Story_ID: 8894
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us.  And middle name included.  And your, your birthdate.
Speaker 2: [Unclear]
Speaker 1: Just talk to me.
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Wadsworth A. Jarrell.  And Wadsworth Aekins Jarrell.  That's "W-A-D-S-W-O-R-T-H  A-E-K-I-N-S  J-A R-R-E-L-L."  And I was born November 20, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I want, I want you to give today's date.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It's May 20th?
Speaker 2: (Unidentified person:) 20th
Speaker 1: May 20th, 2001.
Speaker 2: It is May 20th, 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location we're at?  Can you give the address?
Speaker 2: We're at 628 West 158th Street, New York City.
Speaker 1: And we're in the studio of Wad-, Wadsworth Jarrell.  And the other thing I want you to do is give your profession.
Speaker 2: I'm a painter, and a sculptor--and, and print maker.
Story_ID: 8895
Speaker 1: There are five questions I've asked--I ask of everyone. And they're sort of People Magazine-ish.  But the first one is what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  That's a hard one, because I have a variety of things I like.  I like vegetables.  And I like a lot of fish.  Like shellfish, especially.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't necessarily have any favorite colors except... I repeat this--a lot of the colors in my paintings, which is blue, purple, yellow, orange.
Speaker 1: Favorite vaca--place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I don't go for particularly one place. But some places I've been, I would like to go again.  Like I was in Venice, Italy.  I would like to go there again.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  I have a hard time answering that one too.  But people surprisingly, they whip those phrases--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: off [laughing]. They do.  But you don't have one?
Speaker 2: Not that I can--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: Somebody else probably would say I would.  But I don't know.
Story_ID: 8896
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by having you talk about your mother.  Is it Tabika?  Tabeka?
Speaker 2: Tabitha.
Speaker 1: Tabitha.  Sorry, okay.  Tabitha.  And I want you to tell me about what you know about her family, and where they were from.
Speaker 2: My mother, Tabitha, was from Georgia.  Around Jefferson, Georgia.  And my father was--Oh you was asking about my mother.  Okay, and she's from a family of six.  And two brothers and four sisters--three sisters.  And actually her and the youngest one was the only one left--stayed down South.
Speaker 1: Mr. Jarrell, can you please maintain eye contact with me?  I know even though you're thinking.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay.  Okay.  The next to the youngest sister and my mother was the only ones that stayed down South.  The others moved East and different places like that.  New Jersey and Chicago and different places like that.  And all of them are dead now.  The last person died was 99. The next to the youngest daughter.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about her parents or background or anything like that?  Was there much discussed in the family?  I'm just wondering how much you know about her side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes, I know more about her side than I do my father's side.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: You know, I knew the--her brothers, and I knew her mother.  But I didn't know her father 'cause he was dead before I was born.  But my oldest brother knew him.  I didn't know him.  And I knew the--my grandmother very well.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: We used to go visit oftenly, you know.
Speaker 1: So did she ever talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.
Story_ID: 8897
Speaker 1: How about your father?  Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] He's--
Speaker 2: --was from Clark County, Georgia, which is close to Athens where the university is.  And eventually we lived in Athens.  He was a furniture maker.  And he designed and made furniture.  And also repaired and upholstered and refinished any--dealt a lot in antique furniture.  That's what he did the whole--I've never known him to have a job for someone else until the war [World War Two] started.  He went in the shipyard to build ships in Savannah, Georgia.  But he was always working. Had his own business running his own shop [S.M. Jarrell Furniture Store, in Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about--His name--give his name.  It was--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Solomon.  Solomon Marcus Jarrell.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about his part of the family?
Speaker 2: I only knew two of his brothers, and one of his sisters.  And his youngest brother is still living.  He's 103 years old.  We went down to visit him--a year or so ago.  We went after the 102nd birthday.  He lives in Red Springs, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And he built his own house there and he's in the sixties and he lives there by himself.  And they bring him meals.  But he takes care of himself pretty much.  He rides a bicycle. There's a three-wheel bike he rides around on.  And goes to the post office and to church and all this stuff.  And he can read without glasses.  You know--and I can't [chuckles].  I mean the Bible, which is fine print, you know.
Speaker 1: So have you had any discussions with him about his life and growing up?  You should be--he's a living history book.
Speaker 2: Well, my cousin up the street, Mack, which is my father's sister's son--No, my father's sister's son's son.  He's doing a history. But I don't have it like he has it.  Joseph Mack.  He has a lot of the history of the Jarrells.  He goes way back.  Actually, I didn't know my father had that many brothers and sisters until last year.  You know, he probably mentioned it, but I was young, and I don't recall all of that.
Speaker 1: So did your parents, either one of them, talk about growing up?  Do you remember any stories that they, you know--? Did they--? Do you remember them sharing anything with you about their growing up in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I can't remember them now [chuckling].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I--nothing sticks out that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 8898
Speaker 1: You were the youngest though.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right. Right.
Speaker 1: Of six children.  Can you give me your siblings names and their--in order of--and their names and from the oldest to the youngest?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is Venus Alvin Jarrell.  The next person was Nellie Rosetta Jarrell.  And the next person is Judson Thomas Jarrell.  And the next person was Alicie Jarrell.  And the next person was Solliston Jarrell.  And then me. I was at the end.
Story_ID: 8899
Speaker 1: So you were born in Albany, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you--?  What are some of your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Nothing in Albany.  Because they moved to Athens [Georgia] before I was a year old.  And I grew up in Athens.  We lived in a section.  Okay.  We lived in Athens.  And my first memory was living in Athens.  And then my father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell] bought a little property out in the country, which--a little farm of twenty-eight acres.  And that's really where I grew up, about five miles out from the city.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that life on the farm.
Speaker 2: See my father wasn't a farmer.  He just bought this to get his kids out of the city, he say.  So we grew vegetables on it.  Like we had a garden.  But he still worked in his furniture shop [S.M. Jarrell Furniture Store] in the city [Athens, Georgia].  And my oldest brothers [Venus Alvin Jarrell and Judson Thomas Jarrell] did, 'cause he never learned how to drive, but he always owned a car.  So my brothers was his chauffeurs.  And they worked in the shop with him.  And as we grew up, we all worked there.  But he would even bring stuff out there for--like I learned how to cane chairs and all of this stuff and repair stuff.  I would be doing stuff like that on the--out in the country there.  You know, in my spare time.  He would pay us for doing all of this.  But-- and he hired my first cousin to--we decided to grow some cotton on--you know, a couple acres of cotton.  So he hired my first cousin to do it, because he was used to doing that, and 'cause it--he needed the boys to work with him in the city.  And, you know, it was great.  You know, swimming in the creeks and stuff.  It was really exciting growing up out there.
Speaker 1: Were you--As the youngest, do you--Were you very much the baby of the family?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how do you think that's influenced you?  What--being the baby--Do you-Did--?
Speaker 2: [Chuckling] Well, I was real close to my mother [Tabitha Jarrell], you know.  I wasn't that close to my father, because he was gone all the time.  You know, he was away winning bread.  But I was real close to my mother. Because once the war [World War Two] started, him and my brother, Solliston, went to work at the shipyard.  It was just me and her living there, you know.  And, you know, we got pretty close.  And then I would help her.  Later on she decided she wanted to grow some cotton.  So a couple of years I did that with her.  You know, I worked the farm.  I didn't know how to do it.  The guy next door taught me how to plow and all of this stuff.  And I hated it, but I went on and did it for a couple of years.  And then I finished high school, and I stopped.  And I got drafted into the service.  And that was the end of it.
Speaker 1: Now you--What is--?  How were you--Who were you named after?
Speaker 2: Who knows?
Speaker 1: Wadsworth--
Speaker 2: I mean there's a poet named--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right, Wadsworth.
Speaker 2: Wadsworth.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's what--not?
Speaker 2: I don't know. [unclear] I don't know whether that was ever discussed.  I don't know whether that was ever discussed.  But she named me.  My mother named me.  Probably after Wadsworth Longfellow.
Story_ID: 8900
Speaker 1: So you say you and your mother [Tabitha Jarrell] were close.  What--In what way did she influence you?  Or did you guys talk a lot?  Or--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah we--
Speaker 1: Did you help her around--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] We talked a lot, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what would your conversations be about?
Speaker 2: Any and everything [chuckling].
Speaker 1: Just some examples--that stick out to you.
Speaker 2: Oh, she talked--told me about when she first got married, and all this stuff.  She would--Like she was--You know, people in those days got married young.  She was like seventeen when she got married.  And she told me about her father.  She told me things about him that even--I was just talking to my brother last year, and they didn't even know it.  He'd got his arm cut off in a--working in a--cutting wood with, you know, an electric saw.  And he never really got over that.  You know, he was always sort of ill from that.  And--but she told me a lot of--some of the things like that stick out.  And we talked about me going to school a lot.  Being an artist.
Speaker 1: So tell--talk about that.  The thing about--how do you--she even said I think I read that she knew you were special from the beginning.  And did she ever say that to you?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  She did. [chuckling] I was always--I could always draw.  Well, all the brothers could draw, but they didn't pursue it like I did.  So, you know, and I moved it further than just drawing with pencil.  I was using colors, watercolors.  Then I moved into oils.  And, you know, I was doing some, I guess serious arts and paintings and drawings, you know.
Speaker 1: Now why do you think everyone could draw?  You think that had to do with your father making furniture?  Or you think artistic things were in the family?  Or what do you think?
Speaker 2: Probably in the family.  Yeah, 'cause my father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell] could draw.  He would--you know, he would draw all of his [furniture] designs.  But my mother was--did some quilts.  I--you know, some things I found out later.  Years.  I know she made quilts.  But I didn't have the knowledge to critique them or analyze them until later years.  And actually I didn't know she had that many.  When she died in the '60s [1960s], my oldest sister, Nellie [Jarrell] took all of the quilts.  You know, they're not put together.  They're in sections.  Just patch work.  She took them all to Chicago, and stored them down in the basement in the locker.  And, I just found out in '98 [1998] when she died that she--my mother had this many things.  I mean she had designs that was very African.  And I don't know she got all of--got on to all of this stuff.  But I mean she was really an artist, you know.  And I have--even when I wrote the book, I didn't mention that in the book, because I didn't know it.  You know, I just found that out a couple of years ago. That she really had this much on the ball.  I mean quilts, great, great quilts. You know.  My sister had some finished.  Took 'em to some one in Chicago.  And they put a backing on 'em, and she gave us all one.  But just pieces, you know, squares.  Maybe three-by-three feet.  And you put 'em all together.  We got just bags and bags of those.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Fantastic designs.
Speaker 1: And you--so let's talk about--so your mother encouraged you as--you're--as an artist.  And what was she saying?  What were the--some of the conversations she would have with you?
Speaker 2: [pause] She encouraged me to go to school.  You know, to be an artist.  And she would talk about some of the things I would do. Some of the, you know, some of the colors I used. And all of this, when, you know, we sort of discussed the work I was doing some time.  You know, that kind--those kind of conversations.  But a lot of it was to, you know--go--you know, stay in high school, so I would go--be able to go to school.
Speaker 1: And what did the--?  Was this something that was encouraged in the whole family?  Or this was your mother really saying it?  Did your father encourage it as well, or was he wanting you to work in his business [S.M. Jarrell Furniture Store, in Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No he didn't encourage me that much.  He was too busy making furniture.  And [chuckling]--and we [chuckling]--and we worked with him.  But he was--he had another--he had another theory.  He had the theory sort of like Booker T. Washington had.  He wanted the boys to take trades.  It didn't apply to me because I was too young when--but my son--my brother next to me [Solliston Jarrell] went to Savannah [Georgia] with him, and he took up welding.  He was welding on ships and things like that.  And pipe fitting and all kinds of trades like that.  But he encouraged--he wanted the girls to go to college, you know.
Speaker 1: So--So this--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But I crossed him up.
Speaker 1: You crossed him up.
Speaker 2: [Laughing].
Speaker 1: Now how did you do that?
Speaker 2: I went and got an advanced degree in college.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously laughing].
Speaker 2: [laughing] That's how I crossed him up.
Speaker 1: So now you-Okay, so you grow up.  You--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [laughing] I mean he wasn't around of course.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I would have done it if he had been around, you know.
Story_ID: 8901
Speaker 1: Can you give me your elementary schools you went to?  And your junior high and high schools you--?
Speaker 2: When I lived out in--I lived in Oconee County [Georgia].  Which is one half mile outside of Clarke county.  Clarke is where Athens [Georgia] is, a little city and the university there. We went to one-room schools.  They went from one to seventh grade.  One teacher taught the whole thing.  And I went to two schools out there until I was like in seventh--finished the seventh grade.  And then I went to a--it was a private school owned by Baptists--run by Baptists, called Union Baptist Institute [Athens, Georgia].  They went from K to twelve.  So I started there in the eighth grade.  And went there until I was in the tenth grade.  And then I transferred to the public high school.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh--
Speaker 2: And I graduated from the public high school.
Speaker 1: Why did you transfer to the public high school at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you just got--this guy ran this school with an iron fist. [Chuckling] This is when-this--We got tired of that, sort of.  And actually you wanted to--the people went to the private schools from everywhere.  From Ultimo, Florida.  But most of 'em was from little bitty towns in the--outside of Athens, down in the country places.  But you're in the city.  And you don't know most of the people there.  'Cause most of the people--everybody went to Athens High [and Industrial School].  You knew everybody in the city.  So anyway, that was one of the reasons I wanted to transfer.
Speaker 1: And did your--? Was there discussion much in your family about it?
Speaker 2: No.  See my father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell ] wasn't living then.  My mother [Tabitha Jarrell]--one year I didn't make the grade.  I was going to fail.  So I dropped out.  And I told her that I was gonna drop out.  And she says, as long as I'm gonna go back and graduate that's fine.  So then I--when I went back, I went to Athens High .  Transferred to Athens High.
Speaker 1: So did you--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Take a year off when you dropped out?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I went 'bout a half year.  And then I dropped out--took 'bout a half year off.
Story_ID: 8902
Speaker 1: When did your father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell] die?  How old were you when your father passed away?
Speaker 2: I was like 16.  I think he died in '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Did that have much effect on you or your family?
Speaker 2: Of course. He was the--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm.
Speaker 2: 'Cause my mother [Tabitha Jarrell] didn't have no profession.  He was the sole breadwinner, you know.  And he was, you know, he was a strong willed person.  Not, you know. I mean he wasn't that stern.  But he was--he ran everything.  You know. I mean he paid all the bills.  He did everything, you know.  So it had quite a--an effect on us, you know.  You know, financially anyway, you know.
Speaker 1: So what did that mean?  I mean I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing] What do you mean?
Speaker 1: I mean what--?  No, I'm just saying.  So what--?  Did that mean you had to move to a smaller house or--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Did anyone take over the business or--?
Speaker 2: No, the--No.  What happened was when he went away to work in the shipyards [in Savannah, Georgia], he never opened the business back again.  'Cause when he came back--he caught malaria there.  So when he came back, he was very sick. You know.  And he never did open the business [S.M. Jarrell Furniture Store, in Athens, Georgia] back again.  And he built the house we lived in.  We owned the house.  We owned the property.  So we didn't have to--It didn't effect the living at all in terms of, you know, the physical place you live in.  You just--you know, you didn't have as much finance.  So, you know, my brothers and sisters sort of threw in to help out my mother. You know.  But there was stuff like--you know, she grew her own vegetables and canned them.  And--this was before freezing.  And she had hogs she would kill every year.  Or she would buy one.  And put--and, you know, have the guy kill him.  Or buy one already--buy a portion of one.  But she always had food like that. You know.  You just didn't have a lot of money. You could--You was always eating like--almost like a king.  But you wasn't--didn't have any money.  Very little money.
Story_ID: 8903
Speaker 1: So you're sixteen.  You go--are you at this time--Even when you were at Union Baptist Institute, you--are you drawing a lot at this point?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  I was drawing a lots.  And when I was transferred to Athens High [and Industrial School], I drew a lots also.  I drew for the--I was always drawing for the backdrops for plays and, you know, Christmas, Thanksgiving stuff.  But I was drawing--I was a cartoonist for the [school] paper at Athens High, you know.  I was the business manager.  I got the ads for it.  But I also drew the cartoons.  And I drew them for other--drew other things there for the school.
Speaker 1: And how was the schooling there?  Who were--?  Who was influencing you?  Were there any art teachers that you had come across?  I know you mentioned a Mister--was John [T.] Gray a part of that?  Or no, he--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No. He was at the one room [elementary] school [in Oconee County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: He was at the one room school.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. This was the guy that built an easel for me.  And showed me how to make colors out of herbs.  Like beets, indigo and stuff like that. You know.  Made blue out of indigo, yellow out of orange and onions and red out of beets. You know.  You know, and mix it, and make different colors.  And there was a teacher name Hall, [Jesse] Lois Hall that encouraged me a lot. 'Cause she asked me,  that maybe I should just go to complete art school rather than a university [unclear].  That's what I ended up doing, you know.  But it wasn't because she mentioned it.  It was just when I went to Chicago, it was--someone mentioned the Art Institute [of Chicago].  And I had been there, and seen some shows there.  So that's where I ended up going.
Speaker 1: And for--I'm saying during your high school years. You were fully sort of a--that was your thing--was art. Was--?  Were there any other subjects you liked?  That was--I'm just trying to understand what was, you know. What was forming you as a young person?  That's all I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah I liked science very much in high school.  You know, biology and science.  I liked that very much in school.  And English. I liked the writing part of it, you know.  And, you know, and all the poetry we had to read and all that stuff.  I liked that part of it.  But there were several subjects that I liked.  But I always knew I was gonna be an artist.  And I--we had a piano in the house every since I could remember.  And we all banged around on it.  And I took a few lessons.  And I stopped because I couldn't play the popular tunes, you know.  You had to play all those little ditties.  And I got tired of that.  I wanted to do it quick.  So I dropped out of music lessons.  And, you know, one time when I was young, I thought I was gonna be both.  A musician and a painter [laughing].  But that's highly unlikely.  You know, to do a split profession.
Speaker 1: So in your--not so much your father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell] , but your mother [Tabitha Jarrell] is the one who was the big one encouraging you.  Besides this Mr. John Grey and maybe your teachers in school.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: They were encouraging you to pursue a career on the art--? as an artist?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And so then you're in school.  Is there any doubt at that point?  Your mother's also encouraging you to go.  Your father wants you--if he had lived, he would have wanted you to go on to a trade school?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: But your mother--was she trying to encourage you to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, Um-hmm.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduate.  And then what's your whole--what are you thinking you're--you wanna do?  You-just--I'm just trying to get you to tell the story.
Speaker 2: When I graduated from high school?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wanted to go to college, but, you know, I was--wasn't informed about a school like the [School of the Art] Institute [of Chicago].  So you start thinking of colleges.  And--but most colleges, the art department is very poor, you know.  In those days, it was extremely poor.  And I didn't have any money to go to school.  So I worked--I was working for a year--a couple of years after I graduated.  And I had drafted into the service.  And that's how I went to school.  'Cause, you know, my mother wasn't able to send me to school.
Story_ID: 8904
Speaker 1: You got drafted.  And where were you stay--? into the Army. Right?
Speaker 2: In the Army, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: In Camp Polk, Louisiana.  For most of the time I was in the states.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: I went in, in Fort Jackson, South Carolina.  Then I went down to Camp Polk and stayed seventeen months.  And then they sent me to Korea for the rest of the time.  I was only in Korea less--a little less than six months.
Speaker 1: So you were in the service for just like two years?
Speaker 2: Two years, right.
Speaker 1: You did your tour.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you continuing to do your art there--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] --or not?
Speaker 2: I was the battery artist in the service.  I didn't do any work, any duty.  Hardly any duty.  That's--see, my whole outfit went to--I was in the 567th Field Artillery.  They all went to Germany, and no one wanted me in the outfit.  And they said that, "I don't want him, 'cause the next thing, I look around, he's gonna be in the dayroom drawing.  I want a guy that's gonna soldier." You know.  So I signed a release, so I didn't have to go.  But I--they sent me to a replacement outfit--and this guy sent all of us. [stressed] All of us to Korea [laughing] immediately!  But the whole time, the whole--Not the whole seventeen months.  Say about the first two months, I did--What do you call it?  Basic training. And for the rest of the time I--we moved into a new outfit.  I was doing all of the signs for the company.  Then I was just, doing portraits of the first-sergeant--and just doing things I wanted to do.  Just, you know. People would go on road marches and come back.  I'd be in the dayroom when--under the fan or in the swimming pool swimming. You know. Or in the shower [laughing].  And then I would run out.  And, you know, they'd come back, and they'd line 'em up in attention, to fall out for the mess halls to eat at dinner.  I would run out and get in front of the line [chuckling] and be first. That would make them all mad.
Story_ID: 8905
Speaker 1: You said, "And I was going to be--"
Speaker 2: I was going to school. It was--a lieutenant came into the outfit.  And we used to have these classes where we would be sitting on--out on the ground.  So anyway, he came to the class, and called my name out.  He was brand new there.  And he asked me to stand up.  And he said, "You qualify for art school."  And he said, "Once you go, you'll be in special service. You won't have to do nothing but just art," you know."  And I said, "Wow! That's great."  So anyway, he told me to ask this guy how to do it.  And so I asked this person how to--he sent me to a building that--I couldn't find the place.  I never could find the place. So.  But that wasn't the reason I don't--total reason I didn't go.  Everybody was going home. After you in the service for four months, they give you furlough.  So the first sergeant wouldn't give me a furlough.  He said, "You don't do any work.  You ain't getting one, you know."  So I told him to "Don't make a mistake and pay me payday."  'Cause he did, and I went home. I went AWOL.  And it just sort of killed the whole school thing.
Speaker 1: So you were so upset, you went AWOL?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I wanted to go home and visit my mother, you know.
Speaker 1: So then, when you go AWOL, that's a bad mark on you. Isn't it?
Speaker 2: No. It wasn't even on my records.
Speaker 1: Wasn't?
Speaker 2: No. I went twice.  Went for 15 days the last time.  And that wasn't on it.  You know, you have to get court marshaled basically, before it's on the--this is what they call a summary court marshal. Where the first sergeant just give you extra duty to do.  And that's not that bad. But if you get--not a general court--not a general.  That's the highest one you can get.  Some other kind of court marshal.  That's on your record, you know.  That's--you've done-you--you've committed a crime.  But going over--going AWOL is not really committing a crime, unless you're deserting.
Story_ID: 8906
Speaker 1: You finished your--you know, after those--but art school, that didn't happen? They're not gonna--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously]  Right.
Speaker 1: --pay for art school.  So you're get-you--when you get out of the service, are you headed now to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.
Speaker 1: And is that--is that at your sister's encouragement?
Speaker 2: For--to come to Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  Just--I decided I wanted to do that [laughing].  I mean, I told them I was coming, you know.  And I--'Cause I moved in with my brother.  I moved into his apartment with him.
Speaker 1: And then what are your thoughts?  Wasn't there something about wanting to go to Northwestern University?  Wasn't that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've--again, I wasn't informed about the amount of art they taught at different schools then.  My sister was taking a class there in art appreciation and she did some little projects in art. And I went over there with her one night to a class. And I was impressed by that, and I thought that's where I wanted to go.  But I talked to the guy at Northwestern, and he mentioned the Art Institute if I wanted to be an artist. You know. It was the best place to go.  So I applied and that's when--that was the end of it.  I went there.
Speaker 1: So this is in what year?
Speaker 2: '54 [1954].  When I first got out, I went to Ray Vogue's School of Art at Michigan and Chicago Avenue. Which taught--they had life drawing and stuff. But they were more commercial than others.  I went there at night for ten months.  And then, I wanted to go to school full-time, into a real school.  So I decided on the Art Institute in 1954.  The fall of '54 [1954], I started, and I went straight through until 1958.  I graduated.
Speaker 1: So wasn't Richard Hunt there at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was there.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: He was a couple of years ahead of me.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: He was younger than me, but he was a couple ahead--years ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought he finished in '58 [1958].  Maybe I'm wrong then.
Speaker 2: No. He finished, either in '56 [1956] or '7 [1957].
Speaker 1: So now, what is this experience like?  'Cause this is--I mean Ray Vogue--I don't know what the educational, you know, instruction was there.  But did you find it much different from what you found at the Art Institute?
Speaker 2: Oh exactly.  It was completely different.  You know. It was--one section--they had a--something like a seven or eight story building, where they taught photography, and different things in it.  But I think the one floor was the only place they taught art.  Where I was. You know. They had this room they taught life drawing in. And in the one they taught advertising and various commercial things like that.  But the Institute was different.  You know, more instructors, more everything!  More astute people, everything.  And most of the instructors was foreign when I went there.  A couple of 'em didn't even have degrees. But they had equivalence, I suppose.  And--but it's changed, after I graduated. They made it like a accredited college, more or less than it was.  But it grew.  You know.  It's much larger than it was when I was there.
Story_ID: 8907
Speaker 1: So what do you think--?  What was--?  What were some of the valuable things that you learned there?
Speaker 2: At the Art Institute?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I learned how to--I learned that--I learned how to put things together. Like art together in terms of composition.  Color came more naturally than anything else.  Everything else, I had to work hard to get it.  And, I learned how to see from the Art Institute.  I learned a good painting from a bad painting. A good piece of art from a bad piece of art.  And those kind of things have stuck with me.
Speaker 1: Did you learn that some things you had been doing wrong?  Or, you know, previously?  Or did any of the--?  You know, I go back to you said, "Mr. John Grey--"
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: "taught you how to," you know, "create,"  And, you know, "some of these paints."  Did any of that help you?  You know, the things you had learned earlier?
Speaker 2: I suppose.  But it's but it's like learning all over again.  Once you--when I--once I went to the Art Institute, even the stuff I learned at Ray Vogue's, it was different.  It was the first year, especially.  It was a big learning experience.  And then the second year is a big let down. Because it's not--you've learned a lot of things.  You didn't know anything once you came in.  And you learn all these things the first year.  And the second year you don't learn that much, because you've learned a lot of the basic things.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And now you just need to put 'em to use more, you know.  So it was--I suppose I retained some of--you know, you retain something from everything you do.  Sometimes it's subconscious, or however, but you retain it.
Speaker 1: But still you were studying the--you know, you were studying, basically, the masters and things like that.  You were--your exposure was to European art form more. Right?
Speaker 2: Right. At the Institute.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: And being in a museum school is a great value, too.  If you got in trouble drawing a painting, you could go up in the museum and look at paintings.  And, you know, rather than rely on the instructors so much. Because the instructors didn't say anything at the Institute.  They'd walk around with their hands in their pocket all day.  And they might say one word to you.  When I was teaching school, I said more in one month than they said in two years.  I'm serious!  You know, they--but they turned out good artists.  And I used to tell my students that.  I said, "All this talking we do, and--" I said, "The school I went to, they didn't say anything, hardly."  I said, "But they turned out good artists."  I mean, famous artists [chuckling]. You know. I said, "Maybe that's the way to teach.  I think we over teach." You know.  But they hardly said anything.  He'd come by and say, "Put some blue there."  You know, and just keep walking, you know.  And, you don't know why.  Because he's gone. He's gone somewhere else, you know.  Or he might say something stupid.  "You should never paint the sky yellow.  Never paint the sky blue!"  And you'd say, "Why?"  And he'd say, "I don't know.  It looks like hell!"  You know, or something like that. I mean, you know, "You can't use that." It's no help to you really. [chuckling]. But they changed, and started hiring their own graduates once I graduated from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did--?  What other black students were there when you were there?  Calvin Jones, wasn't he there?
Speaker 2: Yes, Calvin was there.  Of course, Hunt. Who else did stand out?  Well, there was a guy there that's famous now.  But I didn't know him.  Esteves was there the same time I was there.  Benny Andrews was there.  And-just--you know, I'm just thinking of people that still--a lot of people just didn't--just vanished after that.  You know, they didn't continue working.  Parish was there.  The owner of Parish Gallery, was there.
Speaker 1: So this is-what--?  This is-we--what I wanna understand is, that this is the '50's [1950s]. This is not the '60's [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I'm trying to put things in context.  What was this--? You know, 'cause I could say, "Well did the black students [chuckling] form a union?"  But that wouldn't even be the case.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously ] [Chuckling].
Speaker 2: No.  They did in the '60's [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After I wasn't there.  But they did in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.  So I'm saying--I'm trying to understand the environment, you were focused--you know, you were in, at that point.  Because Richard--he never was a part of any black--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I'm just trying to understand.  You know. What was that--?  Can you just recount the environment?  Or, you were just all there as art schools?  He sort of recounted it as artist being the lowest form of humanity.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing] He said, "Everyone-No, it wasn't... It didn't matter if it was black.  Everyone was--[Chuckling] you know, artists were sort of outcast."
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--that was during the Beat period, too.  Everybody was, you know, dressed funny, and didn't take a bath, and all those kind of things.  And didn't have any money, you know.  Except some of the rich people went there--who bought them some poverty, you know.  That's different.  But most peoples was in the same boat. You know.  It wasn't, you know. So there were very few black people there, only a handful of 'em.  But maybe fifteen.  Less than twenty.  This was in the '50's [1950s].  My daughter's went in the '90's [1990s].  And I said, "There was very few black people there.  About fifteen or twenty."  She said, "The same amount is there now." [Chuckling] You know, in the later years.  But it was like 6000 students there when I was there with the night school and Saturday school.  The whole thing had 6000 people.
Speaker 1: That's large.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it--and the Institute wasn't as large as it is now.  They just had started building the lower school.  They was teaching up in the museum part a lots when I was there.  But now there's no classes there.  All the Institute is behind the museum now.  All of the teaching rooms.
Story_ID: 8908
Speaker 1: Were there people that were your--?  You really admired during your time there?  Or that were mentors for you?
Speaker 2: As instructors?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Instructors or other--you know, other artists that you observed.  Was there anyone who was really sort of inspiring you during that period?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually there was a person. I can't even remember his name now that--I learned more--I learned more from the advanced students in painting than I did from instructors.  And there was one guy in particular who was--I was painting--we were painting a figure class.  And the background I had was just flat.  So he told me, "You don't work with a three dimensional figure in a two dimensional background.  Make the background three dimensional too."  So he showed me how to do it.  And I can't remember his name now.  But you learned a lot of things from students like that.  But some of the instructors that influenced me was [phonetic] Pugalis.  That's his last name.  I can't remember his first name.  I took painting from him.  And Briggs Dyer, I took drawing from.  One of the guys in Hinds I took design from.  Which I use a lot of that now.  And I took McKinnon for just one quarter.  But her--she and--her drawing influence me more than anything I took at the Institute. Including painting and everything.  Because she was doing what you call special relationship.  You know, it was dealing with three-dimensional backgrounds and everything.  You know.  Sort of cubistic kind of approach to drawing.
Speaker 1: What was her name again?
Speaker 2: Laura McKinnon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she a teacher? Or she--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] She was a teacher, right. She was from Germany.  Her daughter teaches there now. [phonetic] Ruprett.  She's teaching there.  Taught my daughters.  And Leroy Neman was there.  I took a couple of classes from him.  I took fashion illustration, and I took magazine illustration.  He influenced me a lots.  Probably more than any the other instructors in terms of painting.  And he was a realist.  He would not bite his tongue on telling you what was what. You know.  Which was very helpful.
Speaker 1: And were there any artists out that you admired or wanted to emulate?  Or that you just sort of, you know.  Not instructors, but people that, you know.  Works you saw, or things that you saw that you wanted to be like?
Speaker 2: At the school?
Speaker 1: No not at the school.  But that you were exposed to while you were at the school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Archibald Motley was one.  And Eldzier Cortor was [unclear].  I really liked their stuff.  And actually I started fashioning some things similar to Eldzier Cortor at one point.
Speaker 1: Now Archibald Motley, he wasn't there.  He was--he had already grad--been there and graduated from--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: the school.  Right.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And he lived part time in Mexico.  I never did meet him.  I just saw his work, you know.  'Cause he was hardly ever in Chicago I understand.
Speaker 1: But what did his work--why did you find his work so intriguing? And, you know, or of interest?
Speaker 2: He did a lot of things I was interested in like, clubs. Nightclubs.  And I did a lot of nightclub scenes, bar scenes in my early days.  And once in a while I might do one now.  But that was very interesting to me.  The way he handled the light inside of a club and all that stuff.  I really, you know, was influenced by that.
Speaker 1: And why do you think he's a good--a great artist?  Do you?
Speaker 2: Who, Archibald?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Why he was able to put things together well.  I mean they worked well together.  You know. A piece of art is--if you take away the composition, you don't have a piece of art.  He was able to make a good composition.  His was crowded with lots of people and thing.  But he was able to--I like his colors.  I like the way he designed his work.  And, you know, I liked the finish product he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about--who was the other person you mentioned besides Archibald Motley?
Speaker 2: Eldzier Cortor.
Speaker 1: Eldzier Cortor?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: He's living in--He's been in New York.  He's still here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had these elongated figures which was very fascinating.  You know, they was highly stylized stuff.  Actually I started doing a lot of stylized work when I graduated from the Institute.  That's the direction I really went, doing stylized work. Not necessarily the elongated figures, but everything was highly stylized, rather than realism.
Speaker 1: So that--were you deciding that was a form that you were gonna choose? Highly stylized with all your things?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And see, before you go to art school, you think art is all realism.  You don't think nothing is nothing, unless it's realism. But you find out that, once you do it--once you do the realism, then it's--you want to do something else.  You know how to do that. So you want to move on to something else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you also learn how to talk about other work.  Whether it's nonobjective work of any--You talk about it the same way as a piece of realism,  a nonobjective piece.  The same principles apply to it.  You know, as apply to realism.
Story_ID: 8909
Speaker 1: How were you supporting yourself, going through school then?
Speaker 2: I was on--the first year, I was on the GI Bill the whole time.  Which isn't a lot of money. Only 110 bucks a month:  The Institute was only charging $300 a year then.  It was going by the quarter. It was $100 a quarter. Actually, it was enough to go to school on. And I was only paying half the rent at home.  I think we had a $52 apartment, and I was only paying half that, 26 bucks a month.  So, you know. And I managed, you know. For the first year.  Then I took a job at a paint company.  Where I had to work as a shipping clerk, my first year when I first got out of the service.  I worked as a shipping clerk.  They made paint.  And I--they had a opening on the night shift, making paint.  You know.  So, I took it.  And the next two and a half years, I worked there.  I worked there, from my second year to my senior year, one quarter of my senior year.  So the last two quarters of my senior year, I didn't work.
Speaker 1: Now you--so are you painting?  Are you printmaking?  Are you doing all of them?  Have you decided you--?  You know, are you sculpting?  'Cause, you know, when we were--when I asked you your profession, you described those three.  What were you doing?  What formats were you working in?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: In art school.
Speaker 2: Oh just drawing and painting.  And actually, my undergraduate degree was in advertising. Because my folks told me that, you know, you need to make a living when you get out. So anyway I took advertising, and I didn't like advertising.  I didn't like it in school.  And I went in to see my advisers to get it changed.  And I had too many credits to change it. So he said, "Just take more painting and drawing." You know.  "Get all the classes you can get in that."  'Cause they taught--I went five days a week. You could take drawing and painting.  So that's what I did.  And I got out.  I got a job in advertising.  But not in--not making layouts and paste up.  I got a job in photography, in advertising studios, doing the photography for them.  And once I worked there a while, I found out that the photographers were more in demand than the paste up artist.  And you could demand more money.  You could do any--you know, the--because one place I worked at, I was the whole show, seventeen artists and one photographer.  And I was the pulse of the whole thing. Everything had to come through me.  I had to make photographs of everything they made.  And I could get a raise when no one else could, you know.  So it was--and I did that for 'bout ten years.  And I stopped and went in business for myself.  I opened up a mail order business--processing film.  I had taught myself how to do color. All phases of color, slides, prints, inter-negatives.  So I opened up a mail order business.  And my wife was pregnant with my first--with the first kid.  She had a shop in Hyde Park, where she made clothes.  It was called J. Y. Park at a boutique.  So she moved it into my studio on 61st Street.  And she started a mail order business.  Actually, that's what got me going.  I got all these books, and we read about mail ordering.  It--very interesting, and I started a mail order business the same way.  Plus, I picked up job from the city, also.  And I did that for about three years.  And we opened up a gallery in the studio that we lived in and everything.
Speaker 1: And that was called W.J. Studio?
Speaker 2: W.J. Studio, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet your wife?  Did you meet her at the Art Institute?  No.
Speaker 2: No.  I met her from friends that I knew had gone there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have been sort of life partners this all?  Haven't you? You and your wife.
Speaker 2: Yeah. We've been together--It will be thirty-four years next--second of next month.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And she was an artist also?  She's an artist also?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a fashion designer.
Speaker 1: And so--okay.  So you're--so you were making a living as a photographer, and then even doing this mail order--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thing.  And this is in the '60s.  Right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now what--at what point in time do you get involved with AFRICOBRA?  'cause AFRICOBRA I thought, came out of that period.
Speaker 2: In the '60s[1960s].  Which I still had the business there. 'Cause the headquarters was my studio.  And we had this huge... Some people would call it a coach house.  But it was a studio.  The guy build it for--to make the sculpture for the World's  Fair.  I think in 1910, or whenever it was in Chicago.  And it was two stories.  All brick, two--30 by 30, two stories tall.  The skylights in it... And just--I mean real skylights.  Not those little bubble things, you know.  And it hadn't been lived in, in 30 years, when I--I mean in seven years when I lived in it--moved in it.  So it was in the back of a house. You know, drive up the driveway to it.  And it was called McBurney Studios when I moved in it.  The painter had moved in it since the sculptor.  And he had put a kitchen in it, and a bathroom inside the bedroom upstairs. He suspended the bedroom over the large studio.  It was great.  It was fantastic.  And me and my wife fixed it up. We really fixed it up really nice.  And then we made a--'cause  I used to park my car inside.  I had this Corvette.  I'd drive it inside.  And, of course, the car had to go outside.  And then we made a gallery out of that part of it.  Yeah.  So--and we was doing the mail orders. The mail would come right through the mail slot.  You know. Money and everything.  You knew how much money you've made at 10:00 in the morning when the mailman run.
Speaker 1: So you were setng--wait.  What were you--? You were making money developing?
Speaker 2: I was developing and printing prints for people.  Developing slides, printing color prints for them.[unclear]
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] So this is like, Walg--I mean that people go to Walgreen's now.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No.
Speaker 1: Or they go to Astro Photo.
Speaker 2: Not quite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was doing custom work.  There's a difference.  That was the drawing card.  You know. I would crop it anyway you want it, burn in anything you want and that kind of stuff.  Make any size you want. You know.  Wet mount it, dry mount it.  Anything you wanted.  You know, it wasn't just little snap shots like Walgreen's.
Speaker 1: And your wife was--She was doing what by--
Speaker 2: She was making clothes and selling them.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] By mail order?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Um-hmm.  Mostly specialty items she was selling through the mail.  Like she made--she had a big run on these tams she made.  And she had this dickey out of leather.  Both of them were leather that you zip up.  And Harper's Bazaar wrote a article on her.  You know, all of this was free. We had ads in Harper's Bazaar.  But they wrote the article on her.  And that really made the sales jump up a bunch, you know.
Story_ID: 8910
Speaker 1: Tell me how you got involved with AFRICOBRA. How did that whole thing come about?  And who were the people involved?  Tell the whole story.
Speaker 2: It was a splinter group of the Wall of Respect.  Some of the artists that worked on there.  And--
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Did you work on the Wall of Respect?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right. I painted--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Can you talk about that project first?
Speaker 2: The Wall of Respect?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Donaldson was the--there was a--what is it called?  Organization of Black American Culture.  And they had different divisions of it. Like visual arts, and they had the writers. OBAC writers.  And Donaldson was over the visual part.  And he was the guy chosen to put that together.  So they had meetings.  And they'd ask you to bring in work.  And we'd critique it to see what we had in common.  And then we--Bill Walker was there at the meeting.  And he had a project he was going to do. He had a wall that--this guy run this tavern on 43rd and Langley wanted him to paint a mural on.  So he said, "I'm gonna paint this mural.  You guys can work on it with me if you want to.  If you don't, I'm gonna do it anyway."  So we all agreed to work on that wall.  And then we started deciding what we were gonna put on it.  You know, the different things.  And then each person was asked what they wanna do.  And--I wanted to do the rhythm and blues section, 'cause I did a lot of musicians.  And that's the section I got.  And Parish got the statesmen, they was called. Like Malcolm, Adam Clayton Powell, Rap Brown and all the guys that was on there.  And just different sections like this we all got.  And Myrna Weaver did the sports.  And Jeff Donaldson and Elliott Hunter did jazz, the jazz musicians.  And we hired a person to whitewash it for us, paint it. We rented scaffolding and then we started to work on it.
Story_ID: 8911
Speaker 1: (Continued from end of previous tape.) So you were saying who--you know, what everyone was doing [in the creation of the Organization of Black American Culture's 'Wall of Respect'].
Speaker 2: Right.  We had a person [Sylvia Abernathy] that, I think she must have gone to IIT[Illinois Institute of Technology].  She did.  And she designed the whole thing.  She laid it out for us.  And she s--laid it out.  And we had like sections divided up.  I don't know you ever saw it when it was first done.  We had colors going all the way through it.  Just breaking it up into sections in colors.  Just lines, you know.  And then she would sort of suggest which colors go in each spot.  You know, and some was full color, some was limited color and this kind of thing.  And we just got up there and started painting. You know.  And, of course, the time was limited.  Because of the scaffolding.  I think we had rented it for a short period of time.  And I finished mine first.  Because I was going on my honeymoon to the Bahamas.  And I was the first person to finish.  And, you know, it got quite a bit of publicity.  We had more plain-clothes cops out there watching us work on it than you had other people.  I never knew what that was about [chuckling], you know.  But--and then--and they--We finished it up.  And when they did the dedication, I wasn't there.  I was in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Now did that bring this group together?  Sort of the whole thing of working together like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Yeah. Because it was the first time I had worked with a group [OBAC].  But the group was individual.  And AFRI-COBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists, formed the next year] artists was not individual.  You was individual, but you subscribed to the same philosophy.  And we didn't have a philosophy for the Wall of Respect.  We were just a bunch of individual artists.
Story_ID: 8912
Speaker 1: What was the philosophy for AFRI-COBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]?
Speaker 2: We decided on--We wanted the work to be frontal, like African art.  We named the colors--we was using high intense colors, and we wanted--we called them "Kool-Aid colors".  Because of the street vernacular name the guys had called--The brothers was wearing clothes in the '60's [1960s].  All these high lime colored pink clothes.  And they called them Kool-Aid colors, you know.  So we named--wanted to do kool-aid colors.  And we wanted to do free symmetry.  I can't remember all of the things verbatim now.  But it was a whole--about twelve things we had--principles we put together was part of the philosophy.
Speaker 1: Tell me why you think AFRI-COBRA was so special in many ways.  And--I mean it's still in existence today.  But not, you know--I mean--it's sort of--Is it a shadow of itsel--I mean people are still around.  But it's--it was still--it was very strong at that [chuckling] time.  I'm--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: I feel like I'm--It is still around? I mean you still--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm not a member.  But they're still around.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So I didn't want to step on any toes.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling].
Speaker 1: That's all I'm saying.  But I wanted you to talk about the importance of AFRI-COBRA.  And why that--why this coming together was so important.
Speaker 2: It was important because we didn't just come together as a group of painters.  We come together to create an aesthetic, which we did, you know.  A non-western approach to making art.  And which had never been done before, and haven't been done since. You know.  And actually it was the only group ever that subscribed to the same philosophy.  You know. We all used the same color pallets in a variety of ways.  But if you put a light meter to them, they read the same.  Because of the intensity and the way we mixed the colors. You know.  And we wanted to create this aesthetic for--mostly for posterity.  And that's what we've done.  You know, we was--A lot of them--publicity we didn't get because of ourselves.  We was--Some people would say we was our worst enemy. You know.  One guy in particular thought we were.  'Cause he had a--took our work to Europe.  And the Modern Museum of Art in Paris wanted to show it.  They wanted to show it in Germany and all this stuff.  And we said, "No."  We only showed it in African-American establishments where we started.  And that was our philosophy.  And we said, "We don't wanna do that."  And so this guy was telling me in the '80's [1980s], "If you guys had done that.  You'd be zooming now," and all this stuff.  Maybe, maybe not, you know.  One thing, nothing came back to bite us. You know, the things we--decisions we made.  If we had made those decisions, sometimes things come back, you know, like a boomerang and bite you. But we've--Nothing came back to bite us.  So apparently we made the right decisions, you know.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the discussions going on when you would have your critique sessions?  You know, about the philosophy, about the gen-, you know, of what being an African-American artist was, about this color pallet?  I'm just wondering some of the discussions.
Speaker 2: One thing we did was critique each other's work.  Which most artists can't stand people to do that.  Especially another artist, unless they're in school.  We critiqued work of each others'.  And, you know, about the weak points and the strong points, and what you need to do to it to make it, you know, bring it to fruition.  And we talked about the images we wanted to do.  We only did African-American images.  And the whole thinking was--too is--You know, in some people--You know, when you go to the [School of the Art] Institute [of Chicago], you've taken--A lot of us had gone to the Art Institute.  And most of the images is European images you're making.  And somehow you don't even think about that.  You just make 'em without thinking about it.  And--But we consciously made African-American images.  And that was one of the things.  And we wanted lettering in it to read like a billboard.  But, you know, with sophistication.  And we had made the lettering part of the painting, designed it into the painting.  Sometimes it was hard to read.  But we had words in there, you know.
Speaker 1: You did that with--I know it's mentioned with the Angela Davis piece ['Revolutionary'].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right?
Speaker 2: Even before that--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously]--'fore that.
Speaker 2: I had a big piece ['Black Prince'] of Malcolm [X].  I had the whole eulogy--not--parts of it, that Ossie Davis said at his funeral. It was on a large eight-foot piece of it for the first show we had at the Studio Museum.  And that's how we got jump-started.  We met for like--since '68 [1968] we started meeting.  And we didn't show until '70 [1970].  Ed Spriggs came down.  And [Edmund] Barry Gaither came down to see our work.  And actually Barry was at a meeting.  And Spriggs came down to this 'confabrel' that Jeff put together.  A conference Jeff Donaldson put together when he was doing his graduate work at Northwestern [University].  And Spriggs offered us a show at the Studio Museum [in Harlem].  And according to him, we jump-started the museum.  You know, we put the museum on the map.  But he certainly put us on the map also.  So, he invited us the second year also.  And this is how we started.  And then he booked a show that went around New York State for a whole year.  You know, like Syracuse, Albany, different places.  Rochester, different places like that.  And then Barry booked the first show also into the center in Boston.  And that's--And we talked about any and everything.  But we would meet a whole day some time when we first started.  All day long we would meet in my studio.  And it was like from 10:00 in the morning to 5:00 in the afternoon.  And we'd show slides of artists' work all around the country.  What they were doing.  And we saw what we didn't want to do, you know.  So we wanted to come up with some new ideas.
Story_ID: 8913
Speaker 1: Now how did you decide about who would be members of your group [COBRA Coalition of Black Revolutionary Artists, later AFRI-COBRA, African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] or not?  'Cause they're were some that came in later. Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. When we started it was five people.  It was Jeff Donaldson, Barbara Jones [Hogu], Gerald Williams, [Elaine Annette] Jae [Johnson] Jarrell who's my wife, and me.  Who was the five started group.  And later the next year, Nelson Stevens and Napolean Henderson came in.  And before we had the show at how--the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York], two more people came in.  Omar Llama and Sherman--No three people Omar Lama, Sherman Beck and Carolyn Lawrence.  And it was ten of us.  Just, you know--Said, "Well it's more--it'd be better if we have more people.  You know, more people saying the same thing."  So we got ten of us.  And we never really been over ten in the group, you know.  So that's how we started.
Speaker 1: So how were the new members--?  You know, how were they chosen?  Or how were they solicited?  One of the two.
Speaker 2: I'm assuming they were solicited.  'Cause I didn't know Nelson.  And he came to the meeting.  Jeff invited him to the meeting.  Jeff knew him.  And someone else invited Napolean to the--to a meeting.  We had several people came to meetings, artists that didn't--after we talked about the philosophy and all, they did not want to do this, so they didn't come back. You know.  But Napolean and Nelson was interested in joining.  So anyway they brought slides of their work over, brought pieces of their work that, you know, we all talked about.  And we invited them to join the group.
Story_ID: 8914
Speaker 1: What do you think in hindsight when you think about the work that you developed out of that period [late 1960s-1970s], or, you know, the others? What would you say was the benefit of this meeting together, and critiquing the work?  And, you know, and developing, you know, staying true to the mission.  What do you think developed out of that?
Speaker 2: It--A lot of technical things in--developed out of it.  You know. How to make sure your stuff is excellent in the technical end of it also.  You developed a whole 'nother attitude.  Because we was talking about all kinds of revolutionary stuff, and all kinds of groups.  You know, we wasn't just talking about us all the time painting.  You know, we talked about [Amiri] Baraka's group [Black Arts Movement], and this, that and the other.  And, you know, what's going on here.  And riots here and there.  And, you know, we was talking about everything. It was--'Cause the '60's [1960s] were so exciting.  So many things was happening.  And out of all that, we put together what we wanted to do, you know.  We wanted to do visually, and that's what came out of it.  And it's--And the way it was working, I still use some of the thinking now.  But I work different--consciously work different than I did when I was with the group. You know.  Since 19--Since 2000, I started working different.
Speaker 1: Now you--since the year 2000?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's just a year [ago].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Right.  But--Let--So why do you think AFRI-COBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]--why would you say it was so significant?  You know, it's something that started, what, almost thirty years ago. Twenty years--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But they didn't--It has influenced every painter.  And not just only painter.  We was like Charlie Parker.  We've influenced people.  A lot of people won't even admit it.  But we've influenced almost everybody that works in art [pause] since we started working.  I mean it doesn't matter what ethnic group you are.  We've influenced a little--a little of everybody, you know. And--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And why would you say that?  Why would you say you had been such an influence?
Speaker 2: Color-wise and everything.  Very few artists was using a lot of African influence in their art when we started.  The[unclear] Weusi guys was using it before us.  But we started using-- One of the Weusi guys joined us really.  And we was using it very--a variety of different ways.  Even the guy I admired so much Eldzier Cortor.  He's using it now.  As an older guy you see all these African shapes in all of his stuff, you know, that people wasn't doing in the beginning.  When we first came to New York, most of the artists' studios we visit, they had these little dull colors and all.  And everybody was fascinated over our colors.  And we came back the next year. You know, everybody had brightened their stuff up a little bit, you know.  And I had a student from Nigeria, had seen [Jarrell's portraits of] Angela [Davis] and Malcolm [X].  And he was a graduate student.  So we invited him to dinner one day.  And he came over, and I took him downstairs in the studio. And there was Angela ['Revolutionary', 1971] and Malcolm ['Black Prince', 1971].  And he said, "Did you do this?"  He said, "This is the painting that influenced me to be a painter."  When he saw Malcolm, you know.  And, you know, he had no idea I did that.  He just saw other work I had done.  Because it's old.  And I didn't bring it out, you know.  But we've influenced people all over the country.  And the 'Wall of Respect' [mural in Chicago, 1967] did too.  You know, there was no walls before us.
Speaker 1: So what are your--Some of your favorite pictures out of that period would you say?
Speaker 2: Out of the AFRI-COBRA period?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: The Angela and Malcolm is two of the favorites.  And in the early favorites.  And there's one that Jeff Donaldson owns called 'Reorientation.' [1975]  That's one of my favorites also.  And then I got some things in the later years I made.  But I would always point to Angela and Malcolm probably.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And was that common though that the speeches--?  Was that common for you?  Or was that common for AFRICOBRA with the use of the letters within the piece?
Speaker 2: Well, we had words in the piece.  And I decided to use letters.  I started using the letter B a lots in the first--for the first show.  But I hadn't organized it like I did in the annual--by the second show I was modeling- turning the form with the letters, and making the whole painting out of letters.  Out of the letter B, basically.  And--But everyone else wasn't doing that.  Everyone had the lettering in there.  And then their are words in the Angela piece. Just, you know, statements in the painting, also.
Speaker 1: Did Angela Davis ever see that piece?
Speaker 2: She did.  She gave me a big kiss right here [chuckling]. She was talking at a church in Washington D.C.  And we had a show out in the lobby of it.  And they made sure they brought her through there and showed her the painting.  And she liked it.  And I gave her a silk screen.  You know, I had silk screens out of the print I was selling, and I gave her one.  You know, it was a handfold print.  It wasn't a reproduction thing.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now, you stayed- Okay, so really this time period-- Your apartment--you and your wife's [Jae Jarrell] apartment is a center for a lot of activity. Right?
Speaker 2: For AFRI-COBRA?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's the center for activity.  You have a ex-- You know, you even have a place for exhibitions in--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right, right.
Speaker 1: your place [WJ Studio].  And you're doing your--you're still doing your mail order.  Are you still doing the mail orders?
Speaker 2: We're still--we were still doing the mail order.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what other things would you consider significant about, you know, that period in Chicago?
Speaker 2: It was actually the turning point for me in terms of the way I think about art.  And I developed-- A lot of things, I developed myself in photography.  Because I taught myself color photography then.  And it was just really the--one of the turning points in my life.  It was three of the best years when I was in the mail order business of my life then.  You know. But the meeting with all of the artists, and consciously working out things was very important. You know, for all of us.  For all of the artists in the--I mean you learn so much from each other.  And by brainstorming, you know.  And most artists don't brainstorm.  They just work.  And some of 'em just luckily work.  You know.  But we consciously worked. And most artists disagree with the philosophy we had.  They don't think you can be creative and be in a group, and work out a philosophy.  But you can.  Even Paul Richards wrote a article on that.  He didn't think political art was art.  He said but AFRI-COBRA changed his mind. You know.  That it's art.  It can be political and it can be art, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were in Chicago until what year?
Speaker 2: '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: '71 [1971].  That's right.  We were talk--discussing that.  So AFRI-COBRA got started in sixty-?
Speaker 2: '8 [1968].
Speaker 1: '8 [1968].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--that's just really three years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 8915
Speaker 1: Actually, we was moving to Connecticut [from Chicago, Illinois, in 1971].  And we wanted to be close to New York, but we didn't want to live in New York.  We lived in an area [on the South Side of Chicago] where there was strong gangs, like the Blackstone Rangers and the [Gangster] Disciples.  And they was recruiting kids, fourteen and stuff, and shooting them if they didn't get in.  So my son [Wadsworth Jarrell, Jr.] was like three months old. No, he was older than that.  He was three years old.  And we decided we didn't--we was gonna get out of Chicago.  And it wasn't just the area we was in.  They was all out in the suburbs recruiting people and shooting them.  So we decided that they wasn't gonna do anything about the gang members in Chicago, and we was getting out.  So that was the reason we left, really.  You know, so we left, and went to Connecticut.  And we didn't like Connecticut.  We never did have a place there.  So we stayed in a hotel there.  And we found a place.  We was looking for a place like this big studio we had.  But nothing like that exists, you know.  So anyway, my wife [Jae Jarrell] said she'd lived up in Boston [Massachusetts] before.  So we jumped up in Boston.  And we--I knew a guy that worked at Harvard [University] that was the assistant dean of admissions.  And I called him up, and he got us a apartment the next day.  You know, hooked us up with a real estate dealer.  And we had this big six-room apartment with hardwood floors for 125 bucks in '71 [1971] [chuckling].  All the furniture was still in storage in Connecticut.  So we just had this big empty apartment.  So we went and bought three chairs.  It was me, my wife and my son.  Three chairs, a card table for us to eat on, and some mattresses on the floor.  We bought my son a bed.  Went to the junk shop and got him a bed.  And then we got a mattress that we slept on.  And my daughter [Jennifer Jarrell] was little.  So she was a baby.  You know, she was three months.  So we had this huge drawer we found there and made a thing.  She was in that.  You know, that was her bed.  And we was there for maybe six months.  And Jeff [Donaldson] had offered me this job teaching at Howard [University] before I left Chicago.  And I kept turning it down.  'Cause I didn't wanna teach.  And I hated Boston so much, that's what stampeded me into teaching.  If I'd never moved to Boston, I never would have been a teacher, probably.  So I took the job to get out of Boston.  'Cause I had taken a job in a commercial art's studio there, in a architectural studio. They did commercial art, you know.  And I went on down to [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: Why did you hate Boston so much?  Was it because it was so different from the nurturing community you had--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It was so different from Chicago.  And the--You know, and this was like the early '70's [1970s].  And it was just different.  The--All of the garbage on the streets.  Chicago was clean at that time.  'Cause Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was in.  They had cleaning--community cleaners, you know.  And the streets was clean in Chicago.  And it was all dirty there.  And it was the lowest paying wages for the largest--for a large city in the United States.  I didn't know that until I read the paper one morning.  And it was just ugly.  I mean it just was--It didn't look right, and the people was different.  Real different [chuckling].  You know, they was--I don't know what was the whole thing.  They, you know, the black people wasn't black, you know.  The guys I worked with--  'Cause I worked in Cambridge.  They was really funny.  And actually one guy there that was a foreman for them, they did their easel prints in the front.  Their easel prints is made from ammonia.  They're developed through ammonia.  They was the blue lines and brown lines that--You know, those big rolls that you see that architects use?  That was the finished product that we made.  I did all of the photography and paste up for that blue line.  And we photographed it on to the film.  And developed it, and gave it to them.  And they ran it off and made prints from it.  Anyway, they wouldn't talk--the guy wouldn't even talk. You know, until he found out I was going to Howard.  And then he wanted to talk, you know.  Everybody wanted to talk to me then,  'cause I was going to Howard to teach. You know.  So--a real funny place.  I didn't like it.  I hated it.
Speaker 2: So was [Edmund] Barry Gaither was he there at that time?  He was there right?
Speaker 1: Yeah he was there.  Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But--
Speaker 1: --would go by periodically and see him.  But, you know, I wasn't--you don't hang out with Barry [laughing], you know.  He's running a art center.  You know.  So--but we enjoyed Boston because we wasn't attached. Like I said, we didn't have no furniture.  On the weekends we'd go out.  I would--I took a job after I was there a week.  And I got it through the yellow pages.  Just called up a guy, and he hired me.  You know, so I went--just told him what I could do,  and I was from Chicago.  And I could do this in photography, and I could do this, that and the other.  And he said, "Come on over."  And he hired me.  So we would go out on the weekends to all the museums and just visit.  You know, go downtown, go to the Commons.  And take my son to the Riviera Beach there.  And, you know, it was just like a vacation for us.
Speaker 2: So you were there how long you said?
Speaker 1: I was there from May to August.
Speaker 2: Oh, just three months.  And then you--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 2: --went to Howard?
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 8916
Speaker 1: You stayed at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] how long?
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Six years.  Okay.  So now, what is this period like?  The Howard period?  Or the Washington D.C. period?
Speaker 2: It was--it was very significant for me too.  Because that's when I really got into a lot of--knowledge about African culture and their art and everything.  It was a lot of Africans there.  But we had guys teaching African art that I took a class from there.  And I learned a lots about it.  And we'd go to the African Art Museum [National Museum of African Art].  And it was a very significant period for me in terms of the way my work changed.  That's when I first started using African influence in my work.  When I went to D.C.
Speaker 1: And what are the things that you learned?  And what were you trying to do with your work in that way?  Were you trying to connect Africa with African-American?  Were you speaking to the African diaspora?  What was sort of that--?  What was happening?
Speaker 2: Well, we was speaking to African Americans a lot.  But we was dealing with the heritage of African people also.  You know, and also in the diaspora. Because the Maulan (ph.) people also used the same kind of imagery sometimes.  You know, some of the artists I knew then.  And it was interesting at Howard, because there was a lot of artists teaching on the faculty.  I mean they had a really a heavy faculty in terms of talented people teaching on the faculty.  It was different from the University of Georgia.  When I went down to the University of Georgia, nobody was doing anything.  Maybe one or two people.  And it was fifty-five people at Georgia, and it was about seventeen at Howard.  But everybody on there was really grounded.  And, you know, and they exhibited, and they did a whole lot of--they did work.  They was working artists, you know, at Howard.  And at the University of Georgia it was the opposite.  Very few people once they made tenure, they never worked again.  They never showed again, you know.  The average one didn't.  Maybe a couple of people did.  Of course, I did when I--I never stopped.
Speaker 1: So now who were some of these people that were--  You know, was this group--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] At Howard?
Speaker 1: --at Howard.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: [Alexander] Skunder Boghossian, Harold Smith, Ed [Edward A.] Love  'Cause Jeff [Donaldson] was head.  And [Pause] Frank Smith.  I'm trying to think of other folks.  We had a printmaker named Winston Kennedy.  I guess he's still there.  I think he's head of the department now [2001].  And that's the core of the people.  Of course you had Toby [Tritobia Hayes] Benjamin teaching art history.  And you had Lois [Mailou] Jones also was there.  She was on the faculty when I was there and then later on Malkia [Roberts] teaching drawing and painting and Starmanda Bullock was always there.  And that's basically, basically the whole faculty.
Story_ID: 8917
Speaker 1: Was it an extension of the--so did it feel an extension?  'Cause some of--AFRI-COBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] still was-- It was sort of a subset of AFRI-COBRA at Howard [University].  Right?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was--actually it was--when I went it was two of us--three of us.  'Cause [Jarrell's wife] Jae Jarrell was still in.  It was three of us.  No, she wasn't at Howard I mean.  It was two of us at Howard.  It was Jeff [Donaldson] and I.  Then Frank Smith joined.  Then it was just three of us there for a number of years.  And then James Phillips came down.  He was a member of the Weusi Group from New York [City].  He came down as artist in residence and he joined.  It was four of us.  And then Jarrell (ph.) Williams came up to do graduate work there.  And then there was another one.  And then in later years when I left, they brought some other guys.  Like Akili Ron Anderson.  I was down in Atlanta when all those people joined.
Speaker 1: So what did your work start changing like during this period?  It changed a little bit right?
Speaker 2: When I was at Howard?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it started changing into--Even the B's I was using, it started changing in the '70s [1970s]--mid '70s .  And then in the later part of the '70s , like '76 [1976] I was--dropped the B's completely.  And I was just doing--I had gone to Africa for--FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, held in Lagos, Nigeria, 1977].  And I was influenced by all those dancers and stuff.  So I did a lot of dancers and stuff.  And it was more African patterns then. Then I wasn't using the letters anymore effectively like I had been.  So it changed to that.  And it moved from that to-- And I had started using--influenced by the Senufo people.  Because I did a paper on Senufo for my graduate work.  And my pictures was all--people was all elongated at the top, and short down the--three quarters of 'em was long and the other quarter was short.  And, you know, this is influenced by the Senufo people and Senufo sculpture and stuff.  And--but that whole culture I had studied about.  And then I moved from that to--I had a middle part there when I was doing black jockeys.  I hadn't done jockeys since the '60's [1960s].  And the jockeys I was doing in the '60s [1960s] wasn't necessarily black jockeys.  Because I had never seen a black jockey run. And--but the guy took me to the horse race in Chicago.  We went out to Arlington Heights [Illinois], Arlington Park [race course] there.  He would say, "There--there's one guy that raced, but he's gotten too fat.  So he doesn't run anymore.  He was 130 pounds."  So--other jockeys didn't want to ride with him, because they had to put a handicap on to ride with him.  They had to add weight on their horse, to ride with him.  You know what I'm saying? So [Chuckling]. So anyway, I heard there was black jockeys at one time.  So I went to the library at--in the University of Georgia and studied up. They had just several books on the first Kentucky Derby, everything on that [unclear].  So I did some things on Isaac Murphy, the first painting I did ['Homage to Isaac Murphy (Polytych), 1981].  And the work was different.  Started changing a little.  But I was still using the African patterns  but it was changing a little.  And then in 1980, the early '80s [1980s], I started what we call combing.  You know, pulling through an instrument in the paint, so it looked like striations of like a comb you pulled through.  And this was influenced by some African art like the Bushongo or either Benin.  But it wasn't put in context until I saw one of the AFRI-COBRA members use it.  It was Adger Cowans.  And--but he was only just combing in the background.  And I started modeling my figures and everything with it.  Like this one up here, behind you.  So--and it was that until--I was doing that until 2000.  Then I changed again.
Speaker 1: And what did--what have you changed to in 2000 since--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] This here.  This stuff [chuckling].  I don't use African patterns anymore.  I make up my own patterns.  And I use a lot of--I've always used a lot of (unclear) objects.  But I do that also.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask about that because-Well, I want-- There's some other things I wanna ask in terms of the chronology.  But you--why have you moved away from African patterns?
Speaker 2: You get tired of repeating yourself.  You become a cartoon of yourself if you keep doing--you can do these things in your sleep.  You know how to do this.  It's-- Go back to what I told you earlier about doing realism.  Once you learn how to do it, you get bored with it.  So, I was getting bored doing the same stuff over and over.  I had been doing it since 1983 up until '99 [1999].  And you get bored with it.  And, you know, you wanna move in another direction.  If you're an artist, you can't stand still.  You can't just be stuck in one place, you know.
Speaker 1: So did you wake up just one morning in 2000 and say, "You know, I'm bored."
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: [Chuckling].
Speaker 2: No, you was bored long before you stop [chuckling].
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously laughing].
Speaker 2: You just didn't know what you was gonna do.  And then at one point I just stopped.  And that's the way I always do when I change.  Just I'm gonna--When I start back to work,  I'm gonna change.  And I started experimenting.  And I changed, you know.
Story_ID: 8918
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Howard [University]--I mean Howard and the leave--you decide to leave Washington [D.C.] for some of the reasons you left Chicago, right?  Were you concerned about safety there?  No, or--
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: No.  We was just--I was tired of teaching really.  And--
Speaker 1: You were tired of teaching.  What was Jae [Jarrell, wife] doing?
Speaker 2: She wasn't able to do much there.  So she was tired of D.C.  You know, the fashion stuff didn't work too well there.  Actually, it didn't work that well in Georgia too good there.  Chicago is where it worked better than ever, you know.  But she did some things in D.C.  She changed to some other thing.  One thing she had young kids then.  And she stopped working for a while just to take care of the kids.  'Cause, you know, we had three of them all on top of each other.  The girls [Jennifer Jarrell and Roslyn Jarrell] are just a year apart.  And, you know, it was a zoo in our house, you know, [laughing].  And so that's one reason we left.  And the other reason was tha-- Probably the real reason was I wasn't making tenure there.  And Howard is the real tricky place.  Because people in the art department vote on you to be promoted.  And because it ain't no size.  So you gotta use the people you have I suppose.  I don't think you have to.  They got a big enough college there to do that.  But--And then if they don't like you, you can forget about getting promoted.  And I wasn't the guy that they liked [laughing].  I mean some of the principal people.  And they don't know why they didn't like me.  Because--by association they didn't like me.  They didn't like Jeff [Donaldson, then department head].  Nobody liked Jeff.  And I was his good friend and he brought me in.  So right away like the guy doing--teaching sculpture, he had said something derogatory about me.  And something he said about me.  And I said, "Hey, I don't even know him."  I didn't even know him.  You know, he was hating me before I even knew him.  You know. But then when you come up for promotion, he's got you covered then.  You know, he's in the drivers seat.  So--because I had, had more exhibits than anybody on the faculty other than Lois [Mailou] Jones.  And Lois was 68 when I started working there.  And Lois is--was a prolific person, you know.  So anyway, I remember leaving Howard.  And every year they give you--you tell the art department what you've done.  And then they send it up and you get this little--money.  What do you call it?  I can't think of the word.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Stipend or no?
Speaker 2: No, it's for--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Bonus?
Speaker 2: It's for what you have done.  If you haven't done nothing, you don't get it.
Speaker 1: (Unidentified voice:) Royalty?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: (Unidentified voice:) Royalty?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, no, there's a word they use in university.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: In schools they use it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even they're talking about it in public schools.  They're saying if the teachers don't earn it, they don't get it.  You gotta earn it in other words. Q [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 1: But I don't know the word for it.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But anyway I didn't get it.  And I had turned in my stuff.  And the--Jeff wasn't head then.  Starmanda [Bullock] was head.  She said, "The computer threw yours out. 'Cause, you know, you had 89 on yours."  I said, "Yeah I had 89 exhibits."  And she said--I said, "The computer don't throw nothing out."  I said, "People only--Computers only do what people program into them."  And I said, "I had 89 on there because I've have had 89 shows."  I said, "No one on this faculty has had more shows than that other than Lois Jones."  So I went all the way up to the vice president of academic affairs. And he was sitting'-- I saw the vice.  Not the head lady. He was sitting there nodding while I'm talking to him.  And, you know, I saw the dean.  I went through the whole channel.  He was sitting there like (mimes falling asleep). So.  So and he get a call from his daughter was doing some'n at home.  Something was happening at home.  He had to straighten out a fight over the phone.  So at one point, he got tired of me talking. 'Cause he knew what he was going to say.  He says, "Let me go get your record."  So he went and got my record.  He said--looked on it.  He says, "You're getting paid--You and one guy from music. You're getting--You're the highest paid assistant professors on this campus."  He said, "Because of your professional activities."  He said, "You've had more exhibits than anybody in the art department other than Lois Jones."  I mean he said the exact same words I had told him.  And--but I still didn't get the raise.  Because the head of the department had to recommend it.  So, you know, I did--I was leaving.  So I just left, you know.
Story_ID: 8919
Speaker 1: Anyway when I went to [University of] Georgia , they had never seen a portfolio.  And there was fifty-five people on this faculty.  They had never seen a portfolio this good with this much--this many shows.  I went from assistant professor to full professor in eight years there.  And it never had been done before, you know.  And one guy told me--after I made professor I was on the promotion board the next year.  And he said, "I'm not supposed to tell you this."  He said, "But when your stuff came up.  We looked at it about five minutes and passed it on."  And he said, "One guy got up and said--"  And he was the only black professor on the campus.  He had been there for 20 years.  And he said, "I'm not supposed to tell you this.  But this white guy got up and said if this man had start working 10 years ago, he would have got promoted.  You know."  But then it was me and two more guys made professor.  So it was three of us on the whole--out of 2000 and something professors on the campus. You know.  But anyway, they--I was a star at the University of Georgia, and it was a bigger school.  And everything. You know, everything happened better there. You know.  They paid my way to everywhere I wanted to go.  I went to Europe to shows.  They paid--picked up my tab, you know.  Gave me the airfare, the money I spent, they reimbursed me.  I couldn't get none of that at Howard [University].  You know, Howard was a trip.  But I mean I enjoyed working at Howard.  But it just-- The administration you deal with was, you know, different.
Speaker 2: So that--Howard--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] So much for that.
Speaker 2: --was disappointing from a black college perspective?
Speaker 1: Yeah.So, University of Georgia was all the things that Howard wasn't.  It gave you a nurturing environment, you know--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: It made teaching palatable.
Speaker 2: It was strange.  Because out of fifty-five members I was the only black person there.  I was the first one they ever hired in the art department.  And 99 percent of the students was white.  And once in a--most of the black students came in, they took core courses. But they didn't graduate in painting.  They went into advertising.  You know, fashion--not fashion design, interior design.  Something they could get a job doing, you know.  But most of the graduates in painting and sculpture was white, you know.  And this is what I taught.  I taught painting and drawing. You know.  But you taught the core courses, like beginning drawing and beginning painting.  And I taught graduate.  I was on the graduate faculty. And that's another thing I was able to get on.  You gotta put a portfolio together.  They had guys who had been there for eons, couldn't get on the graduate faculty.  You know. So I mean anything I wanted to do there, I could do it. You know.  But you couldn't--with the same portfolio you couldn't do it at Howard.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: You know.  But the difference is the University of Georgia, no one from the art department could vote on you.  You had to abstain. It's from all the other departments to vote on you.  They would ask you questions about some of the work.  But they wouldn't--you couldn't vote.  But they send you up.  They vote to send you up over there.  They can do that.  But they can't vote whether you get promoted or not.  With Howard, they can vote whether you get promoted.  And they'd say, "No, he's not ready."  Or whatever they say, you know.
Speaker 1: But why did you end up leaving the University of Georgia?
Speaker 2: You get tired of teaching again. You know.  My wife [Jae Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson]  began telling me to leave.  Stop to-Well, she was--actually didn't want me to start back once I left Howard.  But we-- You know, you just wanna--I always wanted to be an artist, just paint.  And, you know, you just get tired and you do it.
Speaker 1: So you left Georgia in 19-- what time?  198--? No--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '80 [1980]-- '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: 1988 [1988].
Speaker 2: Right.  I was there from '78 [1978] to '88 [1988], ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then where do you go from there?
Speaker 2: Where did I go?  You mean to work?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Nowhere.
Speaker 1: You still-- You were still in Georgia?
Speaker 2: I was still in the-- Yeah, 'cause I had moved up to--see, at first when we first moved there, we lived in Athens in the--where the university was.  And we moved up to Atlanta.  My wife took a job.  She was teaching at a private school [Athens Academy]--teaching art, at a private school where my kids went to in Athens.  And then the headmaster [Al Cash] moved up to Atlanta to a bigger place.  I mean it was as big as a junior college.  And we saw him at a ballgame.  We was playing them in football once.  And we told him, "You know, if a job comes up, we'd like to move to Atlanta."  And about two weeks later, he called.  A job had come up.  And we moved, you know.  So we moved up there.  I commuted back to Athens for four years.  You know, four days a week.  I would work from 1:00 to 5:00. 1:00 in the afternoon to 5:00.
Speaker 1: So, that was until what period of time then?
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: That you worked--you commuted.  You commuted--
Speaker 2: I commuted from '84 [1984] to '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Okay, '88 [1988].  Okay.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So [unclear]
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And that's like seventy miles one way.
Story_ID: 8920
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy being back in Georgia after that period of time since it was where you were born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was pretty cool.  Even in the little town [Athens, Georgia] I used to live in.  It was pretty cool.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: You know, they did a lot of articles on me when I--when I first came there. The university [University of Georgia] hired me and they--I had been there a year before they hired me.  'Cause we [Jarrell and his wife Jae Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson]  had a toy business. We was making wood toys.  And we wasn't-- I wasn't gonna ever work again for anybody.  So we made educational toys.  And we was marketing them to Head Start and day care centers and things like that.  And, you know, business was a little slow.  And Frank Smith had all of my slides and resumes and stuff, he was keeping for me.  It was a big box.  So I sent for it.  And he--all these slides and stuff [chuckling] came.  I said, "Wow, I could apply for a job."  'Cause the business was a little slow at that time.  So I applied for a job in  places in Atlanta and the University of Georgia.  And the University of Georgia hired me.  They had a slot, you know.  And I went over for a interview and they hired me.  So--and we kept making the toys.  Actually, we accelerated them. We went into business with a commercial business.  We were just doing them by mail.  Otherwise I was just doing them from our studio and taking them and delivering them.  But we started--opened up a shop where we brought in--a hobby shop.  Where we had airplanes, model railroads, everything.  And wood--other wood toys we imported like Hero [Heros] and--from Germany. We got Kouvalias from Greek.  We was the only place in town that sold wood toys and Lionel trains.  And we, you  know we had a real upscale business.  But we had to--I couldn't paint too much during that time.  We had to let it go, because we didn't have enough traffic. You know.  Didn't have enough traffic, so we decided to close it up.
Speaker 1: And you-- That came out of the whole thing of being I thought under with the nursery school and everything being--or school and things being uninventive.  You know, you were sort of--Your wife was like--Or both you and your wife work said that things were unimaginative.  And you--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thought it was--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Exactly.
Speaker 1: --bad for kids.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your kids.
Speaker 2: And actually it started from--like it was her sister gave my son [Wadsworth Jarrell, Jr.] a train when he was young.  And I built a whole pike for him.  And then I really got into it.  We gave him the whole living room in [Washington] D.C.  And I had the thing going all around the room.  In the rest of the room, she build these little kitchen sets and things out of wood for the girls [daughters Jennifer Jarrell and Roslyn Jarrell].  So, they had the whole living room.  'Cause we was never in it.  So we said why would we have this.  Only, you know, people come over.  Usually we was in the family room.  So--and then we started.  And my daughter--youngest daughter [Roslyn] was in school.  And she build these little houses out of wood.  And we was sort of influenced by that too.  So anyway we decided to do that.  And that's what we went into.  You know, we tried to make very imaginative things.  Which we did, you know.
Story_ID: 8921
Speaker 1: So in 1988 what is this-- what, what happens then?
Speaker 2: I quit--She [Jae Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson] was at [The] Lovett [School] teaching.  I quit working and she quit the next year.  And we both did what we did, you know.  And that's when I really started--I was with a dealer in Atlanta before I moved to Atlanta.  And I was selling a lot of stuff.  At one point, I was making more money, the last three years before I quit. I was making more money selling art than I was teaching.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So, it was not hard-- It was hard to leave, you know.  And then I decided to give myself a raise.  The paintings I had been selling for $3,000, I decided to sell 'em for $18,000 and $20,000 overnight [chuckling].  So, I had paper pieces that we sold--this dealer sold for $1500.  And $1800 is as high as we got.  And I sold 'em for $8000 later.  And sold them the same--to the same people [chuckling] that I had been selling them to for $1,500.  And it's--actually it's the only place in the world now I can sell a painting for $20,000.  If I send a painting down there for $20,000, put it on there.  I can sell it.  I'm in an auction every year, and three years in a row, they sold a $20,000 painting.  One year they sold a $21,000 painting.  And they sell lots of $8-- $10,000 every year, you know, from the show. You know, from the auctions.  So--and a person came to my studio and bought a $18,000 one out of my studio there.  They don't do that in New York.  But they did back there, you know.  So, I still keep Atlanta--I still sell stuff there.  You know, I haven't lost it.  Actually, it's gotten better, because I'm not there.  You know. When you're in a place, they can say, "I'm always gonna get a piece."  'Cause they know where you are.  But if you're gone, then they-- When you send a piece down they'll buy it quicker.
Speaker 1: Now, who represents you there?
Speaker 2: No one now.  But I'm gonna go back with the same person, Faye Gold.  She represent me for five years there.  And she ran the auction this year.  And she asked me could she handle me again.  And I'm gonna let her do it.
Story_ID: 8922
Speaker 1: So you left Atlanta to come here [New York, New York]?  No.
Speaker 2: Right I did.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the decision?  Why was that decision used?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] To come to New York?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, we had been talking about it.  When we moved down South, we talked about moving to New York when we left Howard--left D.C. [in 1978]  'Cause her [his wife's] brother was living here.  He lived in Soho, or rather Noho.  But he was asking us to move up here.  And I told him, "I got young kids."  He said, "Well, other people in New York got kids." You know.  So anyway, we didn't--I had taken my wife [Jae Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson] to visit her sister down in Albany, Georgia.  And I took her through Athens.  We went out to see this property I had in '74 [1974].  And she bugged--she'd been--she was bugging me all the time, "Well, let's move down there, there.  You got all that property.  You know, let's move down there."  You know.  So I said, "Nah, I couldn't make a living there."  So anyway we ended up moving there instead of New York.  And then we talked about moving to New York regular when we was in Atlanta.  And once we quit working, that's all we talked about.  So, we just decided to do it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And she kept asking me when are we gonna move.  I said, "I don't know.  I can't afford New York."  I said, "I can't even afford to move."  'Cause we got a lot of stuff.  I had a lot of art. And she's got a lot of fabric and clothes and stuff.  So she said, "Let's do what we always do.  Let's have a sale."  So we had a sale.  And we got--put articles in the paper.  We got this huge write up in the paper on the front cover of the city part of it or whatever they call it.  And it was just like New York City.  People were just standing in line to get in there. You know.  I paid $4300 to move up here.  For the trucks to pack all my stuff.  And I packed it basically to move it.  We made a lot of money.  I mean tons of money, you know.  In about the month we did it, I think I made over thirty grand. You know, just selling art.  And she made a lot selling her stuff.  She had a lot of clothes.  She's got--She sells vintage clothes.  And she got a lot of 500 jeans she don't even sell.  Japanese pay $2000 for a pair of 500 jeans, 500 Levis.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And that's a fact.  In Japan they will pay two grand for 500 Levis.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they don't make 'em anymore, you know.  But she's got a whole stack of 'em.  'Cause she used to--You know, she go to junk shops here.  That's what she does everyday.  Everyday she's out, you know, shopping.  And she's got more stuff.  We got a storage--It ain't here.  She's got two storage places downtown.  Like warehouses with stuff, you know.  Furniture, you name it, you know.
Story_ID: 8923
Speaker 1: Your wife [Jae Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson] and you--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling].
Speaker 1: --have had a great partnership.  And what would you attribute your success in many way--  You said thirty-six years?
Speaker 2: Thirty-four.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Thirty-four.
Speaker 2: It'll be thirty-four, June 2nd.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Well, we got a lot in common.  And we think a lots alike a lots, you know.  Very much alike, you know, in terms of the way we think.  You know, we try not to have a lot of arguments.  And we take all the, you know, the funny stuff out of living.  And just, you know, and we live a quality life together.  That's what we have.
Speaker 1: And your children, their names?
Speaker 2: Wadsworth [Jarrell] Junior, Jennifer [Jarrell] and Roslyn [Jarrell].
Speaker 1: And they also are very artistic.  So I'm wondering how you feel that, you know, everyone--It looks like even Wadsworth Junior is gonna be following in your artistic footsteps.  How do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah. He's--he's not gonna be a painter.  He's gonna be a-- He's in-- wanna be into film-- film making.  But he--and photography and film making.  And--which he used to do photography when he was young.  But he forgot all that stuff, he said.  And Jennifer is a painter.  I mean a fantastic painter.  I'm trying to book a show in Atlanta with her and I together.  And Roslyn is a fashion designer.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: But she's a manager at Crate & Barrel up here [New York City] down on 5th Avenue I think it is.  Yeah, Jennifer is a terrific painter.  And she's influenced by me, you know. It's not Czanne. She's influenced by Wadsworth [chuckling].  But she's great.  She's taken it further than I, I am.  She's more intelligent than I am.  I mean she's real intelligent, real bright.  I mean, she was bright when she was six.  Which is--she's really bright, you know.  And she does a lot of things, you know.  She reads a lots.  And take a dance class here, yoga here or everything.  She's into everything.  Into everything.  But--but a real good, good artist.  Really a great artist.
Story_ID: 8924
Speaker 1: I wanna move just into questions about art.  This is an area that you've really dedicated your life to.  And you've had--you've had success at it.  So, I want you to talk about what art really has meant to you.  You know, this is not anything that you got--I mean you were encouraged as a young person to pursue it.  Even if your parents told you, you know, "Get something where you could be a graphic artist."  But you end up doing photography anyway and making money.  But, I'm just wondering what your thoughts about, the, you know, the value of art to society.
Speaker 2: I think art is one of the major fabrics of society.  Because everything that's done--that's made, is created by an artist.  It was designed by an artist.  You know.  It could be clothing, cameras, chairs you sit on, couches, beds, utensils you eat with, drink out of.  All of this is designed by an artist.  So, I mean one of the most important people in the society is an artist.  You know.  In other societies, African societies, they are more respected then they are in our society.  They are real revered in the African society.  Because he's the main person.  He does all of the creating of the things they use.  You know.  And, of course, they do that here.  But, we don't--Most people don't even realize they do it here.  But to me it's, hmm--art is--it's important to me.  It's not the monetary part.  It's just creating the work is important.  Making the work.  And also thinking in terms of posterity.  You're not put on this earth just to come here and just live and die and do nothing.  You know.  And if you--Being a visual artist, I will leave something here.  You know.  It's like I'm not dead, because my whole legacy will be behind me.  You know, like a musician.  You know.  You leave something here.  And that's more important than the monetary part, you know.  My daughter put it in perspective for me when she was asking--talking about going to art school.  And I never thought she was going.  I always thought she was a good singer in high school.  She sung with a traveling group from the school. You know.  And I thought she was going to go into music. But she went into art.  And I said, "Well, you can't make much money in that." and she said, "I'm not interested in the money." You know.  "And this is how you--anybody can make money. But can you do something significant?  That's the idea."  But you can make money. You know.  I make money out of this.  I don't get rich but I make some money out of it.  But--and then there are artists that not making art, is making money. You know.  And I'm not one of those artists. I make art.  I'm not--I don't make money.  I make art.  But I--once in a while I put some stuff up for sale and I'll sell it.  But there're artists that do stuff just for money, you know.  And I'm not one of those.  But it's very rewarding. Because I've been a lot of places that I wouldn't have gone otherwise.  I wouldn't have been able to go.  I've been to Martinique. My way was paid.  Everything was paid for, including the housing, the eating.  I've gone on to Africa the same way, and to Nigeria the same way.  The government gave us a plane.  The U.S. Government gave us a plane to ride over.  Two hundred and fifty two people riding in it.  All of us was artists on the plane.  And everyone was black on the plane. This was when we went to FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977].  I've gone to Malm, Sweden--was paid for.  I've gone to Italy.  I've taught in Italy for the whole summer with the--in the University of Georgia program.  And I was all over Italy, Venice, Rome, Naples, you name it.  I've been in a lot of places and met a lot of people that I wouldn't have met otherwise.  So, I mean, it's been very rewarding to me, you know.
Story_ID: 8925
Speaker 1: What would you like to do that you haven't done in your life?
Speaker 2: What would I like to do?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I would like to have this book published that I've written. And I would like to make a film one day out of some of the things I've written.  That's what I'd like to do that I haven't done.  Those are two things I'm working on doing.  Not just dreaming of 'em.  I've written a book. But I just haven't edited it down enough to have it published yet.  I've seen a agent who asked me to edit it down. But--then I want to have some of them made into movies.  I would like to direct one of the movies.
Speaker 1: So, what do you--in New York, what are you looking to happen in New York?  Each place is--each location has meant something different in many ways. Your travels have been, you know, have been representative of different stages.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, what are you looking for from the New York experience?  You've been dancing around New York for--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [laughing].
Speaker 1: --some time.  Now you're here.  You say you're ensconced here.  You won't wanna ever leave.
Speaker 2: [laughing].
Speaker 1: [Laughing].
Speaker 2: Well, I'm looking for--Not all the time I've been looking for this, but just recently I'm beginning to think that way.  I was out of galleries for a while and, you know.  I'm in and out.  I'm not difficult to deal with, but I'm firm.  I don't take any foolishness from galleries.  And on a moment's notice, I will--if they're unprofessional with me once, I'm subject to pull my stuff out of the gallery.  So, I'm--one of my goals here is to get a good dealer to handle my stuff in New York.  And I'm working and I've met one and I'm supposed to be taking him some stuff.  I just haven't put the portfolio together yet.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And that's one thing I wanna do here.
Story_ID: 8926
Speaker 1: As a black artist, and as someone who is one--you know, one of the founding members of AFRI-COBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]  what are your--what does it mean for, you know, to be a black artist?  It's been--you know, when you look back--You know, you said earlier that, "This-your--" well, you didn't say you were amazed. But in a way, what you guys created was, you know, pretty instrumental and significant.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So--But things have changed.  Now even you have moved outside of the traditional figures you were--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --using.  So I'm wondering as we sit here in the year 2001, what do--what would you define--What would you define as black art?  That's one question.  And then I wanna know what it--what it is to be a black artist?
Speaker 2: What I would define as black art is what AFRI-COBRA has created as a nonwestern approach to making art.  Not just using the word "black art," you know. Because you're a black artist, you know.  Because a lot of the work is created by black artists. But the black part is only on the end of it.  But the work is European influence.  It's a European painting.  The whole influence is European.  They just put black artists on the black art because he's a black artist.  But AFRI-COBRA art is a non-western approach to making art. And that's what I would call black art.  You know, black aesthetic or African-American aesthetic.  And what it means to me to--as to be a black artist, it just means a lot to me to be an artist.  You know. Whether I'm black or what [laughing].  But, you know, being a black artist is no different from being a black person--just being a black person, you know.  I mean you go through some changes that other ethnic groups won't go through. You know.  There--you go to the museums; you don't see African-American artists in the major museums.  Once in a while, but not as a whole.  You don't see them on a regular basis in major museums.  You know, and everybody would like to--African Americans would like to get their work in museums like that.  And, of course, you don't know how to do it. But that's--and that's not something I'm striving for. You know.  I don't even think of that really, that much. But, you know, once in a while it cross your mind. But that would be good if you could do that, you know.  And it's not just, you know. People talk about 'em as being white museums.  These museums are supported by everybody. You know.  Everybody's tax dollars pay for these museums. And you can't just lay back and say, "Well, they're white museums."  You know. But they're museums.  Ain't but one Metropolitan Museum here [New York City].  There's one modern museum of art here.  So, they're museums and they're owned by the people. You know.  The people support it. You know, they got government support in everything. And your tax dollars is doing it.  It's as much your museum as it is anybody else's.  So--but you're not controlling it.  You're not--people running it is controlling it.  You know, the curators and the directors of it.  And those are the people that's really controlling it, the whole thing.  So-and--what was the question [laughing]?  What it means to me to be a black artist?  Well, as I just said, it just means a lots for me to be an artist. You know. And sometimes being a black artist is an advantage in a lot of things I've been in.  It's been an advantage.  Only--I've been in things that's only was for black artists. And that's an advantage.  Being in Atlanta was an advantage of being a black artist. 'Cause the art was controlled mostly--especially in the inner city was, you know, grants and commissions was controlled by African Americans who was in the position. And in [Washington] DC.--the same way.
Story_ID: 8927
Speaker 1: When did your mother [Tabitha Jarrell] pass away?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: When did your mother pass away?
Speaker 2: '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  And your father [Solomon Marcus Jarrell] passed away in--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what do you think they would say if they could see you now. And especially, your-Well, both of them.  What do you think they would say?
Speaker 2: They would be very proud of me, you know.  My mother saw some of my work before she died.  I took a portfolio down when she was in the hospital.  They would be very proud. And especially the teaching part.  'Cause, you know, people think of that as the ultimate.  Because a lot of people think that's the high point of my career was the teaching. But to me it--I mean, I got a lots out of it.  I mean, I got a lot of--I built up a good--really good portfolio. Especially working at the University of Georgia [Athens]. But they would have been fascinated by me teaching at the University of Georgia. Because it was segregated when they was there and, you know, and I came there teaching.
Speaker 1: And then what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: [pause] I want it to be "I was a good father, a good husband and a good artist."  And that's all I want folks to say about me.  That's enough.
Speaker 1: And is there anyone in your life you've most admired?
Speaker 2: My wife, Jae [Jarrell, born Elaine Annette Johnson] [laughing].  You want me to elaborate on it [Laughing]?  Well we've been together for thirty-four years.  I mean, been married for thirty-four years.  But she's a friend.  She's not just a wife and a lover.  She's a friend.  We're friends, you know.  And she's the best friend I got. And we can talk and laugh about anything.  Most people around us a while, they'll say that, "You guys don't need anyone else. You have too much fun together."  We'd be riding on the subway, we have people come over and comment and say, "You're a great couple. You look like you enjoy each other."  Well, we enjoy each other, you know.  So these--well, you know, and she's brilliant.  She's very brilliant.  One of the--And I admire her.
