Story_ID: 24088
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Morgan Jackson, Jr., on my birth certificate.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: We already have a problem.  My place of birth is Birmingham, Alabama.  My date of birth on my birth certificate is 9/22/1936.  My mother said I was born 9/24/36.  I celebrate 9/24/36.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But for social security purposes and all the other stuff, you cannot change the birth certificate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a lot of errors in my birth certificate.  My father's name was spelled wrong, which was typical in the south, so sometimes they didn't even have records, as you can imagine.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a distinguished research professor emeritus, with all my titles in there.  I'm a distinguished research professor because I still do research, I still have grants.  And as long as I do that, I will be a research professor.  I'm also a professor emeritus, distinguished emeritus.
Speaker 1: Is it of chemistry or of--
Speaker 2: It's distinctly of chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you call yourself an astrochemist?
Speaker 2: I would call myself an astrochemist, a laser chemist, a photo chemist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have published in all of the fields.  My training is in physical chemical, experimental physical chemistry.  I have worked in astrochemistry since 1964.  I've done photo chemistry since the same time, 1964.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, those two things are my principal interests.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 6, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in a room in the Chemistry Building at the University of California, Davis.
Story_ID: 24089
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a kind of a warm-up, and they only require short answers.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, actually good food is my favorite food--just good food, excellent food.  I tend to like, I don't like ordinary food, let me put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: When it's warm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Where it's warm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 24090
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, so that we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: So, we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Claudia Cornelius Haygood Russell.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Claudia, C-L-A-U-D-I-A, Cornelius is C-O-R-N-E-L-I-U-S, I think.  Haygood, H-A-Y-G-O-O-D, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was December 14--I'm trying to--1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?  What kind of occupations, and--
Speaker 2: My grandfather, great-grandfather on my mother's side was a blacksmith in Selma, Alabama.  His name was Haygood, H-A-Y-G-O-O-D.  He was a, when he was young, he was a slave.  His father was half-white, I know that.  And he was married to my great-grandmother, whose name I can't remember right now.  And she was also a slave.  But they were free.  Now, as the only blacksmith in Selma, Alabama, he had a pretty good business, as you can imagine.  And he had several children.  My grandfather was Claude Haygood, and he married my grandmother, Della.  And right now, I can't--Della Waller.  And they had two children, my mother, Claudia, who's the oldest, and Florette, who was two years younger than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about, you know, life in Selma in those days?  He was the only black--your great-grandfather was the only blacksmith in town?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he knew his half-white brothers, I'm told.  He was, he did quite well, in fact.  My grandfather died while he was in college.  He was at Payne College, and he died in the flu epidemic, I think, in 1917 or 1918, the big flu epidemic.  Those are the stories I remember.  And my mother was raised, until after he died-- my great-grandfather raised the two girls until he died, but my mother was twelve years old.  And my grandmother, who was not very well educated, became a maid.  And she actually came out to California, and my mother remembers her as being this very flapper type woman she would see periodically when she was young.  I don't know all of the chronology of this, but I do know that my grandmother was a maid to some of the movie stars.  In fact, she was Carol Lombard's maid before she died.
Speaker 1: Carol Lombard was the girlfriend of Clark Gable.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  And she, and before she died, she was Ann Sothern's maid.  So, that was two people I know that she worked for.  She was married four or five times.  I can't keep up with all of her husbands.
Speaker 1: So, this is your grandmother?  This is--
Speaker 2: My grandmother.
Speaker 1: Della?
Speaker 2: Della.
Speaker 1: Della Ward, right?
Speaker 2: Della Waller, W-A-L-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was raised by your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Until she was, you say she was--
Speaker 2: Until he died, because he died when she was twelve, and then her mother came and got her and they moved out to California.   And as I remember her telling me, she went to Santa Barbara Junior College, and then somehow she got back to Alabama, which I don't remember exactly how it happened.
Speaker 1: Now, did she--okay--so, you don't know what the decision-making was in terms of going back to Alabama?
Speaker 2: No.  I got some vague idea, but I don't know enough to really put it on record.
Story_ID: 24091
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother like finish school in Alabama?
Speaker 2: No, by that time she started working.  She met my father, so that had to be in 1934 or around that time.  In '34' [1934] or '35' [1935], she met my father and they got married.  And I was born and my sister was born four years later.  And so she worked.  My father was a school teacher at Parker High School and a businessman.  So, that was the beginning of their life together.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, did your mother, was she primarily a housewife back then?
Speaker 2: No, she always worked up until--at least she always worked while she was married to my father.  And she worked in various positions.  Most of, a large part of her life was in administrative or secretarial administrative positions, where she moved up.  She was, she worked for various government agencies, and eventually became a program director for the first black radio station in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the call letters of that station?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember they played jazz and--
Speaker 1: Now, this has to be in the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This was even before that.
Speaker 1: Oh, before--
Speaker 2: This was back in, let's see, the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, it was in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, this is, well, I guess we could do some research and find out the name of the station, but this is--did it last?
Speaker 2: Well, it lasted for awhile.  I mean, she left and she got re-married.  My mother and father were divorced.  She got re-married a few years later to Dr. Russell, who was a dentist in Mobile and moved to Mobile.  That was in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she became a housewife.  So, she worked up until she married him.
Story_ID: 24092
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was in 1951.  Well, let me go to your father's side now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Morgan Jackson.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Didn't we just figure that out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was 1911.  You said he was twenty five when you were born, so that would make it 1911.
Speaker 2: Right.  And he was born--his birthday is September 22, 1911.
Speaker 1: So, his birthday is actually on the 22nd instead of yours.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you think that's how the mix-up took place?
Speaker 2: The mix-up took place, according to my father, because the obstetrician or the doctor that delivered me was a drunkard.  He always got things mixed up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, your father was born in Birmingham, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you made a point before we started, that Birmingham was a new city.  Can you explain that to us?
Speaker 2: Birmingham was a new city in the south.  It was started because of the steel mills in the early 1900s.  The Jackson family moved there when it first started.  This is the story I got from my father.  My grandfather's name was William Morgan Jackson also.  He was a business person.  He owned an ice house and a grocery store.
Speaker 1: An ice house in those days was a lucrative business.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did, he had several children.  His oldest child was Joe Jackson.  I showed you--who had 12 children.  And Joe Jackson, well, he had, Joe Jackson was the oldest.  Augusta, Augustine, was a school teacher.  My father William Jackson and Henry Jackson, who was a preacher, and actually was a--if you've ever seen the movie or the film clip of Martin Luther King's speech, I've Been to the Mountain Top, well, he's on the stage with him, because he led the, he was one of the leaders of the garbage strike in Memphis.
Speaker 1: What was his name again?
Speaker 2: Henry Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, his wife wrote a book about the garbage strike.
Speaker 1: Now, was he leading as an organizer, or was he like a garbage man?
Speaker 2: No, he was a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He was a minister of the AME Methodist Church, a fairly prominent minister in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you were talking about whether it was a lucrative business or not.  The story goes that it was such a lucrative business that Joe Jackson went to ten black colleges and never finished any of them, because he was a playboy. (laughter).  And that worked fine until his father died, just like my mother lived pretty well until her grandfather died.  And then as the stories go in the South, all the money disappeared.
Speaker 1: Joe Jackson, he enjoyed the fruits of the ice house, but he didn't, he wasn't able to sustain it as a businessman?
Speaker 2: He didn't even get to business.  I mean the way somehow all of that disappeared--and I don't know all the details, but all of that disappeared on the death of my grandfather.  Joe Jackson eventually owned the cafe in Hensley, and that's what I remember of him and his children.  I know a lot of his children, those that are alive that I saw at the last reunion, which has been many years.
Speaker 1: So, you say he actually attended ten black colleges?
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly the number.  There's a story that he went to several black colleges.  He had a very nice automobile.  He liked the women, and that's the story.  And so, he never did, he never applied himself in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the story I got.
Story_ID: 24093
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, your father ended up going to school and becoming a school teacher, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he finished Tuskegee [Tuskegee University].
Speaker 1: Now, he was there when George Washington Carver was there, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I actually met George Washington Carver, and Booker T. Washington was there.
Speaker 1: Now, when your father was there, Booker T. would have been gone by then, because he died in 1915.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess he would have been.
Speaker 1: Robert Russo Moton, I think would have been--
Speaker 2: Moton was--you're right.  Moton was the president.
Speaker 1: Did your father major in education or was it--
Speaker 2: Well, he taught auto mechanics and algebra.  So, I assume he got a degree in industrial arts with a specialty in auto mechanics.   And I know he got, he worked on his master's degree--not until, what is that--Indiana, Ohio--that famous--it starts with a B, I think.  I can't think of it right now.  But he would go and work on his master's degree.  I think he got it, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about George Washington Carver that your father has?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I mean, my father didn't tell me--I just met him.  He would go down and there.  And when I was young, I had polio.  And the only rehabilitation of crippled children's hospitals for blacks or African-Americans at that time was Tuskegee.  So, I got polio in Indianapolis, and after I got over the acute stages, they sent me down to Tuskegee.  I did meet--when did George Washington Carver die?
Speaker 1: Carver died either in the, it had to be in the early '40s [1940s].  I think it was during the war, sometime during the war.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I met him, I met George Washington Carver when my father drove down to Tuskegee. And we went for some reason, maybe for a football game or something like that.  Because when we went to Tuskegee, there was a house on the campus everybody stayed at, because there were no other places to stay, or you stayed with somebody else.  But Tuskegee had a place you could go and stay.  And I met him during that period of time.  But he didn't make a big impression on me.
Speaker 1: You would have had to be really young.
Speaker 2: I was probably age seven or age eight years old or something like that.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay.  So, where did your father teach?
Speaker 2: Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Parker High School?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any other stories about going to school or about growing up in Birmingham that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, not anything really significant.
Story_ID: 24094
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, is there a story around how your parents met, how they met and fell in love?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there is, but they never told me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What I basically remember, that's all they ever told me.  My father, like a lot of black men in those days, worked hard.  He had, he was a school teacher, plus he had the only black taxi cab company in Birmingham.  So, he would get out, you know, he'd first go to teach his classes, go to school.  And when school was out, he'd go and deal with his taxi cab business.  Probably he'd go to the Elks club, like most of the black men did.
Speaker 1: They had a health club they would go to?
Speaker 2: Elks Club.
Speaker 1: Elks, oh, Elks, okay. (laughter).  Not health club, okay.
Speaker 2: Those were the days when they weren't worried about health.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At the Elks Club they weren't concerned about it, either.  (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Elks Club, okay.  So he was an Elk?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24095
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, so I'll ask you more about your parents as we talk about growing up.  But, when you consider their dispositions and their personality and their habits and hobbies, how they walked and talked and looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Everybody says I take after my mother.  They say I look like my mother.  You know, I take after her, and I was very close to my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably much closer to her than my father.  So, as I got older, before he died, we probably got a little bit closer.
Speaker 1: It sounds like he was a very busy, very--well, trying to do--well, the cab company sounded like a full time job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was not--it was a different time in a different era.  He was not the kind of, he wasn't the kind of person who would be hanging around children that much.  It just wasn't the thing most African-American men did.
Story_ID: 24096
Speaker 1: Sir, we were talking about the fact that you say you take after your mother  [Claudia Russell] more than your father [William Jackson, Sr.].  Now, did you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you name them in the order that they come, and place yourself--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and father had two children, and I'm the oldest.  My daughter--my sister is four years younger than I am.  Her name is Yvonne.  So, we're the only two real blood siblings.   But I have a step-sister, Carol, who is the daughter of Dr. Russell, Wilbourne Russell.  Wilbourne is his first name, W-I-L-B-O-U-R-N-E, Lorraine, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, Russell.  And so, Carol is a year older than I am.  So, when I moved down to Mobile, I was no longer the oldest, I was the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how old were you when your mother re-married and you moved to Mobile?
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you basically grew up in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You finished high school in Mobile?
Speaker 2: Actually, I didn't finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the, I was in the first Ford in the class in Morehouse.
Speaker 1: So you were an early admittance--
Speaker 2: Early admittance student.
Speaker 1: At age fourteen?
Speaker 2: I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen, okay.
Speaker 2: I studied one year in Mobile.
Story_ID: 24097
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to go back even further, to when you were just an infant or a toddler.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memories.  Well, I remember when my sister was born in 1940.  I remember when--in fact, I've got a picture of me holding her when she was about eight months old.  I remember Pearl Harbor in December of 1941.  I remember sitting down at the radio listening to Franklin D. Roosevelt.  We lived in the projects in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Now, explain that on some level because today, there's a stigma the project has.  But in those days, it wasn't so--
Speaker 2: No.  In those days the projects were the newest housing that African-Americans had in Birmingham.  It was built during the late '30s [1930s].  I mean, school teachers lived there, principals lived there, doctors lived there.  If you--nobody was building houses once the war started, as you know.  So, that was the best available housing for most people.  And so, I remember staying in the projects during the war.  There were kids around, and it was a nice place to be.  And we had, we were part of the row houses, where they had the two story row houses with three bedrooms and a bath upstairs, a living room, a kitchen, and a small backyard, a front yard.  And our house was right across the field where they had the playground, and we played football.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were right across the street from a park?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't a park.  It was sort of a big open field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't what we would really call a park now, but it was the closest thing to a park that we had at that time.  I mean it was, it had grass and everything.  It wasn't just dirt.  And it did have, if I remember correctly, some playground equipment and a ball field, a baseball field, something like that.
Story_ID: 24098
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, alright.  Now, we always ask this question.  When you think about growing up, and where you grew up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I said there was a big field across--so, I remember the smell of freshly mowed grass.  We had a backyard with sunflowers.  They weren't that big.  We also, I had a pretty happy childhood.  I mean, the only, I think the only problem was difficulties associated with my parents, and their problems in getting along with each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I remember playing with other people's children, and getting punished for doing bad, for doing the wrong thing, not that bad by today's standards.  But I lived in a segregated town, but I never--I went to a Catholic school which was across town.  So, I had to go and catch a streetcar or a bus, and even though the buses and streetcars were segregated, I always managed to get along with the bus driver and pretty much sit where I wanted to sit.  So, I never felt oppressed.  I think part of that was associated with people who knew who my mother [Claudia Russell] and father [Willism Jackson, sr.] were.  And so they sort of, you know, "That's Miss so-and-so's son."  And so they sort of let me do pretty much--they didn't really bother me that much either.
Story_ID: 24099
Speaker 1: Did white people in Birmingham in those days respect black professionals as such or was it due to a personal relationship with somebody?  Or what was it, what do you think?
Speaker 2: There were still things you couldn't do.  But I didn't say I went downtown and sat at the Woolworth's counter.  I didn't do that.  I mean, but I never remembered, I never remembered not being able to do what normal people did.  It just didn't seem that oppressive.  It got more oppressive the older I got, when we started doing things.  But I don't remember it being, you know, that oppressive to me personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I read about things, and don't get me wrong, I knew there were lynchings.  Bull Connor was the police commissioner.  My mother [Claudia Russel] and father [William Jackson, Sr.] knew these people.  I got polio in 1945.  We moved out of the projects in 1945 when I got polio.  And I was Indianapolis when I got polio.  And we had, Dad purchased a lot in 1939 up on the hill, so they were going to build a house.
Speaker 1: This was in?
Speaker 2: Birmingham.
Speaker 1: In Birmingham, okay.
Speaker 2: They were going to build a house all on one floor, so I wouldn't have to walk up and down the stairs, which is what I had to do in the projects.
Speaker 1: So, did you all move into that house?
Speaker 2: Well, first they had to get a building permit.  And my mother went down to get the building permit.  And she told me, she told me my father sent her down.  My mother was fair, but everybody knew she was black.  She never said that she wasn't black.  And so, she went down and she started talking to the commissioners about the building permit.  And she said that--well, I'm sure he didn't call her Mrs. Jackson.  He probably said, "Claudia, we don't mind you moving up there, but once we let one of you Negroes move up there..."--and that's probably the word that they used, they didn't say nigger, but they'd say Negra, and put an 'a' on it.  If you grew up in the south, you'd know that.  And they wouldn't say Negro, because that's too polite... "and then other people would move up, and we'll have a problem."  Well, other people did move up, and so now, I lived on what they called Dynamite Hill.  And if you look in the papers during those days--
Story_ID: 24100
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the famous Dynamite Hill--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  We lived two blocks from the house, the first house that they bombed.  And further from other houses, so--
Speaker 1: And just for those who're watching this who don't know what that is, Dynamite Hill was named because black homes were often--
Speaker 2: Several black homes were bombed up there, until finally, they just stopped.
Speaker 1: They were bombed by the--
Speaker 2: By whites who did not want--everything was all black and white, colored and white, to be honest.  They didn't want the coloreds to move out of the region where they were.  So, they started bombing people as they built houses.  Eventually, it stopped because they couldn't bomb fast enough to keep the people from building.  So, people started, I guess, resisting.  I don't know exactly, I mean this part is a little hazy to me, but I don't know exactly when and why it stopped, but maybe the federal government stepped in, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: I know the, one I guess of the most publicized bombings was the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in 1963.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was later during the civil rights movement.   This was earlier.  We're talking about in the late 40s and early 50s.  I was actually in Birmingham with my, visiting my father when that happened.  And one of my cousins was one of the girls who got killed.  I don't remember her name because I didn't really know her.  This was 1961, and I was down there with my two children and my wife visiting my father.  And when they had the march afterwards, I went down there.  My father got upset and he said, "You know, you're going to get--I don't want anything to happen to you."  I said--well, I went anyway.  But now I do remember that.
Speaker 1: So, then they caught one of the fellows that dynamited--Thomas Blanton, who supposedly bombed the 16th Street Baptist Church, and they proved he bombed it.  And he had been bombing homes for a few years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'm sure Bull Connor and all of the--the police knew who was doing what.  The reason they caught him and tried him was probably because we got more publicity at that point.  You know, you had the federal government and--and it wasn't because of the FBI, because Hoover knew what people were doing anyway, and probably agreed with it.  But it was more the national media's reaction to what happened.
Speaker 1: So, your father built the second home on Dynamite Hill?
Speaker 2: No.  We built--our lot was next door to another family whose name happens to be Jackson, but had been living there for a long period of time.  And there was another, about a block away there was another house that had been there for a long period of time--Ward, who was also a school teacher at Parker High School.  Across the street from him was another black family who had three children, or four children.  I can't think of their names right now, but I used to play with them.  So, there was a house next to us, there was a house a block away on the same street, 12th Avenue North, and one across the street from there.  And so we built there.  And the first time I came to California was when the house was being finished. And I came--my father sent my mother and the two children to visit her mother in Los Angeles while he and a friend of his slept on the screen porch with rifles to prevent anybody from coming to the house.  So, nobody came to the house.
Speaker 1: So this is, now what year is this?
Speaker 2: It had to '46' [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '45' [1945] or '46' [1946] because I had polio in 1945, but it had be '46' [1946] because they built the house while I was in Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Now were there white families that owned homes on that hill as well?
Speaker 2: It was pretty empty.  It was just a bunch of empty lots up there.  I mean every--between our house and the Wards and the other family, there were no, there were empty lots.  So, it was on the other side of the Ward house, going toward what they called Center Street, which was the way--they didn't want blacks to go on the other side of the Ward house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, that was the first house they bombed.  And then they didn't want you to cross Center Street, because that's where the white neighborhood was.  Birmingham Southern College was within walking distance of my house.  Regent Field was within walking distance, fifteen or twenty blocks.  I mean, I have walked to Regent Field.
Speaker 1: That was a white--
Speaker 2: That was a white area.  So, the black area was on one side of Center Street.  And actually, it was supposed to stop a little bit before you got to Center street.  And the one, the house that was bombed, the first one was bombed, I think it was near the corner if I remember correctly.
Story_ID: 24101
Speaker 1: So, now, you said something that intrigued me.  You said whites and blacks, but then you corrected it to whites and colored people, were actually living on the Hill.  Is that a--
Speaker 2: Because that's what they called us.  They didn't call us, they did not call us blacks or African-Americans.  And if I'm thinking about that era, it doesn't seem right to use, I mean you're going to use the right words for the period of time.  It would be colored--Negro in polite terms--colored in everyday usage, and then you know, the other epithets that they might use.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact, in those days, if you called somebody black, they might get mad at you.  And African-American was just not heard of.
Speaker 1: Right, you're right about all of that.  I just wanted to get clarification on it.  Now--
Speaker 2: Actually, so names do not define me.  I define myself.  So, I mean you can call me what--well, I don't accept insults, so don't get me wrong.  But you can't define me by a name or a label.  And that was the way I was raised.  So, that was just water off my back.  I can call you as many names as you can call me.
Story_ID: 24102
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were keenly aware of the crisis that was going on in those days.  I mean when you were-- because you had like polio.  Now, this is another crisis.  This is a personal crisis with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you discover, I mean what happened?
Speaker 2: I was supposed to go to camp that morning.  I was staying with my Aunt Florette who lived in Indianapolis [Indiana].  I got up.  I remember getting up out of bed. And I was right-handed.  And I stepped on the side of the bed and fell.  I said, well that's strange.  But I got up, went and got a bowl of cereal, corn flakes.  I tried to swallow them and couldn't swallow them.  I gagged and choked and threw up.  So, I went and told my aunt, you know, what happened.  So, I got a fever and, of course, that was sort of--and then they put me into--they took me to the hospital.  Indianapolis was just as segregated as Birmingham, Alabama.  They didn't have a place--they were not going to put a black person in the regular part of the hospital, so they put me in the basement with an iron lung next to my bed.  I had a, my throat was paralyzed, so they had to feed me intravenously for two weeks.  I was nine years old, and I think when I finished, I got down to about forty pounds.  So, I was skin and bones.  Then they transferred me.  I had a private compartment.  My mother, of course, had come by that time.  They shipped me by private compartment down to Tuskegee, Alabama.  And after--because they had to keep me isolated until the critical stage was over so that I wouldn't pass it on to anybody else.  And during those days--you're younger than I am--but in those days before the Salk Vaccine and the saline vaccine, they used to have polio outbreaks every summer.  And unfortunately, I was one of the people who contracted it.  So, then they took me, they put me in a private room in Tuskegee.  And I remember--
Speaker 1: Is that the John Andrew Hospital in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: It was the, I've forgotten the--
Speaker 1: Hospital in Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was--no, it was the special hospital built by Franklin D. Roosevelt for people with polio.  Whites--there were similar, there were others around the country, but this was the only one that would, that would work with blacks.  This was the colored people's, it was new.  It was in good shape and they had good doctors.
Speaker 1: So, Franklin Delano Roosevelt's family--
Speaker 2: No, the federal government, not Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay, the federal government, okay.
Speaker 2: Because he had polio.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that was one of the things that they tried to make sure everybody had access to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Yeah, I remember polio was really a big deal.  And the telethons we have now, a lot of the telethons started up in response to polio.
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't have televisions.  They were just getting televisions.  But it was a big thing, you're right.  The March of Dimes program, I was supposed to go on one of the March of Dimes--
Speaker 1: Now, the Salk vaccine was--
Speaker 2: The first one was--
Speaker 1: Around '55' [1955], is that about right?
Speaker 2: No, actually I think--I had polio in 19--I was nine years old, so around '45' [1945].  The Salk vaccine came in about 1949, if I remember correctly, and you can check that date.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I missed it by three or four years, if I remember correctly.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, did they, was there, by 1949 it was Salk vaccine.  I know that would prevent it, but was there a cure for it?
Speaker 2: Well, once you get polio, there is no cure.  The problem, what happened is, it has to run its course.  So what happened, I mean, it's a virus, so there are no anti-viral medicines.  Even to this day, there are no anti-viral medicines.  So, what it basically does, it destroys your nerves.  The nerves, when the nerves are destroyed, they don't enervate the muscles, so the muscles deteriorate.  And so, that's why you see this waste that people have as a result of polio.  My right leg is sort of wasted because of that.  The--I think the thing that helped me, when I got down to Tuskegee, I remember an older man--because adults were getting it too--I'm in a wheelchair--came in one day, and I'm sitting up feeling sorry for myself.  And he told me to get up, and you can walk.  I looked at him, and he kept insisting.  So, I got up and tried.  And I started dragging my leg, but I started moving around.  And then they started rehabilitating me.  And that sort of helped, I think, to get an early start on that a little earlier than the doctors would have started.  It certainly helped, not to feel sorry for yourself.  Also, I remember during that period of time, a young lady, pretty young lady, who had it.  And she must have been, I was nine, she must have been about thirteen, twelve or thirteen, and she refused, she just gave up and died.  She just didn't want to be a cripple.  And I think, I asked my mother "Am I going to be a cripple?"  And anyway, it was a traumatic experience, and it changed me for a lot of reasons.  I became more combative as a result of that.  Because children at that age tease a lot, and I didn't like being teased, even though, as my wife reminds me, "Well, it's true, I don't understand why you get upset." (laughter).  But I was a child.
Story_ID: 24103
Speaker 1: Alright, you were just telling us off-camera that you kind of learned to get around, even though you had like polio, you know, on a crutch, and in a cart and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and trying to play football, and--
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a kid I never went out for the football team because remember, I'd lost all this weight.  So, but you know, trying to learn how to play basketball--which I was never any good at.  I don't think that had anything to do with polio, I just couldn't shoot.  I'd shoot bricks.  I later--I mean I liked to do a lot of, I played--as I grew older and actually when I got to graduate school, I started playing golf, in 1960.  I played golf until 1969 for about nine years once a week.  I never was any good at it.  Then I was on sabbatical in Pittsburgh, and didn't have anybody to play golf with, so I started playing tennis.  I found that I could hop around and play tennis reasonably well.  I mean, I was never going to be a tennis star, but I could hold my own.  I played tennis from 1969 to 2000, about three days a week, and even when I came out here I played tennis.  And so, then in 2000, I decided to--I fell once too many times on the hard tennis court, and I decided, well, I'd better go back and play golf, because if I fall on the golf course, at least I'll fall on the grass, and it's softer, which I do.  But I still play golf.
Story_ID: 24104
Speaker 1: Alright, so, now, well, we'll get back to the polio.  Well, I guess I should follow up now.  When did it finally, when did you finally get back to like normal physical activity, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I got polio in July of '45' [1945].  I was out of school for a year.  And I started school early, so I was accelerated to begin with.  When I got back, I had missed a whole year.  So, you know, I went up to the ninth grade in Birmingham, and then in the ninth grade, my mother married again, and I moved to Mobile.  In Birmingham, we were in the K through 12 system.  In Mobile, they were in the K through 11 system.  They had never changed their old system.  They never, this is the residuals of slavery, so they could put the people out to work in the field.
Speaker 1: So, you could never graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Well, no, you graduated at the 11th grade.  I don't know how they came up with that, but because I'd been--I finished the ninth grade.  If they put me in with their group, I would have gone to the 11th grade.  But because I'd been in the--they had one class of tenth graders, so all the transfers from the K through 12 into that school system, went into tenth grade, and all the dummies were in the tenth grade.  That's the truth.  And so I lasted there one year and then I took the exam and went to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to go back and--oh, what I was going to ask you, how long did it take you to get like mobile, you know, where you were reasonably normal again after having polio?
Speaker 2: When I first got down there, I told you, in Tuskegee, when I got up, that started the rehabilitation process.  So, I was mobile even with the crutch and the wheelchair, or in the cart.  I would go to regular physical therapy.  One of the things they'd do, they'd do a lot of stretching to get you really flexible.  And I guess up until I was thirty, I was pretty flexible.  I mean, I remember when I finished, when I got back, I could sit up in a movie with both of my legs behind my head, I was so flexible.  I'd do that, you know, and the kids...  But I wish I was as flexible now on the golf course, but I'm not.
Speaker 1: Now, a woman that was contemporary with you pretty much, Wilma Rudolph, had polio and ended up becoming a track star after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There are different levels of recovery.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's not the same with everybody.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, my problem is that I lost all of my quadricep muscles.  So, the older I get, the worse it has gotten.  But I can do this with one leg, but I can't do it with the other.  So, you know, that's the way it goes, that's life.
Story_ID: 24105
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I didn't ask you.  Now, you started school in Catholic school, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: The Catholic school I went to in Birmingham was called Immaculata.  It went from, I guess, nursery school--no, first grade--first grade through 12th grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I went from the first grade to the ninth grade, and then moved to Mobile and went from the 10th to the 11th in Central High School in Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Central High School.  Now, were there, did you have, was there any indication that you were going to be a scientist when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was always interested in science.  I mean, before I had polio and after I had polio, I was always interested in science.  I was a good student.  I liked to read.  I mean, but I didn't know how to study, but I liked to read, and I read a lot.  And I was interested in paleontology.  That's really scientific.  Like most kids, I was interested in dinosaurs and so forth, and astronomy.  I didn't know anything about it, but it seemed interesting.  And I liked math.  And I liked to read.  I liked history in high school.  I had a real good history teacher.  And I enjoyed history.  I didn't like English very much, which you can probably tell from my writing.  But I always wanted to be a scientist.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any role models, or were there any heroes or scientists that you--
Speaker 2: My hero was Percy Julian.
Speaker 1: When did you find out about him?
Speaker 2: The first time I found out about him was in an article in Corium Magazine about him, and it's called The Man Who Could, I think.
Speaker 1: It's Corium, yeah.  It was about the size of--
Speaker 2: Jet Magazine.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was about the size of a Jet magazine.  And it told his story, and he was actually from Alabama.  And I remember it because I always told my father I wanted to be a scientist.  And of course in those days, the first reaction of a black parent to a kid who's saying he wants to be a scientist is, "Well, what are you going to do with it?  Well, if you're good enough to be a scientist, why don't you go into medicine or something, because then you're essentially an independent person."  I didn't want to be a doctor.  I didn't want to be a dentist, you know.  I wanted to be a scientist.  So, when I read the magazine, and I had read it, and when he brought this up, I think I was in college.  And he said, so my father said, "Well, the only thing you can do if you become a Ph.D. in science is teach in a black college."  And everybody knew black college professors didn't make any money.  And in fact, his wife and he said, we will pay for you to go to medical school.  But they wouldn't pay for--well, they did give me, he gave me something when I was in graduate school, but he wouldn't pay for it, in other words.  So, I remember saying, well I'm going to be like Percy Julian.  And I pointed out the article for Percy Julian.  And I guess my father said, you're crazy, and I can't tell you anything, which he probably couldn't.
Speaker 1: Now, when you, going back to grade school and high school, were there any teachers who were major inspirations or mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the good history teacher.  I can't remember her name.  I remember a biology teacher, Burroughs, who was pretty good.
Speaker 1: That was a history teacher in Mobile?
Speaker 2: Mobile, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't remember any of the teachers in the Catholic schools.
Speaker 1: Were any of them black in the Catholic schools?
Speaker 2: They were all nuns.  As far as I remember, they were all nuns, white nuns.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were no black nuns in those days.
Speaker 1: Well, there were, but hardly any of us knew of them.
Speaker 2: They weren't in the program.  There was a guy, I don't--who in the summer before I went to Morehouse, took a group of us, his name was Rodriquez.  And he went over math with us.  And I was so impressed by him, that when I got to Morehouse I was going to be a mathematician, until I started taking chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a black man named Rodriquez?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he, this is a special program he had during the summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, on his own, took a group of us, and I don't know how many, even to now, because it's been so long.  But he did have an impression on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, probably the biggest impression is in college when I took McBay.
Story_ID: 24106
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, when you left high school, were you on the honor roll, or were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the honor roll.  I mean, when I was in high school, I mean I always made good grades.  It was easy.  I always did--almost all the time, did my homework on the bus going to and from school, because it wasn't that hard.
Speaker 1: So, was--
Speaker 2: But I was at a disadvantage because I never really learned how to study, to be honest.  It took me a long time to do it.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you choose Morehouse [Morehouse College]?  I mean, it's not like it's a bad choice.  But how, who guided you towards Morehouse?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Because your father went to Tuskegee, I know--
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the tenth grade, okay.  They didn't have, I saw on the bulletin board in high school an advertisement for the Ford Foundation Program, early entrance program.  And it said if you take this exam, you can go to Fisk [Fisk University] or Morehouse, and you get your tuition and room and board paid.  And I was not, it was not, well, first it was not clear to me how I was going to pay for college.  I knew I had to go to college, but it wasn't clear how I was going to pay for it.  I told you I had an older sister.  She was leaving to go to college, and I sort of hung out with the people in her crowd.  And I said, well, I don't want to stay down here, you know, going to this dummy class for two more years, 11th and 12th grade.  So, I took the exam and I passed.  And I got accepted to Fisk and Morehouse.  Fisk was a program that you go there and you spend five years.  They made you take an extra year.  Morehouse was only four years, so I did--so it was, I said I think I'd rather go to Morehouse.   So, I accepted to go to Morehouse.  The sort of interesting thing, I don't know whether I have it now, but I had a note.  My mother kept a note that Benjamin Mays sent me.  It was handwritten, and he had read in the Pittsburgh Courier that I'd been accepted to Fisk and to Morehouse.  And it basically said, "Dear Mr. Jackson, I see that you have been accepted to Fisk and Morehouse.  I expect you to be at Morehouse on such a date..."  So, I went to Morehouse. (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  This is interesting too, that the Pittsburgh Courier, which really had a national circulation in those days, published your name as a--
Speaker 2: I think so, it was the Pittsburgh Courier.  It was probably Pittsburgh Courier, because I was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just saying that they published your name in the paper as an upcoming student, you know, who's gotten this choice for Fisk and Morehouse, along with the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was, yeah, it was all of the students.  Maynard Jackson's name was probably in there and May Jones--all the people--Pops, Charles Brown, who we were talking about, all the people who were--Peter Chatow (sp), who is a plastic surgeon.  And everybody who got accepted.
Story_ID: 24107
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, okay, Morehouse.  So, now was it much more challenging at Morehouse than it was in high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't get all A's, so yeah.  Yeah, I mean, yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at Morehouse there was the great Dr. Henry McBay that everybody talks about.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We hear his name over and over again in these interviews.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was your relationship like with Dr. McBay?  What was he like?
Speaker 2: I did not take chemistry in high school, and I told you, my stepfather was a dentist.  School started on a Monday, so the way I was going to get to Morehouse, he had to drive me up there.  And so, he was going to drive me up there on, he wanted to leave on Saturday morning.  And Mobile is about 250 miles from Atlanta, and then there were no interstate highways in those days, 1952.  So, Harry Truman was president, and the interstate didn't come in until Eisenhower was elected.  And he started it.  So, he wanted to drive up that weekend.  I think we started, and he had to come back so he wouldn't have to close his practice for the half a day on Saturday.  So, we left, and I got there a couple days earlier than most of the freshmen, than all of the freshmen, in fact.  It was early enough for me to talk to the upper classmen who were going to be assigned to work with the freshmen when they got there.  In fact, when the other freshmen got there, they thought I was an upper classman.  But in talking to the upper classmen, they said, "Well, what are you going to major in?"  I said, "I'm going to major in math."  They said, "Well, that's good.  Don't take chemistry, because McBay is going to flunk you."  At that point in my life, I didn't, you know, I was, I didn't believe that.  And I didn't, I took it as a challenge, you know.  I enrolled in general chemistry.  Fortunately, I got a C the first semester and a B the second semester.  But I got hooked.  I liked the way, I mean, he made it interesting.  He was a very good lecturer.  He was very difficult, but I thought he was very fair.  He didn't give you anything, but he didn't take anything away from you.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't start off setting the world on fire in chemistry.  You got a C.  Now, you're like fourteen years old, or fifteen?
Speaker 2: Fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen, okay.
Speaker 2: My son did better in chemistry than I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, I got a C, but that's okay.  I mean, you asked me my relationship with him.  After I finished college, and got finished with graduate school, and started publishing papers, we had a very good relationship.  When I finished Morehouse, he wanted me to stay at Atlanta University and get a master's degree.  And I didn't see any reason why I should do that, even though my grades weren't that good.  So, I had been accepted to Northwestern [Northwestern University] and Purdue [Purdue University], but couldn't go because I didn't have any money to go, and they didn't give me any assistantship.  So, I moved up to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]  because I had a cousin there, who said, "Well, with your degree in chemistry you can get a job in the federal government."  So, I went around all that summer looking for jobs in the federal government.  But in the process, I knew I wanted to go into physical chemistry.  And I kept asking, well what's the best school for physical chemistry?  And they kept saying Catholic University, which was about a mile from where I was staying with my cousin.
Speaker 1: I want to stop this right here and then go back.  We skipped the whole Morehouse experience, which we need to get to before we get you to graduate school.  And Morehouse, I mean, you were telling me when we were walking around the campus earlier with you, your roommate was Maynard Jackson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my freshman roommate.
Speaker 1: Your freshman roommate.  And there was another student there that people might know, another one was Charles Brown, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who's a Reverend.  You didn't have any idea that he was going to be a Reverend at the time?
Speaker 2: No.  Let's see.  There were a lot of people there.  I mean there was Charles Brown, there was Maynard Jackson, there was Till, who only stayed two years.  After the first two years he went back to Texas and got his undergraduate degree and became a neurosurgeon, and teaches at Howard University Medical School.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Till, T-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Aaron Jackson was a chemistry major.  He died recently, but was a urologist.  He taught at Howard University.  Major Owens, who was and still is a Congressman from New York.  And that's only a small number of the ones that come to my mind right now.
Speaker 1: Now, you weren't the only early admitted student, right? So, there were other--
Speaker 2: One, everyone that I named was an early admitted student.  There were about twenty five or thirty of us.  Most of them were really smart.  And a guy from Chicago by the name of Joe Carl, I remember him.  I can't remember all the people in the class at this stage.  But it was a pretty--in fact, there are people who say we were the most famous class at Morehouse.  There were others who tried to rival us, but given the fact that out of seventy five students, the accomplishments of that class were outstanding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but there were about thirty early admitted students?
Speaker 2: Right.  But the program continued after that.  Walter Massey, who was president of Morehouse, was a couple years later.  So, I mean, there were--so there were, it was a pretty distinguished class.
Story_ID: 24108
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who were some of the--now, did you all, as early admitted students, have any social difficulties?  I mean, there were a lot of you at one time.  I know I think I was reading once that Dr. King started at Morehouse at fifteen, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.  But he was not part of, there was no Ford Foundation program.  He got there because, if you live in the south and you're pretty smart, then you get skipped a lot.  So, he got there early because he got skipped a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there are a lot of examples like that.  I don't know what they did in Dayton, Ohio, because I--that's where you're from.  I don't know whether they skipped people up there or not.
Speaker 1: Not much.  I haven't heard of many stories of people getting skipped.
Speaker 2: But they, I mean they would skip a grade and so forth, and a lot of that happened.
Speaker 1: I mainly hear that from the south, the skipping of grades, but, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They said that Dr. King had some social issues because he was younger than everybody else.  But you all had like thirty strong going in, so did you all have like social difficulties trying to adjust to college life?
Speaker 2: Do you mean did we have a whole lot of girlfriends?
Speaker 1: Well, no, not if you had any difficulty I guess, finding a girlfriend.  Or were you all, even at age fifteen--I don't know what your social outlook was.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether we would have been--we were probably no worse than some of the other students.  I mean, if you go to an all boys' college, all men's college, there's a lot of hooray about a lot of things.  Most of it is probably not true anyway.  So, what really happened and what people say happened, who knows.  It didn't keep us from doing--we did everything we wanted to do, just like anybody else.  They put us in special dorms for the first couple of years.  And they happened to be the newest dorms, so we didn't really care.  And they've now torn them down, but we did everything.  I mean, we went out, we spent a lot of time drinking beer, went to football games.  It was, I mean it's what I think a lot of college students do now.  The nice, one of the nice things I liked about Morehouse compared to, say U.C. [University of California], I don't like the quota system they had in U.C., because it does not allow the students to explore as much as we did.  It doesn't allow you to sit down and argue and talk about various issues that you have in class, because you're too busy trying to take an exam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I consider that poor education.
Story_ID: 24109
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, do you have any stories about Dr. Benjamin Mays?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I told you he sent me that note.  I was probably not the typical adoring student that most--maybe I was very independent, let me put it that way.  And probably most of the students were in awe of Dr. Mays, and I wasn't.  I basically wasn't in awe of anybody, to be honest.  And so, there were incidents that happened, which I don't need to recount.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, they make a good story.  (laughter).  This is a good time to tell them, if they're worth telling.
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell the one.  The one thing that I remember, I mean I'm not going to tell you about the story about me and Dr. May.  He, Dr. Mays would expect everybody to agree with him.  And I wouldn't necessarily agree.  And there were times that I said so in public, and my classmates would say, well, you should a good boy, you shouldn't have said that.  And I said, well, I thought it was the truth, and I say what I believe.  And I do that with anybody.  I've done that all my life, and I'm not going to stop doing it.
Speaker 1: For instance, can you give us an example of--
Speaker 2: It was trivial.  There was, Dr. Mays had banned the homecoming dance from being off-campus or anywhere after our freshman year.  Because we had the homecoming dance at this club downtown, and we sort of, it was pretty outrageous what we did.  It wasn't, I mean we didn't break up anything or anything like that, but we, that was in the days when all the college students drank.  We were drinking.  We had portable bars.  We were dancing.  Some people drank too much.  I wasn't one of them who drank too much.  But, and so, he, afterwards, he got very upset.  He said that we had embarrassed the school.  We didn't--it seems we had done what all the white students do, but we were supposed to be more subdued than they were.  So, he just said we can't have dances off campus.  So, we cancelled the dance.  Actually, they didn't have one until my senior year.  And finally, some group of the students agreed to--most of us, a lot of us didn't, but he wanted us to do something, he wanted us, he was tired of people walking and making a path on the grass.  So, he called a meeting of all the students and said--but he didn't want to put chains up.  He wanted us to, on our own, to do this, because he asked us to do it.  And I think I got up and said, "Well, you want us to do this, but you don't want to do what we want to do.  So, why do you expect us to do this, and you don't agree with some of the things we want?"  And so, some of my classmates didn't like that.
Story_ID: 24110
Speaker 1: Did you ever take any, were you ever elected to any leadership positions on campus?
Speaker 2: No.  I was not that kind of student.
Speaker 1: Did you join any fraternal organizations?
Speaker 2: I did.  Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and that lasted for about three years, and I think in my senior year I stopped doing that.
Speaker 1: Why?  Was there a reason?
Speaker 2: I always had reasons.  It was in my junior year.  There were some men from the city who came to a basketball game.  And there were words between me and one of the ladies of the men from the city.  And I had pretty much forgotten about it, until after the game was over and I came out of the gym, and I was accosted by this guy and his friends, and they surrounded me.  And one thing led to another and, remember, I only weighed 125 pounds and I was 6 feet 1, so I was pretty skinny.  And we got into an altercation and we had a fight.  I actually hit the guy first, because I was surrounded and I didn't see any way I was going to get out.  So, I might as well get one lick in before I get beat.  And I mean, I remember saying that.  And so I hit him as hard as I could.  And fortunately, they were, we were just swinging fists.  And my frat brothers didn't even try to break it up.  They just looked.  And so from that point on, I said well, if that's the way--you're supposed to be my frat brothers and I'm surrounded by these high school kids, and you can't even come in and at least  break it up.  The guy who broke it up actually was from Alabama, one of my home boys.  And he just started spreading people around.  So, I said that's enough of that.  And so I didn't, that was about my last, that was the last altercation I ever had in my life with anybody.
Story_ID: 24111
Speaker 1: Were there any other professors other than Dr. McBay that you remember, you know, from Morehouse [Morehouse College] that were significant?
Speaker 2: Probably Dr. Waldock who taught physical chemistry because that's what I ended up doing.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: W-A-L, I think D-O-C-K.
Speaker 1: Waldock, okay.
Speaker 2: He was actually white.  And, but, I actually did a sophomore project with him.  I always was interested in machines, and he had this interesting machine called the polarograph.  And I had to give a quantitative analysis to analyze brass.  And I said, "Can we use this to analyze brass?"  And he said "Yeah, we can try."  And so I used it, and that was about the only research experience I got at Morehouse.  I mean, I know all of my professors.  I could tell you all of my professors at Morehouse, what I took from them.  And I think I remember most of the grades.  But I wouldn't say any of them influenced me.  My biggest influence was my mother.  And some people, McBay, a couple of people in graduate school--well, one person in graduate school--
Speaker 1: Well, we're going to get there in a minute.  I just wanted to know before we leave Morehouse what was going on.  So, you got to Morehouse in '51' [1951] and left in--?
Speaker 2: 1952.
Speaker 1: '52' [1952], okay.  So, you left in '56' [1956]?
Speaker 2: No, I graduated in '56' [1956].  I didn't leave.
Speaker 1: Alright, yes sir, yes sir. Okay.
Story_ID: 24112
Speaker 1: So you graduated in '56' [1956].  This is, now in 1956, the second term of Eisenhower starts, I think in '56' [1956].  That's an election year, and he and Stevenson are running against each other.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is the year of the Montgomery bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama.  And so, did you go back to, when you were leaving Morehouse, had you already decided where you were going to go for graduate school?
Speaker 2: No.  I told you I got accepted to two places.  I got accepted to Northwestern [Northwestern University].  Before I even applied, the man told me I wasn't going to get any support, because they had given out their quota for assistantships to black students.  That was in 1956.  I could even tell you his name, but there's no sense in putting his name out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the second, I got accepted to Purdue [Purdue University].  And I didn't get any funds to apply.  They both said you can come, if you can pay your way.  I didn't have any way of paying my way.
Speaker 1: So, Catholic University [Catholic University of America].  You were in D.C. [District of Columbia] working for the National Bureau of Standards--
Speaker 2: I wasn't working.  I was looking for a job.  I went to Catholic University on a Friday.  Classes started on a Monday.  I walked into the office of the chemistry department and asked could I enroll at night school in the Ph.D. program.  The secretary laughed at me, and said we don't have a night school program, but I'll let you talk to the chair.  And I had written down all my grades in science, and I had pretty good grades.  If you added them up, I had about a 3.1 or a 3.2 grade point average.  And I took them in.  This is in science and mathematics, and in my last year, I had all A's in science, all A's and one B, or something like that.  But the chair told me, he said "Come, we still have some TA's left.  If you come back on Monday, you can get a TA."  So I came, I called my mother and told her what happened.  And he told me how much I could get.  I said, "Well, I got in graduate school, and this is how much they're going to give me, and can you help me at all?"  And she said well, I can send you $25 a month, which helped.  And I came back on Monday, and I don't know for sure, but I think the chair thought about this, because he had no official transcript.  He had, that was before GRE exams.  He had no references, other than me walking in the door.  And so, he said I'm going to assign this guy who walks in off the street to the class teaching as a TA.  But he had plenty of research money.  So, he said "Go in the lab and make two bud cells, some bud cells."  Because I had said I wanted to do experimental physical chemistry anyway.  So I went in there.  I didn't know what, somebody told me how to do them, and I did them.  He came back.  He tapped them on the desk.  And he said you're going to be hired as a R.A.  So that's how I got into graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, so this person sounds like he was special, I guess, in terms of bringing you in.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: He was special.  I mean, first, he accepted me into graduate school.  And that was important.  If he hadn't accepted me, I wouldn't even be here today.  Actually, I worked for him for three years as an R.A.  I didn't end up getting my Ph.D. from him, and I was, I was not a great student.  I mean, I've never been, that's why I talk to students, and I try to explain to them that you have to just work your way through this.  Nobody can really look at you, nobody can really tell about your grades.  The grades give you an idea what a person will do, but they don't necessarily tell you how creative they will be, how determined they'll be, how hard they will work.  You know, there's some people, there are a lot of people smarter than I.  Even my students, a lot of students, my students are smarter than I.  But I had my difficulties in grad school.  I mean, but I finally learned how to study, which took me a  while to do.  So, I started graduate school, I guess I started in, 19... because I finished in 19... I guess, because I turned 20 in September.  When I came from Morehouse, I really did not know how to study and didn't know a lot of things, but I was determined to get a Ph.D.  And I finally did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm surprised to hear you say that you didn't know how to study at Morehouse.  We always hear how tough Dr. Mays was on his students.
Speaker 2: He was.  I mean, I did study enough to do that, but I mean, I had to study more.  I had to work harder.  And I had to learn how to work harder.  I had to learn how to review more.  I had to learn how to read more.  I had to learn how to slow down and read, and read more carefully.  When I tell, I taught a lot of general chemistry students, and I tell students over and over again, you cannot read science like you read a novel.  You have to read everything, and understand each word in that sentence is important.  You can't just get a general idea.  You have to try to understand the concept of what the author is trying to say about that.  You want to learn what the principles are that's guiding what's going on.  And that is not the same thing as being able to read and recite back what you read.  So, what you're trying to do is get an understanding, so that once you understand it, you can apply it to something new.  So, that's what I mean, you have to learn how to do.  And it takes patience and it takes time, and it takes more than just memorizing what's being put down on a piece of paper.  At least it does for me.  I mean, some people can do it differently.  That's what I needed to do.
Story_ID: 24113
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who was your Ph.D. advisor?  I mean, well, who was, first of all, who was the gentleman that admitted you, that you worked for for three years and who, and secondly, who was your Ph.D. advisor?
Speaker 2: The guy who admitted me and supported me was F.O. Rice.
Speaker 1: R-I-C-E?
Speaker 2: R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other black students in the department?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Catholic University at the time had a reputation of admitting black students to graduate school in all fields, but in science also.  And actually, for a period of time, produced maybe ten percent of the black Ph.D.'s in the various science fields.  One of my best friends was Harry Morrison, who is now deceased.  And he was the first African-American in the physics department at, Professor in the physics department at Berkeley.  I think he was the, the other one who was behind me was Bill Lester, who is one of those who you interviewed as one of the Science Makers.  So, yeah, there were African-Americans there.  I wasn't the only one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Harry was probably the smartest person I ever met in my life, after Professor Morris.  Another person who was very important was Virginia Griffin, who's dead now, deceased.   I think F.O. Rice is deceased now.  But he lived to be in his nineties before he died.  She died early.  But she was, when I was in a very down period after I had not passed the chemistry qualifying exam, she invited me out to her house and sort of cheered me up and got me going again, seeing that I felt very really depressed.  And actually, I was so depressed, I switched from chemistry to physics because I always liked physics, and I'd already passed the--we had three sets of qualifying exams.  One for, two for the minors and for the major, and I'd passed the physics and math minors, but didn't pass the chemistry majors.  So, I switched to physics.  And she had taught me courses, and she was a professor of both chemistry and physics.  So, she had taught me both in chemistry and physics.  And she was important for two reasons.  One is she got me a job at the National Bureau of Standards when I needed one to go back into the chemistry department and finish up my Ph.D.  And two, she told me that I was not as bad as I was thinking I was.  So, those two things helped me a lot.  And the experience at the National Bureau of Standards was exactly what I needed, because I had an opportunity to work.  After I had not passed the exam, the qualifying exam in chemistry, I had got married.  And I had my wife, and then my first son was going to be born in June, and this was, I found out in November.  So, I had to finish that semester up in the physics department and go back into the chemistry department and find a job, and I did, at National Bureau of Standards.
Story_ID: 24114
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to ask you.  How did you meet your wife, and--
Speaker 2: At a party.  She was a graduate student at Howard [Howard University] and I was a graduate student at Catholic University [Catholic University of America]. She was getting her master's.  She was working on her Ph.D. in pharmacology, and I was working on my Ph.D. in chemistry.
Story_ID: 24115
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, alright, so, you were getting ready to tell us about--so you got a son on the way and you're, so what was your--oh, what did you do at the National Bureau of Standards?  That's the other question I didn't ask.
Speaker 2: At the National Bureau of Standards, I worked under Dr. James R. McNesby.
Speaker 1: Mc--
Speaker 2: Mc-N-E-S-B-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do?
Speaker 2: Research.
Speaker 1: Okay. You were a chemistry--
Speaker 2: I was a chemistry researcher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing fundamental research on the reaction--do you want to know what it was, or do you just--
Speaker 1: No, well, go ahead and tell us.
Speaker 2: On methyl radical abstraction reactions and thermal decomposition of hydrochlorides, radicals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was that, can you break that down for the laymen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you take methane, which is natural gas, and is a chemical formula of C-H4, and you break off the hydrogen, you get a methyl radical.  These are very important in combustion and they are the sort of things that carry the whole combustion chain, the chain reactions that occur.  Also, important in combustion are the other free radicals: ethyl radicals, normal propyl radicals, isopropyl radicals--because when you heat them up, they break apart and form other reactive radicals that promote the chain.  So, combustion in the automobile cylinder, for example, is the result of chain reactions.   And those chain reactions are carried by free radicals, and among the most important free radicals are the simple ones that I was telling you about.  Does that make--or do you want more?
Speaker 1: That makes some sense to me.  You know, I mean, a normal person would probably understand it.  (laughter).  But I think it makes sense, yeah.  So, now your dissertation, now what was, now was Dr. Griffin your advisor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was in theory.  And the guy who was my official advisor at Catholic University was Basil Darwent, D-A-R-W-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Darwent, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he taught kinetics.  But he wasn't the one who really, all he did was sign off on the thesis, because he really didn't do anything.  The one who taught me everything was James McNesby, who was at the National--I gave you his name earlier.
Speaker 1: McNesby?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, so what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: 'Isotope effects in methyl radical abstraction reactions in the thermal decomposition of normal propyl, isopropyl, and tertiary butyl radicals.'  I think that was the title of the dissertation.
Speaker 1: So, can you break that down for us?
Speaker 2: Well, the methyl radicals play off of hydrogen from other hydro columns, forming methane, and leaving back a bigger radical, because the bonds in the bigger radical are weaker than the bonds in the methyl radical.  They break and form two radicals.  So, it started out with one, and you play off the hydrogen and you get two radicals.  Those two radicals then react with other hydrocarbons and form even smaller radicals.  So, this is the way you keep the chain reaction going, and you get energy by doing that.
Story_ID: 24116
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, now did you have any trouble with your dissertation, or did you--
Speaker 2: Actually, I was working.  I took the qualifying exams in May of '59' [1959].  I took them again in May of 1960.  I started at the National Bureau of Standards in December of 1959, and by the summer of '61' [1961], I had finished all the research.  I passed the exam in May of '60' [1960].  Then we started the research, wrote the research, and I took the final oral exam in November of 1961.  So, from December of 1959 to November of 1961, I took, studied, and re-took the Ph.D. qualifying exams, passed them, did all of my research, wrote my dissertation, and I was out in November of 1961.  And we published five papers from my dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that unusual, for so many papers to come from one dissertation?
Speaker 2: I think it may have been a little bit unusual at that time, but I think it's more typical now.  I think the thing that is unusual, is to finish all the research that quickly.  I mean, I've learned, what I learned at the Bureau of standards, was how hard scientists have to work.  I really understood that when I was around other people who were working that hard, how many hours you put in, how much it really takes.
Speaker 1: So, typically, when you would go into work, how long would you be there?
Speaker 2: I would say I typically worked sixty hours a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean that's typical.  You know, ten hours a day, at least ten or eleven hours a day, something like that, and seeing them come in on Saturdays if necessary.  Actually, that's when I started playing golf, too.   Everybody played golf on Saturday, so--
Speaker 1: Were these your colleagues?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my colleagues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but that's what I learned, really.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you officially got your Ph.D. in '61' [1961]?
Speaker 2: I officially finished and passed all the exams, and I marched in '62' [1962].  But once you finish the final oral exam, that was it, and I had passed all the requirements.  I think my Ph.D. certificate said 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I actually marched.
Story_ID: 24117
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now we're into the Kennedy years in D.C. [District of Columbia], so just to put it into some kind of historical backdrop.
Speaker 2: Actually, I left and went to Baltimore [Maryland].  I wasn't in D.C.
Speaker 1: Oh, when you finished your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I got a job at the Martin Company, which is an aerospace company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, this is your first job after you--
Speaker 2: That was my first job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked there from 1961 to, I think, August of 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in 1963, did you go back to the National Bureau of Standards?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I took a big pay cut, a 30 percent pay cut.
Speaker 1: Why did you leave a job that paid 30 percent more?
Speaker 2: Because I wasn't being a scientist.  I mean, I actually published one paper when I was there, but I kept getting raises every six months.  And there was some racism involved, some things I didn't like.  They promoted a guy to be my supervisor, and we were on the same level.  He had a master's degree, I had a Ph.D.  But I think the final straw that broke the camel's back was when I came up with an answer, a product which--I thought I had gone into the industry with the idea of being like Percy Julian.  So, I came up with a product that in principle was the ideal solution to the problem that we were dealing with.  And I showed it to them, and they were not interested at all.  I said, this was not a place for me.  You know, I was not going to, this was play, this was not science.  This was not trying to solve problems, and that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: What was the problem, if you can explain it?
Speaker 2: The problem that we were looking at was how do you build better nose cones for ballistic missile re-entry vehicles?  I had read all the literature, and I knew what the ideal characteristics of this material should be.  So, I fabricated a markup of what goes, of that kind of material, and showed with a simple markup that we could, that this material would then have the right kind of characteristic.  It, of course, needed a lot of development.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I explained it all to them and showed them how it worked, and there was no interest whatsoever.  This told me that this was really not the place for me to be.  And so, at that point I started applying for post docs, post doctoral associate-ships, and I got a National Academy of Sciences post doctoral associate-ship, and went back to the Bureau of Standards to learn surface chemistry.  And in order to do that, I had to take a pay cut.  But that's basically what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're back at the Bureau of Standards in 1963.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you're there about a year, I guess?
Speaker 2: I was there about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I left after one year because I was, this was, the Bureau of Standards did not have much money, but it was not clear that they were going to hire anybody.  And I had a job offer at Goddard's Space Flight Center in Maryland.  And the guy, the position I was supposed to be taking, I was told that the position I was taking was going to lead to be the section chief in that program, or the chief of that program because the guy that I was supposed to be working with was going to leave.  He had said he was going to leave, which was fine.  I was, you know, going to learn some stuff from him and he was going to leave, and then I was going to run the program.  So, I thought that was a good idea.  So I took the, I could have stayed at the Bureau of Standards another year.  In fact, two fellows who were there with me, did stay, and had wonderful careers there because they ended up getting permanent jobs, which probably, I assume I would have done the same thing.   But we were all married, but I was the only one with two children, and so I felt I had more of an obligation than they did.  And so, I took the job at the Goddard Space Flight Center and stayed there for ten years.  I learned a lot, published some papers, got promoted, and that was an important aspect of my career.
Story_ID: 24118
Speaker 1: Now this is, you're at Goddard's Space Flight Center at the beginning of, and I guess the most publicized era for U.S. space flight?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So I mean, it was, Goddard, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was getting money at that time.  There were a couple of things that I did that you talked about.  You asked me about astrochemistry.  It was there that I started using my knowledge of chemistry and applying it to comets, which is what I was hired to do, and trying to understand the physical and chemical processes occurring in comets, and why they look the way the look, what they're made of.  And so I started working on problems like that.
Speaker 1: How did you study the comet, I mean did you study the names of comets, or--
Speaker 2: Well, primarily, comets are studied by spectroscopic observation.  You look at, use telescopes and measure the spectra.  And spectra are the signatures for molecules in comets.  And from the ground we can see signatures of free radicals like C-N, O-H, just barely.  CN-OH, C-2, C-3 and N-H.  That's the first clue.  There's other things.  You could just look at the orbits and see how the orbits change in periodic comets.  And a famous scientist by the name of Fred Whipple figured out that when they evaporate material as they heat up going around the sun, that material, when you go to have a force go in one direction, it exerts in the equal and opposite direction, remembering the second law of motion.  So, that slight motion changes the orbit, and if you measure it precisely, you can determine how much force was involved.  And he wrote a really brilliant paper, where he used that information, and he came up with what we call the icy nucleus model.  The comets are made up of frozen water with various materials inside, and when the water evaporates, it pushes back on the comet, and that's what causes this chain to orbit.  And so, you look at that and you try to figure out well, then, how do free radicals come about?  And we showed that they come about and that you can make sense out of it by photo association.  That means light from the sun. Molecules absorb radiation from the sun and break apart.  For example, water, H20, absorbs light and breaks apart H plus O-H, and we see the O-H.  HCN breaks apart and gives you C-N plus H, and so forth and so on.  So, I worked on those kinds of problems.  I wrote a, NASA was setting up a telescope called the IUE telescope.  They did ask for an ultraviolet exploratory telescope.  And I used, I proposed that we could use their telescope to study the ultra violet emissions spectrum above the atmosphere of the earth, so that you could see things that you could not see from the earth.
Speaker 1: Now this is, correct me if I'm wrong.  This is about 1974?
Speaker 2: The proposal was written to use a telescope, was written before that, because it takes five years to send up a satellite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You started, got it in '64' [1964].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's ten ten years.  That was in '74' [1974].
Speaker 2: '74' [1974].  We actually made the observations in '74' [1974], '75' [1975].  But I wrote, I was the principal investigator on the observations.
Speaker 1: And this is the first team to use the ultra violet explorer.
Speaker 2: Explorer, that's right.  And the interesting thing, to me, was the astronomers who designed the telescope said we wouldn't get a big enough signal from a comet to be able to use it.  But I showed that you, in fact, could do that.  Because I showed them a piece of paper, and we actually made the first observations.  The signal was about what I had predicted it was going to be.   So, being a chemist, it felt good to prove the astronomers wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: That telescope went on to make some of the most significant observations of comets.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the newer versions of the HST telescope and so forth is still making significant observations of comets.
Story_ID: 24119
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at some juncture in '74' [1974], you joined the faculty at Howard Hniversity.
Speaker 2: In September of '74' [1974].
Speaker 1: Did you leave Goddard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I joined, before that, in January as an adjunct professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I became a full time professor in 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who else was on the faculty of Howard?  Who was the chair, and what was the faculty like?
Speaker 2: The chair at the time was Marty Taylor, who is deceased.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the others?
Speaker 2: Jeff Wheeler, who is also deceased.  Peter Hambride, who is also deceased.  Paul Stone, who I think is still alive.  I'm trying to think.   Herbert Lake, who is still alive and on the faculty.  And I'm missing--I got some names of people, I can't remember them all, but--
Speaker 1: I just wanted to get an idea.  And was there, what drew you to Howard?  Were you--
Speaker 2: They offered me a job on the faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had been looking for a job on the faculty since I had taken a year off and gone to the University of Pittsburgh as an associate professor, visiting associate professor in physics.
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: 1969 and 1970.
Story_ID: 24120
Speaker 1: Okay.  The University of Pittsburgh, alright.  So, did you, had you decided basically that you'd rather teach, or be in a place where you could do research and teach?
Speaker 2: I had made the decision before I went there.  I had met, before I went I was trying to do some work in molecular beams, which is supposed to be the frontier of my field, in my experimental field.  And I was trying to build a molecular beam apparatus at Goddard Space Flight Center.  And one of the instruments that we needed was something called a quadruple pole, Q-U-A-D-R-U-P-L-E, P-O-L-E mass spectrometer.  The advantage is it's small and you can put it inside and move it around.  Now, you don't know what a mass spectrometer is, do you?
Speaker 1: Now, a spectrometer looks at the light spectrum.
Speaker 2: Now, this is a mass spectrometer.
Speaker 1: Mass, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: So, what it does is it breaks up, you put ions in it, and it separates them according to their mass, so you could analyze it.  So, this company, this professor in Pittsburgh had a company and an experimental lab, and a reputation in this field, a big reputation in this field. So, he invited me to become a visiting associate professor, and I thought it was a good opportunity to learn something new, and I went.  And I actually learned an awful lot.  I think that that year was important in all of my future careers, because that year taught me how to analyze what one might expect if you did certain, if you wanted to do a certain kind of experiment.  So, I could, I got experience that allowed me to sit down with a calculator and paper and pencil and figure whether it was feasible to do a certain kind of experiment, which then became the basis of future proposals, and so forth and so on.  And I learned that when I was working there.  Nobody else, even when I was doing my Ph.D. research or when I was in graduate school, had taught me how you go about doing this.  And so, this was to me very important.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, this is the University of Pittsburgh, before you went over to Howard?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So-
Story_ID: 24121
Speaker 1: So, when you went over to Howard, was there a, was that resource there, the mass spectrum?
Speaker 2: No.  There was nothing there.  But I went over as an adjunct professor.  When I got there, I started writing proposals.  And the chair of the department, who was Marty Taylor at the time, decided that at least I was writing proposals.  And a lot of the other African-American faculty weren't.  So, he actually took a position from the organic chemistry people and gave it to me, and asked me would I start and would I become a permanent professor, and I accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now, were you able to get one of those mass spectrometers?
Speaker 2: I did, but that was not important.  I mean, I did, but by that time, I had come up with another idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that idea was using tunable dye lasers as a way of both detecting and characterizing and monitoring free radicals.  I told you earlier that I had studied free radicals in my Ph.D. thesis.  But the way we studied them then, what we had to do was use them, make products, analyze the products, and try to figure out what was going on, alright.  So, while I was at Goddard, starting, after I got back from Pittsburgh, actually, in 1970, I came up an idea that--actually, I was at lunch and I was reading a magazine, and I saw an ad for a laser that would put out tunable radiation in a region where things like CN, which are in comets, or in O-H, C-N in particular or C-2, would absorb and then become fluorescent.   And because of some experiences I had had before that, and because I knew about comets, I started looking at how much, how bright this light source was, and I did some back of the envelope calculations, like I'd learned to do in Pittsburgh [the University of Pittsburgh].  And this light source was brighter than the sun was.  Now, the sun is responsible for the light that you see from comets, by exciting these radicals up, so that you can see them from comets.  So, I said to myself, well, then maybe I can use this to monitor these radicals right in the laboratory.  And I then started making some calculations.  All the calculations seemed to work out.  At the same time I was making the calculations, that's when the government, believe or not, had some extra money--which they don't have anymore--and the director sent around requests for proposals.  And I wrote a two page proposal, and they gave me $20,000.  And I built one of these laser devices with the experimental set-up.
Speaker 1: Now this is what year?  What year is this?
Speaker 2: This started about 1971.  '70' [1970], '71' [1971], after I got back from Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably, I think 1971.  '70' [1970] or '71' [1971].  And I think I submitted the first paper in 1973 or 1972, somewhere in there.  But that was, that actually was the big thing that I pushed, once I got to Howard University.
Story_ID: 24122
Speaker 1: Alright, so at Howard, you outlined the project you would work on and--
Speaker 2: Well, I wrote proposals, they were funded, and I started a laboratory there.  We eventually built a big enough laboratory called a laser chemistry lab at Howard, where we trained graduate students, and published papers...
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the same time--now, I started at Howard [Howard University] in '74' [1974].  By the time I started at Howard, I think it was probably in '74' [1974], '75' [1975].  The IUE telescope satellite had now been launched, and we started looking at free radicals in comets.  So, I got money from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], NSF [National Science Foundation], and the Department of Energy.  And we started looking at free radical reactions for the association to produce those reactions, uh, radicals, and characterizing those radicals with lasers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you've heard people say that there's always a pull, opposite ends pulling on university campuses, especially on the black campuses, in terms of teaching load and research time.  Did you experience any conflicts in terms of teaching load and, well, what they asked you to do in terms of teaching, and the amount you needed for research?
Speaker 2: I taught the regular teaching load that they had until I started bringing in enough money that they felt it was important for me to spend more time doing research.  I got appointed while I was there, and I think it was a graduate research professor or something like that.  It's in my CV, if you look at it.  And so, that reduced some of my teaching load.  When I got the offer to come out here to U.C. [University of California], they reduced it even further.  I mean, they actually made an offer to keep me.  The chair here did not think I was going to accept his offer because it was better than his offer.  But, and actually that offer at the time was the largest offer they had ever made to anybody at U.C.  So, Howard really tried to keep me there, and I really enjoyed working at Howard.  It was a very difficult decision for me to leave Howard.
Speaker 1: Now, before you left Howard, you were honored with a Percy Julian Award, I think in 1979?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I won the Percy Julian Award.  I won every award, I think, the teaching award.  I mean, I won every award they could offer you at Howard University.
Speaker 1: You said they offered you the highest salary they ever offered anyone at Howard?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't say that.  What I said, I said-- what I said was that the offer U.C. made me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the set-up money and so forth, was the largest offer they had ever made at U.C. Davis at the time.  Now, it's not, you know, but at least that's what I was told by the chair of the department, I don't know.  How would I know?  But I know that he told me that they had to go--and they just hadn't done anything like that before.  They do it now all the time, but this was back in 1985.
Story_ID: 24123
Speaker 1: How did you get on the radar of U.C. Davis [University of California, Davis]?
Speaker 2: There was an old professor here by the name of David Baldwin, who I had met at a photo chemistry conference, probably ten years before that.  And he knew about my work, so he called me up one day and he asked me would I be interested in a faculty position here.  And I flippantly responded, "Everybody's got a price."  And I then called my wife and said, "Do you want to move?" I mean, I really didn't take it very seriously.  I called my wife and said--because I didn't think she--and then I said, "I've got to check with my wife, and so forth."  I called her and said, "You know, somebody called me about a job out in California.  Are you interested?"  And I thought she was going to say no.  She said, "When are we going?" (laughter).  So, I called him back and I said, "Let me explain to you what kind of deal I have here."  I said, "I got my own building, I got so many people working for me.  We got a big lab, and I get paid and I don't have to do but so much, and so on.  Do you, I mean if we're serious about this, you're going to have to beat all that, alright."  And so he said, "Well, let me try."  And it was between him and the chair of the department.  They came up with an offer that was better than what I had at the time, but was not as good as the offer that came from Howard in response to that offer.  But, you know, I decided to come here anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is in 1985?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were about fifty one, I guess then?
Speaker 2: '85' [1985], no, forty nine.
Speaker 1: Forty nine, Okay, alright.  So, at U.C. Davis, so you come in 1985, and by 1988 you are the Miller professor here, and what--
Speaker 2: Not here, but at Berkeley.
Speaker 1: At Berkeley, oh--
Speaker 2: They have something they call the Miller professorship.  I applied for it and got it, so I went down to Berkeley to work with Bill Lester.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When was that?
Speaker 2: That was to work with--look, I have to look back at the resume--to work with Yuan T. Lee.   And was, is it '88' [1988]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1988.  It's a Miller Professorship.  So, that's at U.C. Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you went there for a year, or longer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And, okay, so what were you working on?
Speaker 2: Maybe it was six months, I'm not, it may have been half a year.  Let's see, I was working with Yuan T. Lee on molecular beam research.
Speaker 1: Okay, molecular beam research.
Speaker 2: I think it was maybe '89' [1989], but maybe it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have here '88' [1988].  I'm not, you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: I'll check my CV.
Speaker 1: Well, so with Yuan T. Lee--so, at U.C. Berkeley--
Speaker 2: I have to look back and check some of these dates.
Speaker 1: It's either '88' [1988] or '89' [1989].  And do you want to elaborate on what you all were doing?
Speaker 2: Was I working for--well, I don't remember if I was working--yeah, okay, yeah, I know.  We were working on photo dissociation using crossed lasers in a molecular beam.  And, well, what we basically did was, you take light, break apart the molecule, and then you look at the velocity and angular distribution of the fragments.   And from that, you can tell something about how tightly they are bound and what the different dissociations, what are the forces holding them together?  So, that was what we did down there, okay, in that period of time. Alright?
Story_ID: 24124
Speaker 1: So when you came back to campus here--now, tell me if I'm skipping over something.  But in 2000--well, I skipped over ten years here. (laughter).  What happened, was there anything significant between 1989 and 2000 when you became the department chair?  I know there's got to be--.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's a lot of things.
Speaker 1: So what was going on in that period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, excuse me, I was trying to get some dates.  I worked with Bill Lester in 1980, before I came down here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was still at Howard on sabbatical.  I think that's in the CV if you look.  I worked for Yuan T. Lee in 1989 and 1990 with a Miller, and I think I had a Guggenheim, too, at that time, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a Guggenheim in there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a Guggenheim at that time.  Because Miller paid for half a year and Guggenheim paid for half.
Speaker 1: That's right, Guggenheim in '88' [1988].  You had two.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, when I got back here in 1990, I think I started, they asked me to be, to work in the dean's office.  I was still doing research.  Now, I'm always doing research.  And I'm teaching, always teaching and doing research.  So, they asked me to work in the dean's office, and they offered me two positions.  One was some kind of diversity--I said I don't want to do that.  And the other one was associate dean for academic personnel.  I said what do I have to do with that?  They said you have to review the files of all the faculty in the College of Letters and Science and make a recommendation to the dean of what they should do.  So, I said, okay I'll do it.  Now, somebody asked me, one of the associate deans asked me at the time, why did you take this?  I said because it's my understanding that senior professors are supposed to take administrative jobs to help govern the university as part of what they do.  I didn't have any great desire to be an administrator, alright.  But anyway, I did it for three years until we had the budget cutbacks, and they said they were going to cut out something else.  I said, fine, I'll go back to doing research.  I mean, I'll go back full time in the department, which was fine with me.  And I was happy doing that.  And then, I think in 1998 and 1999, I was a visiting associate professor in Taiwan at the National University in Taiwan.  I was a visiting professor, not an associate professor in Taiwan.  And I was a visiting scientist at the Institute for Atomic and Molecular Sciences with professor Yuan T. Lee, who had moved from Berkeley to Taiwan.  I was a senior Humboldt award winner at the Technical University in Munich.
Speaker 1: Now, when was that?
Speaker 2: The same time, 19--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing that I think from 1998 to 2000, it was about a year and a half.
Story_ID: 24125
Speaker 1: Well, there's something we passed.  In 1997, the American Association of the Advancement of Science presented you with the Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  For mentoring, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was based on a lot of things.  Not only, well, first it was based--I'm one of the founders of the National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1972?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, and I had been very actively involved in that organization throughout this time.
Speaker 1: Why was that organization formed?  I know I'm asking something that probably most people would say, oh well, we already know.  But we don't know unless someone tells us.
Speaker 2: That organization was formed, because at the time and even up to the present, we did not believe, and I still don't believe, that African-Americans get the kind of, the kind of recognition that they should.  We get a lot more now than we did in 1972.  They don't give us as many awards as we should get.  They are not, we're an after thought to the greater chemical industry and chemical society.  We're an after thought to most academicians.  I mean, I can tell you stories, which I won't, over and over again how people forget who they are, okay.  They forget, I mean, so that's one thing: recognition, understanding, and being a part of the mainstream in the chemical sciences.  That's part of it.  The other part of it, but I mean part of that is, if you look at it, we're ten percent of the population and make up two percent of the Ph.D.'s in chemistry, okay.  So, we're not, we're not represented in terms of our numbers.  We were not represented in the professorship, in terms of our numbers.  It is hard to get more minority Ph.D.'s in chemistry if you don't have minority Ph.D.'s in the universities, okay.  One of the significant achievements of the National Organization of Black Chemical Engineers is that it has given out about a million dollars in graduate fellowships, and they have worked with various companies to get money to support students in graduate school, alright.  Another, and I think just as significant achievement, is that the organization has acted as a spokes--as a group of African-American scientists who can talk to Congress and the federal agencies about providing more support for HBCU's, historical black colleges and universities.  Back in 1972 to 1978, or '76' [1976] or something like that, I, as a representative of the organization, testified before the Congressional Committee on how HBCU's were not getting money, and large amounts of money, to do significant scientific research in their institutions.  As a result, and we were asked to do this by Ted Kennedy's committee when he was head of the committee that governs the National Science Foundation.  As a result, there was a program started called the Minority Research Centers for Science and Engineering, that was designed to support those institutions that historically had trained a large number of minorities or underrepresented people in the sciences and engineering fields.  The first center was at, the first grant funded a resource center at Grambling University.  And it was, I don't know, several million dollars for five years.  That was the largest grant that had ever been awarded to an HBCU at the time.  Now, this was not just for HBCU, it was for HBCU's and for Hispanic serving institutions.  So, the second grant went to Puerto Rico.  And actually, they did a very good job of using that seed money to upgrade their science production, and in their graduate schools.  Because now, they were probably more effective than we were in America, well, in Georgia, because they actually controlled the whole education system down there.  And we had only partially controlled certain things.
Story_ID: 24126
Speaker 1: So, what university in Puerto Rico--
Speaker 2: I think it was the major campus.  Rio De Piedras, I think, is the name of it, but I'm not sure, because I didn't follow it that much.  What I did was to try to pull together letters and testimony for authorization and for the Appropriations Committee of the Senate and the House.  Because I lived in Washington, I knew how the system worked.  So, you first have to get a bill authorized, and after you get authorization, you have to make sure they appropriate money.  If they don't appropriate money and you've got an authorization bill, it doesn't have any teeth in it, right.  Now since that time, if you look at all the government agencies, they have started to, they send more money out to HBCU.  I mean, HBCU is still one of the most important institutions in this country for producing scientists and engineers at both undergraduate and graduate levels.  I think like, I just saw some statistics.  20% of the African-Americans go to HBCU's, but they still graduate almost 40% of the people who go out and get the Ph.D.s in the sciences and the engineering fields.
Speaker 1: That's an incredible statistic.  Now, I worked in, I mean I work in the, I still work with my minority students.  I have a grant from the Sloan Foundation, and I'm very proud of what U.C. Davis's chemistry requirement has done.  Because right now, we have over 200 graduate students, and of those 200 graduate students, ten percent, over 200, I think ten percent of those students are Hispanic or African-American or native American.  Now, if we had all of the R1 universities in the country with that kind of racial--we could significantly increase the number of Hispanic, Native Americans and African-Americans getting advanced degrees.  Can you imagine what that would do to the country?  One of the things I know as being a scientist, when I tell a white person I'm a chemist and have a Ph.D. in chemistry, all of a sudden there's this, a change in respect in their eyes, because I have defied all of their preconceived notions about what we are.  We need to get to the point where there are no more notions about what we are.  That they should expect to see African-American scientists and so forth and so on.  And that's why we started NOBCCE, okay.  That is what it's all about.  It's about trying to get that number up, trying to work with students, and to get them through and to get them to understand what an important contribution they are making to this society, alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you still work with NOBCCE to this day?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.  I still, I mean, like I said, that's one of the principal places I go to recruit students for U.C. Davis.
Story_ID: 24127
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were elected department chair in 2000, right, here at U.C. Davis?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that affect your research?
Speaker 2: It hurt it a lot.  I mean, this is a big department.  The budget in this department when I was chair was like $600,000.  There were, well it started out as 100 and something graduate students.  I came here with the idea of increasing it to 200 and something.  We got it up to 200 and something graduate students.  We teach 12,000 students a year.  We have a faculty of forty faculty members, when we need a faculty of sixty or something, because of the teaching load we have.  We don't have enough research space.  I have put in a plan to renovate this building.  And a lot of it has been renovated, including the hoods and so forth, because it's a safety issue, but we also needed the research space to be able to recruit more faculty.  It was a big job.  In that five years, I replaced 40% of the faculty.  That's very hard to do.   And the only thing that I miss that I really wanted to do, was to bring in another African-American.  We made some offers, but they went someplace else.
Speaker 1: Out of those forty faculty positions, there was only, how many African-Americans?
Speaker 2: You're looking at that person.
Story_ID: 673531
Speaker 1: So I'll begin by slating. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, today is December 2nd, 2017, we're on campus of UC Davis in California [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] and this is a continue- continuation interview with Mr. William Jackson [HistoryMaker William Jackson].  So I'd love to ask you about what, when did you know that you wanted to be a chemist?
Speaker 2: My freshman year at college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I took Henry C. McBay's [Henry Cecil McBay] course in general chemistry.
Speaker 1: Which often, when people take chemistry I hear people talk about that and they run for the hills because that's the class that many people fail.  What made it appealing to you?
Speaker 2: Well first I took it because I was challenged to take it.  I was told by the upperclassmen I met when I first got there, "Don't take general chemistry because if you did, you were going to fail and you aren't going to be here long."  Well that was a challenge because I'm, I guess I was extremely confident, probably overconfident, that I was smart and nobody was going to just flunk me out.  So I took it.  I did have, I didn't get an A, I actually got a C on the first, in the first semester and a B the second, so, but I was challenged and I felt it was interesting and I wanted to learn more about this.
Speaker 1: So, as a chemistry major, what were you learning?
Speaker 2: About how the world works, really works because everything in life is associated with chemistry.  I taught general chemistry myself a lot, both at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and at UC Davis and I used to walk in the first day of class and say, "Look around you, everything that you see is due to chemistry.  If we didn't have chemistry, you wouldn't have any clothes on, there would be no buildings, there would be no color, actually you wouldn't even be here," and then we'd start from there.
Speaker 1: And, and their mouths hang open and you explain (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ah, I'm not sure that happens that way (laughter).  I would hope it happened that way but--
Speaker 1: But, tell, what does that mean, that every- everything you wear, everything that exists, even who we are is chemistry, translate that please.
Speaker 2: Well the world and the universe is made up of atoms and molecules, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Molecules make up you and I and the things that we see around us.  Without those molecules, we wouldn't exist.  It's ironic when you think about it that human beings are made up of, I think it's about 79 percent water and what's amazing about that to me is how do you take something that's 80 percent water and end up, that person, talking, looking different, eating, playing baseball, basketball, writing and doing all these wonderful things. And you can say that about everything in the world. And it does because chemistry exists, we have molecules and they react with each other and they form all kinds of molecules and that is sort of what I'm really interested in.
Story_ID: 673532
Speaker 1: Now, I'm not interested in biology 'cause, to me, my mind is too complicated.  It, it is, I mean, chemistry is responsible for that but now the molecules are so big, it's difficult for me to wrap my, my little mind around it.  A lot of people can do it, I don't.
Speaker 2: You mean when you, when you're looking at biology--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --as opposed to.  So chemistry is looking at molecules and atoms on the smallest--
Speaker 1: Scale.
Speaker 2: --scale.
Speaker 1: But those atoms and molecules make up proteins and all enzymes and those things react and they make up more complicated beings.  So, then if you really go down and say what it's all about, it's still all about chemistry but the little molecules are the things that start it all off and if you understand those then you will understand the bigger molecules.  You may not ever get to the same detail as you can with the small molecules but there should be general principles that you can glean from the small molecules that you can apply to the bigger molecules and some of the techniques you use for the smaller molecules can be used for the bigger molecules.
Speaker 2: And when you say, techniques, is it techniques of discovery of seeing them or seeing how they react to each other?  What, what are the techniques that you're talking about?
Speaker 1: The techniques are, literally in some cases, seeing each other.  Those techniques I don't do but they are done like with scanning electron microscopes with, there are a lot of various techniques that are used but they all rely on, well they don't all, they are associated with a microscopic world that we really, really can't see at all in the same sense as I can look at you and talk to you.  There are machines that are used that allow you to visualize things now that you couldn't visualize when I started in this field sixty years ago and I mean, literally, it's over sixty years ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673533
Speaker 1: So we'll, we'll talk about the development of technology and how it's affected the field but let's start with your dissertation.  Can you tell me why you made the choice that you did for this study that you would do and what impact that you thought this work would have and what impact it did have?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I went through that kind of logical process.  When I finished college [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I knew that all the parts of chemistry I had studied up to that time, I wanted to be a physical chemist.
Speaker 1: And what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That's a chemist who looks at the interaction of the kinetic energy, mass, collisions, it basically uses conservation of mass, conservation of energy, conservation of angular momentum and applies it to molecules to see how they react with each other and what they are made of.  We know that molecules are made up of atoms, atoms are made up of electrons and protons and neutrons and subatomic particles and they somehow fit together and produce all of the atoms that you see in the periodic table, and the atoms then form other molecules, all the way up to proteins and even bigger things and that then forms the world, so, you know.  So, physical chemistry looks to see how all of that works together.  How do the atoms react with the molecules and how do the molecules react with each other and I was particularly interested in how the molecules react with each other, how they break apart, how they react with light, how they react with electrons, how they react with ions and so forth.  I did not articulate all of that when I was going to graduate school [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.].  I knew I was going to graduate school so I had to learn a lot, a lot of the stuff that I now know, I didn't know and even a lot of the material that was taught to me then, is no longer true now because this is sixty years later, we learn as you go along.
Story_ID: 673534
Speaker 1: So, I got into graduate school.  Do you want to know how I got into graduate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.  Is this the Catholic University [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1956.  I think I applied to eleven colleges and universities for their Ph.D. program.  I was accepted to two, Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  Northwestern, we're going to have to cut that out.
Speaker 2: Can we pause a moment?
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And speed.
Speaker 1: So as I was saying, we, I had applied to graduate school and had been accepted at Purdue and Northwestern but neither one of them provided any funds for me going to graduate school.  I had then decided to go to Washington, D.C. because my, I had a cousin there who told me it would be easier for me to get a job in the government because I had a bachelor's degree in chemistry and they were always looking for scientists and as I went around to all the government agencies, I asked what was the best school in the area for physical chemistry and I found out the Cath- they said, they all say Catholic University.  So, I was staying at 18th [Street] and Taylor Street Northeast, the chemistry department was at like 4th [Street] and Michigan Avenue, which is about a mile, mile and a half away.
Speaker 2: Close.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so I walked there on a Friday, I had printed up all my grades in science, handwritten 'em, two pages with the courses, walked into the chemistry department office, asked the secretary, "Can I enroll for the night school program to get a Ph.D. in chemistry?"  She actually didn't laugh.  She said, "We don't have a," she was an older woman, she said, "we don't have a night school program but I'll let you talk to the chair [Francis O. Rice]."  So the chair looked at me, I gave him my grades and I told him I wanted to do physical chemistry, he said, "Well," this was Friday, he said, "well, we still have some TAs left so come back on Monday and I'll give you a TA."  I said, great, you know, I was very happy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And what does it mean to become a TA?
Speaker 1: It's a teaching assistant.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you teach the undergraduate laboratories and they give you a stipend and you get tuition remission.
Speaker 2: So you could afford to do it?
Speaker 1: I could afford to do it.  I mean--
Story_ID: 673535
Speaker 1: So I came back on Monday and went to see him [Francis O. Rice].  I called my parents, my mother [Claudia Haygood Russell] and said, "I got into graduate school at Catholic University [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]."  And she said, "Well I can't send you but twenty-five dollars a month."  I said, "Fine," you know, 'cause I got a TA [teaching assistant]. And I go back on Monday and he gives me pieces of glass and said, "Go in the laboratory, my laboratory, and make some butt seals," and I did.  I didn't know what a butt seal was so I asked people to show me how to make 'em, they showed me, I made some, he tapped them on the desk, they didn't break, he said, "Well I'm going to hire you as an RA."  I said okay.  I didn't know the difference at the time between an RA and a TA.  There is a difference.  TA--RAs don't get tuition remission, RAs have to pay tuition so by the time you pay tuition, I think the RA stipend at that time was about fifteen hundred dollars a year, eighteen hundred dollars a year, no, I think it was about twelve or fifteen hundred dollars and you paid six hundred dollars of tuition, you had six hundred dollars left for ten months to live on.  You are--when you're an RA in the summertime, you didn't have to pay tuition so you had a little bit more money.
Speaker 2: But is RA, resident assistants, is that what--
Speaker 1: No, it's a research assistant.
Speaker 2: Research assistant.
Speaker 1: So you're being paid on a government grant--
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: --but the government grants didn't pay the tuition and you don't get tuition remission at Catholic Univ- University.
Speaker 2: So that actually wasn't better, financially?
Speaker 1: No, that was worse.
Speaker 2: But was the role better?  The--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because you did research all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Research, right.
Speaker 1: The, in fact, the new administration's tax bill is--
Speaker 2: And now we're talking about 2017 tax bill, yeah?
Speaker 1: Yes, the new administration, two thousand--it just passed last night--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the [U.S.] Senate, is getting rid of the tuition remission for teaching assistants and any other tuition remission.  I mean, well it's not getting rid of it, it is adding it to the stipend and now you're going to be taxed on all of it.  So if you go to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and you got a $50,000 tuition and a $30,000 a year stipend, you're going to be taxed on $80,000 and you never saw the $50,000 and I, if you walk around the building, you'll see a few signs by the graduate students complaining about this particular portion of the new tax bill.  Hopefully, they can straighten it out in conference committee.
Story_ID: 673536
Speaker 1: So, anyway, you get this RA [research assistant], you, which allows you to go to Catholic University [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're going full time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are you, who else is there?  Are there other black students at Catholic University at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There were, Catholic University at that point, it was actually graduating more African Americans with Ph.Ds. than 90 percent of the other research universities.
Speaker 1: Do you know why?
Speaker 2: They started doing this in the '40s [1940s].  Why, I don't know.  I mean, nobody, they no longer even have a Ph.D. program in chemistry which is a disaster as far as I'm concerned but I know, Professor Harry Morrison [Harry Lee Morrison], who was the first African American physicist at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], was two years ahead of me.  He went to Catholic University as an undergraduate and he was one of three people who finished Catholic University and was on the faculty of UC Berkeley, one was white, who actually taught me, was an undergraduate, taught me in a lab in physics I took as a graduate student, it was an undergraduate lab because at one point I was going to switch to physics, the other African American was Bill Lester, [HistoryMaker] William Lester, Jr., who was also a HistoryMaker, if you look him up.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Harry Morrison is, unfortunately, passed away.  He was, but Bill Lester was two years behind me and then I'm the other person who finished Catholic University who also was at Catholic University at the time.
Story_ID: 673537
Speaker 1: So what was your Ph.D. project?
Speaker 2: My Ph.D. project was actually done at the National Bureau of Standards, which is now called the National Institute of Technology--of Science and Technology [sic. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland].  I was studying the thermal decomposition of free radicals and the reactions of methyl radicals with hydrocarbons.  The importance of this is that we were studying how hydrocarbons break down and react for a better understanding of what goes on in combustion and, and with those molecules and radicals in the atmospheres of planets.  I wasn't focused really on the applications, I was more interested in how you get, what we call, elementary reactions.  How do you see what, how one molecule falls apart when you heat it up?  How do you see how you make another molecule when a free radical reacts with it?  Does it react, which part of the molecule does it react with?  So that--we call that chemical kinetics.  At that time the only way we could study that is by using isotopic labeling, either radioactive isotopes or like I did use deuterium at certain places and try to see how, where that deuterium would be in the product.
Speaker 1: And what is deuterium?
Speaker 2: Deuterium is a hydrogen atom with, instead of one electron and one proton, it has one electron, one proton and one neutron, okay.  Tritium, which is radioactive, has one electron, one proton and two neutrons and that nucleus is unstable so it breaks apart over a period of time and has a certain half life they called it.
Story_ID: 673538
Speaker 1: So I was concentrating on elementary reactions.  At that time, almost everything that we knew about how these free radicals were reacting was the result of looking at the final products and trying to guess what the intermediate states were.  Well how did you get from A to B?  Now, you can imagine, let's try to think about, you wanted to go from, you see yourself in Davis [California] and you see yourself in San Francisco [California] and somebody tells you, "I know you got to San Francisco, but can you tell me how you got--," well, you need, you, I have to figure out, after you get to San Francisco, how you get there.  There are many different pathways to get there, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well the same thing happens in chemistry and it, it's, what we really want to know in chemistry, when we think about it as chemist, is that, suppose, I'll take an example that we're working with now.  Suppose I have a molecule like CO2, all right, carbon dioxide, a pollutant in the atmosphere, and I put in energy in that CO2.  Now, with separate experiments, I measured how much energy it takes to break one bond or two bonds, or you break one, you've got three atoms, one of 'em is carbon, two of 'em are oxygen atoms, so I, here are the possibilities that can happen.  I could break a carbon atom off an oxygen atom off and so I can end up with three different atoms, separately, right.  That costs me a certain amount of energy.  I could break off one oxygen atom and leave me with CO, carbon monoxide, that cost a different amount of energy or I could break off a carbon atom and leave me with O2, a separate molecule like, which is oxygen and that's a different amount of energy, okay.  Now I put in, let's say I put in a hundred, in whatever units you want to use, a hundred amount, a hundred, X amount, I don't want to use X, say I put in a hundred, let's see, what is a common--hundred watts of energy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll use watts--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that's power--but, or a hundred calories of energy, that's a real energy unit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Actually a thousand, thousands of calories of energy but I know how much I put in.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then if I know how much it takes to go to each one of those final states, then I can figure out, I can tell you which, whether we have enough to do that, all right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that's what, what I really do now.
Speaker 2: And that's what you were studying in--
Speaker 1: That was what we were trying to get to to study so that, we didn't have the tools at that time that we could measure in real time how that process was occurring.  What we had to do is do what we call, product analysis, and then try to take all of the information we got on the final products to figure out what had happened in between.
Story_ID: 673539
Speaker 1: You were talking about the equipment and you've lived long enough to see an incredible transformation in the kinds of, what technology has afforded every industry, including yours but, can you talk about what equipment was available to you as you were doing your--
Speaker 2: Well, as I went from one stage to another (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --your Ph.D. and, how--yeah, as you went from one stage to another, what were you needing and, and how did the, how did your work evolve as the equipment was available for you?
Speaker 2: Well when I started [at Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.], the guy who gave me the RA [research assistant] was a very famous chemist, he was from Ireland [sic.], actually, his name was Francis O. Rice and he--
Speaker 1: O-R-I-C-E?
Speaker 2: O is his middle initial, Rice was his last name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: He is famous for a mechanism that explained how hydrocarbons reacted to produce final products in combustion and so forth, it's called a free radical mechanisms.  These free radicals are molecules or collections of atoms which we call molecules, but they have a specific property, that they have an unpaired electron which makes them very unstable, you can't buy 'em generally and as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Being unpaired makes them unstable?
Speaker 2: Yes, and they always, the electrons always, all the time want to be paired up with other electrons.  So he was very famous for this and his biggest tool was to be able to use liquid helium to freeze out all of the products that are formed as a result of combustion in the gas phase, all right, and then he would take it to a mass spectrometer or they were just getting gas chromatographs and analyze 'em and then try to figure out what the reaction--how you got those products.  So it was a puzzle to figure out how you got those products.  And so, as I said when I said we used deuterium isotopes and we did it almost the same way, but we didn't use liquid helium.  We trapped out the products and then put 'em through a gas chromatograph and trapped 'em as they came through the gas chromatograph and then put 'em in a mass spectrometer.  Now let me, those are two separate instruments now, at that time they were two separate instruments.  And now what do they do and why are they different.  The gas chromatograph separates different molecules based on some property.  It could be their different boiling points.  It could be their different--how well they stick to something else so that you make a column and some stick more strongly than others so instead of, they don't all come out together, they come out at different times.  The mass spectrometer measures the total mass of the material that comes out and from that and what you put in, you know what you have.  So it's a way of analyzing what the different compounds were.
Story_ID: 673540
Speaker 1: Now if you want to go back into history of chemistry--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --then you would, if you go all the way back, what they, they used to do is measure boiling points.  They'd measure any property of a molecule that was different than another property of a molecule and that is a way they tried to tell what was different.  As technology advanced, mass spectrometers, instead of being separate instruments, they took the output of the gas chromatograph and put it directly into the mass spectrometer and made one instrument and now you can go buy this separate instrument and you don't have, they automatically measure the products as they come out so they know what the identity of the molecule they're putting into the mass spectrometer and that makes life a lot easier.  There are other techniques that can be used, which in my day required using a prism to break up the light and measure the absorption of the material and when we were talking separately, and not on camera, I pointed out that, that in quantum mechanics, or for molecules, each energy level is separate.  You have defined energy levels for electrons, defined energy level for the rotation of a molecule, defined energy levels for how molecules vibrate and those define--and when you transfer from one level to another, you only use one specific frequency of light to transfer because you can't go in between, so if you're absorbing light, which in our case, if we're looking at colors, if we are absorbing all the red light, then the only thing that you would see was all the light, other than red, right, because--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --every- everything else--the red is being absorbed by the dye in your blouse or whatever you have and what you see is a reflect- reflection of the light that is still there because if you look at our light it's a continuum, unless you go under very high resolution and we won't discuss that, no.  But anyway, there are now things called spectrophotometers that separate the light and allow you to analyze exactly which frequencies have been absorbed and you can also look at what frequencies are being emitted.  To give you an example, have you ever been to a discotheque with a light--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where they have the blue lights and stuff?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And you got on a white blouse and you, everybody suddenly looks like they got blue on.  Well, that's a result of being, of the dye fluorescing back at you, it absorbs whatever light that was there but that dye now emits the light so you can use that to tell what that particular molecule is doing.  So now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, yeah, go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --go ahead.  So that, those are the kind of techniques, there are other more kind of, well, most of the techniques are based on light, especially for remote sensing because while you can do things in the lab when you have 'em right there in the lab with you, if I want to see something in the upper atmosphere or at another planet or in another solar system or in another, or at another star or another galaxy, the only way I can do it is look at the spectra and the spectra then gives me the information about what molecules are there.
Story_ID: 673541
Speaker 1: I'm curious as to how this apply- applies as you move on in your career.  So you leave Catholic University [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] and go to Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Martin.
Speaker 1: And, in Baltimore [Maryland], this is 1961, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what are you doing there?
Speaker 2: Well, I start, I moved into, I was still looking at what happens when you heat things up but now I'm not heating up gases, I'm going to heat up polymers, okay.  And why am I heating up the polymer?  Because Martin was, had a big government contract to build intercontinental missiles.  Now, inter- what, what is an intercontinental missile?  It has a rocket on it and it has a payload and the payload generally has, well, has one or more thermal nuclear weapons, right.  If you go, if you want to deliver that payload, you go up and shoot the rocket up in the atmosphere, actually, out of the atmosphere--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --through a trajectory that hits someplace else five thousand miles away from you say would be the target, at your enemy, wherever that enemy is.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Once you go out in the atmos- out of the atmosphere and you release the bomb, or the payload, it has to come back in the atmosphere and when it comes back in the atmosphere, unless you protect it, it will burn up before it hits your target, then you don't have a bomb any more, then, I mean, you can't burn up the atomic or H-bomb [hydrogen bomb] and still make a bomb, it doesn't work that way so you have to protect it, and the way they protect it is through the nose cone with a polymer on it and they let the polymer burn up and then as it takes away the heat and both in burn--as, as a result of the burning of the material and the gas then go--taking away some of the, but most of the heat is taken away by radiation and it's, there's an equation that defines it but once you get above the boiling point of water, the most efficient way to get a way of, get rid of extra heat is to radiate it away, not to put any, not to convect it away, all right, that's too slow.  Light is much more efficient to do--to doing that and that's why you see in the, you see in some of the latest ovens, what's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Crystal (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --lamps, basically, that heat up and they get hot and you get radiative of heat rather than using gas, gas and burning gas.  So that was what I was working on and I wanted to know the mechanism and I was trying to make a more efficient way of doing this and I came up with some ideas that, and I actually wrote a paper on it and surprising enough, people are still reference- referencing that particular paper.
Speaker 1: So you were there for two years, right?
Speaker 2: Eighteen months, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Eighteen months and this is Martin company was an aerospace company?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In eighteen months, was that a long enough time for this to be put into effect--
Speaker 2: Oh, they never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the work that--
Speaker 2: --put it into effect.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Story_ID: 673542
Speaker 1: And, and so typically, in, for the chemists who would be working, say at Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation], looking to solve some of these challenges in order to get missiles into space and back efficiently, you know, how many people are working there?  How many projects are being worked on and how often do they make it to market?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the reasons I left was it became clear to me after eighteen months that they weren't going to really use anything that you did, I mean, that was really not the purpose of the research and development division.  The purpose of the research develop- development division was: A, to put it in your proposal for the contract that you--your contract, said--I got this research and development division that can solve problems if they come up 'cause they're engineers, they know how, they know what they have been doing, they know how it has worked and they don't really care as long as they can make it work.  They don't know, they don't, it's not like a consumer company that if you make a better product--and even in consumer companies, it doesn't necessarily work this way, you, it doesn't, as long as you're making money, you don't care.  So that was my first disenchantment with industry.  I had researched, first place I had figured out how it worked.  I had read all the literature, I'd gone in the lab, I had devised new experiments, that's why the paper is still being referenced.  I devised the experiments, I used all the techniques, they gave me the money to use all the techniques that were available at the time and I had used them and had written a big paper on it.  Secondly, I thought of an idea to make it even better and I demonstrated it in a laboratory and they just shook their heads and said, "Well, so what?"  They didn't want to investigate it anymore.  Two years later, or three years later, a big famous polymer chemist in Houston, in Texas, published a paper that made it in C and E News [Chemical and Engineering News], essentially doing the same thing that I had done in the laboratory for them.  So they didn't care.  So I, what was my purpose there?  I went into science be- as a scientist and I wanted to discover new things.  My hero was Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] and I wanted to be like him but I was a physical chemist.
Speaker 1: And he was your hero, why?
Speaker 2: Because he was an African American, one of the, prob- one of the greatest scientist in his era and the first African American chemist that I know of who published eighty papers, got twenty or thirty patents, made millions of dollars, helped win World War II [WWII], devised new compounds, new ways to make hormones cheaply so people could have testosterone and progesterone and all of the estrogen compounds that we have today and they didn't have to be taken across Chicago [Illinois] in a Brink's [The Brink's Company] truck 'cause they were so expensive, that's why.
Speaker 1: Good reason (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 673543
Speaker 1: Now, you just described the politics, too, of the industry.  I mean, you--
Speaker 2: Of science (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Of science, right, because as a purist, as a scientist, you--
Speaker 2: I don't think I'm a purist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't use that word.
Speaker 1: As a scientist, you were interested in figuring out solutions.  You had figured out a solution but politically, there was less interest in what you had discovered?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Has that been true throughout your career?
Speaker 2: No, not, I don't think so, I--that was part of it.  I mean, I was in a situate- I mean this was 1961.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was one of the reasons I left [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The other reason was that it was clear, at that time, they were not going to promote an African American.  They were going to always have, they would pay me, and in fact they paid me very well, but they weren't going to put me in charge of any white people.  I mean, I came from Alabama.  I have enough sensitivity to know what was going to happen especially when there were two, two of us when I got to this particular section, one of them had a master's degree in engineering and I had a Ph.D. and then they walk in, I think after a year and said that he was going to be my supervisor, that didn't make any sense whatsoever.  It couldn't make sense if he knew more about what I was doing but he didn't and I knew he didn't and he knew he didn't so, I mean, that was time for me to get out of there.
Speaker 1: So even in your industry racism was glaring?
Speaker 2: Of course.  You think--this is America isn't it?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes.
Story_ID: 673544
Speaker 1: So where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: I went back to NIST and spent a year as a, national (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And NIST is National Bureau of Standards and Technology [sic. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, National Institute of Science and Technology [sic.] now.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At that time, it was the National Bureau of Standards.
Speaker 1: And what, what is the work that happens there 'cause that's where you did your Ph.D. work, right?
Speaker 2: Well they did fundamental research--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so you published papers and they--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, I, research scientists are like musicians.  If you have, I mean, and where a musician is a hit, you know, you have a hit song or you write a symphony, a research scientist write papers.  If you have paper--I tell students all the time, if you have papers then those are your credentials.  When you write, it's what you sell.  If you work in industry, if you have patents, that is your credential.  If you don't have patents, you better make sure you're working in something that is fundamental to their bottom line because, I mean, nothing in this life is free.  You, you have to sell yourself.  You have to have a commodity.  Your commodity is the history of African Americans, that paid your salary.  If you don't get that history and get somebody to buy it, you don't have, you'll be looking for another job, right?
Story_ID: 673545
Speaker 1: And so, at NIST [National Bureau of Standards; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], you are doing what work when you go back?
Speaker 2: I went from gas phase kinetics to start looking, try to look at surface chemistry and try to understand surface chemistry because surface chemistry is important in catalysis, catalysis is important in making things, new things in industry and I wanted to understand fundamentally what was going on and I went to the surface chemistry section and started thinking about ways of looking at how individual molecules react on the surface.
Speaker 1: And you're doing that with what intention?  Like what, how can you apply--
Speaker 2: Surface chemistry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --what you learned in surface chemistry?
Speaker 2: You can make better catalysts, more efficient catalysts.  You use catalyst right now in your exhaust system to reduce some of the pollutants that are coming out as the result of the combustion in the industry.  We talked earlier about how automo- in automobiles and internal combustion engines, you have explosions every, I think, sixty seconds or something like--I don't remember the, it depends on how many cylinders you have but the, I think it's of the order of thirty times a second or sixty times a second you have an explosion and you do that by putting a spark to ignite petroleum with oxygen so that it burns.  At high pressures, you initiate a chain reaction which is what F.O. Rice [Francis O. Rice] was doing when I was in graduate school [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.], trying to understand, you initiate a chain reaction that results in an explosion because you, you, and you pull out as much energy as you can from the gasoline that you put into the, into the combustion chamber.  Did you--now, when that happens, you don't burn everything all the way down to water and CO2 [carbon dioxide].  If you did, that would be the maximum you could get out of the system but, in fact, you don't get complete combustion all the time, you get nitrous oxide, NO.  You get CO because if you, and we all know you can kill yourself if you turn on your--
Speaker 1: Car.
Speaker 2: --automobile in a closed garage, you will go to sleep and never wake up again--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because carbon monoxide is, you know, an extremely dangerous--
Speaker 1: Gas.
Speaker 2: --product.  So, you don't go to complete combustion all of the time and as a result we want to take some of the products out of the exhaust, we use catalytic conversions which gets rid of some of the nitrous oxide and nitric oxide that are produced as byproducts in the combustion process.  That's one example but you also use catalysts to make new compounds and those are other examples.  I mean, platinum is a good catalyst for some things.  There are some things called dehydrogenating catalysts which I actually used when I was at Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation] to make a better product for them that they weren't interested in.
Speaker 1: They were not?
Speaker 2: That was the one that I told you earlier (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That was that one?  That was that one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Story_ID: 673546
Speaker 1: So, at NIST [National Bureau of Standards; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], how many chemists are working there when you're there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Was a large group (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: A couple of thou--it's a large place and not--
Speaker 1: And are there other African Americans there too?
Speaker 2: When I was there, let's see.  There--Howard Foster [Howard J. Foster] was there working on his Ph.D. when I was there, as a graduate, he was getting his Ph.D. from Catholic University [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] in physics, when I was there getting my Ph.D. in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Chemistry, um-hum.
Speaker 2: When I went back, there was another young man who've actually finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], his name was Dolphus Milligan [Dolphus E. Milligan], he was in the physical chemistry branch and he spent his whole career there, that was in the, that was '63 [1963] to '64 [1964].  When I went there in 1959, before I got my Ph.D., I think the lady told me, it was a woman, I can't remember her name right now, told me when she checked me in, you know you go through human resources to check, she said I was only the second or third person with a degree there in the whole place.
Speaker 1: Person, not just African American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: --African, with a degree--
Speaker 2: With a degree--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --other than a janitor or--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, clerical staff or something.  So, but then they, it has changed so much that the last director was an African American chemist from Birmingham, Alabama who went to high school where my father [William Jackson, Sr.] taught.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that, I mean, while we have had, there have been some dramatic changes and he was a fabulous leader of that organization (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I can't--
Speaker 1: We'll find it.
Speaker 2: We'll find it, I'll tell you.
Speaker 1: So when you were there, you're the--
Speaker 2: May [Willie E. May], M-A-Y, check it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: M-A-Y, okay.  When you were there and you're the third person with a degree, perhaps who's come through the doors, how were you treated?  This is the, this is, well first it's the late '50s [1950s] and then still just the early '60s [1960s], in America, you know, this is the ground swell of the Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't even, no, it was--this, we hadn't gotten to the ground swell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.  When was, when did they bomb Birmingham [Alabama]?  In 19--the, the children were bombed in 1962 or '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: This is '63 [1963], maybe, something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '63 [1963] 'cause I had a cousin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I think it was '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: --who got killed in that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 673547
Speaker 1: Do you want to know how I was treated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When I was there as a graduate student, it was fabulous.  I mean, both times I was at, at that organization [National Bureau of Standards; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], it was great.  I went to my first American Chemical Society meeting in 1960, I think, in New York City [New York, New York], I shared a room with the guy I was working with, so when I went to Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation], we were asked to go out to Seattle [Washington] to--I was asked to review a process for desalinization of water, and the company, this was when the Seattle World's Fair [Century 21 Exposition, Seattle, Washington] was going on, and I went through and I made my recommendations and so forth and so on and they wanted me to go out there and I went out--the head of R and D [research and development] division went out with me and my supervisor, not the one I told you about who they were going to promote ahead me but the other one, and they rented a two bedroom suite, one had two double beds and one had a king size bed.  Well the R and D director got there first, he took the separate bedroom which is fine, I would have expected that.  I get there with this other guy, we go into the twin bedroom with the twin beds and he said, "No, you sleep on the couch."  Now this is the Ph.D. in metallurgic, metallurgy engineering from Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], this was the first time I had encountered that kind of racism since I left Alabama and he was my supervisor.
Speaker 2: So you had to sleep on the couch?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I slept--and so the director came out, look--said, "Why are you sleeping out here?"  I said, "He said--told me to sleep out here," then I got a raise, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well at least there was some awareness.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but a raise, you know, but--
Speaker 2: So you go from--
Speaker 1: So that's when I decided I would, I, I don't necessarily want to stay in industry.
Story_ID: 673548
Speaker 1: In 1964, you go to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So your research skills are now--Martin, I keep saying Martin Marietta [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation] because it became that, Martin was aerospace, this is also aerospace, correct?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Or no (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --it's different.  It was di- Martin--
Speaker 1: What is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --was producing a product.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was producing missiles, the Titan missiles then it got government military contracts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was investigating, it was in investigating the universe, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was interested in planetary science, sending men to space, you know, to try to understand the universe.  That's basically what the, the real reason for NASA.  And it has a hard time selling its fundamental reason but in the process of doing that it builds, it uses and advances technology and that's what it sells.  It also helps us understand the world around that we live in, which is very important, I mean, from the atmosphere to improving agriculture, to understanding the oceans, I mean all of these things you could do because you can do remote sensing and remote sensing then helps you understand what is going on.
Speaker 1: So, it's very different from Martin.  Thank you for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They're entirely different (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 673549
Speaker 1: What is your role when you go there [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was not what I thought it was going to be.  I was in, that was, I had, by that time I had, I had two young children, I was married, I was married when I went to NBS [National Bureau of Standards; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], I was married even in graduate school [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay, then, yes.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: It does--it's fine, but, and you have two children?
Speaker 2: I have two children.
Speaker 1: And who are they?
Speaker 2: Eric Jackson and Cheryl Jackson.
Speaker 1: And, and as adults, what do they do?
Speaker 2: My son is a chemical engineer, he works for EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] in Washington [D.C.].  My daughter is a emergency pediatric physician and she works in North Carolina, UNC Chapel Hill's hospital [UNC Medical Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], leading the emergency pediatric department.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 673550
Speaker 1: Okay, so at this point, when you're at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], you have a family, young children?
Speaker 2: I had fam- a family at NIST [National Bureau of Standards; National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --too, and a family at Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and you are, you're hired as a staff chemist is that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you said it wasn't the job that you thought it was going to be.  What did it end up being?
Speaker 2: Well, no, the work I did was basically what I thought I was going to do but when I, the reason I left--normally, you take two years as opposed to, I took one year because that was a time that was not clear you were going to be able to get a job after, and this was a permanent job.  This is the job I had turned down when I first finished graduate school [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: At NASA?
Speaker 2: At NASA.  Because I didn't, what was proposed for me to do was not what I thought was a very good idea.  So the same person comes back to me a year and a half, or two years later, and says, "Well, I'm leaving and you will have a lot more independence."  And so I went to interview and I talked to his boss and he said, "Yes, he's leaving and you'll be the, take his position."  I said, "Well, you know, that's a good opportunity," 'cause then now I could start my own group and lead it and so forth and I would have control, would have the, more control over what went on.  Well, he never left (laughter) and eventually after being there for about five years, they brought in someone else who is actually a person who had gone to graduate school with me and we were friends and he worked there for a while and then when this other guy wanted to give up his administrative job, they put him in charge.  I mean, you know, I--the same story.  Now, it wasn't his fault but it was not what I expected.  By that time, though, I had decided the only place I was going to really be free to do science was to, and define my own path, because really, a real career is being able to define your own path, not have other people defining it for you.  It was to go into a university as a professor and then if I could get my, my own money, then I could do what I would--I could lead my own projects and do what I wanted to do and that's what I tried to do.
Story_ID: 673551
Speaker 1: So before we go into that, what exactly were you doing at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]?  What, what projects were you working on?
Speaker 2: My job was to try to understand the chemistry that produced the things that you saw in comets and planetary atmospheres and astronomy, in general.
Speaker 1: And what did you discover?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Let's talk first about my astronomy and then we'll talk about my chemistry--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --okay?  The, the first thing that I tried to do in astronomy, now I'm trained as a chemist, was to try to see if I could use a radio telescope to look for water in comets.  There was one telescope at the time.  I wasn't going to try to build one 'cause I didn't know enough to build a radio telescope and that, but there was one national telescope that MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] haystack antenna [Haystack Radio Telescope] in Lowell, Massachusetts [sic. Westford, Massachusetts], outside of Boston [Massachusetts], that could look at a certain frequency, they could detect water.  It wasn't the ideal solution because water is, it did detect it in the frequency range that we expected it to be, but it was a chance--and I probably did ten different observations and we saw one possible example and that then turned out to be the quote, unquote, first example of water in comets.  It has since been observed several times in that same frequency range and to date we still don't completely understand why it's there.  I think I have some new ideas about why it might be there based on some laboratory studies we've done recently here at Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] but there haven't been, I mean, at this point we don't know.  Since that time, one of the young men I hired at Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland], I had, who actually came to work for me, I hired several people at Goddard, did some infrared observations 'cause now we had infrared telescopes and he was able to prove that you could actually see that and it was a magnificent observation and I'm very proud that he had done, he's done so well and this was something he did completely on his own but--
Speaker 1: And how much later was he able to do that?  When did infrared come into play?
Speaker 2: My first observation started in, like in the, around '74 [1974].  He was probably eight or nine years, ten--well, no wait--no in the, mine, we're in the '60s [1960s], I think or early '70s [1970s].  I don't remember the exact date.  His was probably eight to ten years later--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they required an entir- entirely different technology that was not available at the time.  The, so that was one thing.
Story_ID: 673552
Speaker 1: The other big observation at that time was that Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland] was in charge of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, it was building it at the time I got there.  This was the first telescope that was put in space and it was put in to look at frequencies that you cannot look at from the earth.  So it was above, that was why it was actually put there.  It was a great success.  I was, three people proposed to use that telescope to look at comets.  I was one of the people who wrote a proposal.  The two people, I was the only one who wrote a proposal that predicted that you would see a large signal from Lyman-alpha or from hydrogen atoms in comets, okay.  And so in 1974, you can only use a telescope to see comets when they come around, since they aren't here all the time like stars, you, it's something you could only see when they come around and the, I was proud of the prediction because the astronomist at Goddard said, "Well, you can't see a comet."  I'll never forget him telling me, "You'll never be able to see a comet because this telescope was designed for stars and a comet is a diffused object."  I said, "Well, I don't think that's the case."  And that's why I did the calculation, and when we got a chance to use it, the biggest signal that you saw in that region was hydrogen atoms because they come from the photodissociation of water to give hydrogen atoms plus OH [hydroxide], and so I was vindicated.
Speaker 2: While you were there?
Speaker 1: While I was in there, looking at, in the control room at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland, that telescope is a couple of thousand miles up in the air and, you know, I don't know, I don't remember those kind of numbers.
Story_ID: 673553
Speaker 1: And so, while you were there, you were there five years you said?
Speaker 2: No, I was there from 1974, 19--
Speaker 1: Seventy--
Speaker 2: --sixty--let's see, '64 [1964] to 1974.
Speaker 1: Really, at Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: I took a leave of absence one year to go to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.  So, in that time, that's a ten year window--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how did technology change in terms of the tools that you're using in order to do your work?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, the tools that we were doing--using, in the laboratory, when I got there, at Goddard, I had to decide well what kind of tools were, was I going to use and what was I going to study.  I mean, I didn't know anything about comets when I got there.  So I had to think about what is going on in comets that made sense to look at as a chemist in the laboratory, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I would go and ask the astronomers, I mean, they told me the spectra, I could look in the literature and see the spectra, and the spectra were made of those things that we talked about, free radicals, and I knew you could not store free radicals, okay.  So you had to make 'em as the comet was coming close to the sun and there was literature that said it was, the comet was made up of ice and compounds that were frozen in it and dust particles and so forth and that all made sense.  But none of these particles that you see in the spectra are stable particles so they weren't frozen out, they had to be made at the same time.  So, I--how do you make free radicals?  You can burn stable compounds or heat 'em up.  You can put in light and it can break them up, 'cause that's a form of energy that can be used to break it up.  You could react it with ions, that's--but the most reasonable thing I could show, I wrote a paper on this, the second, the first paper I wrote about it was to show that the most likely thing that is happening is that you're doing photodissociation, that collisions are not, there aren't enough collisions for you to do any of the other things and only certain kind of collisions could happen and those kind of collisions could be insertion reactions, free radical reactions, it couldn't be abstraction reactions because all of those have activation energies or you need to put in a certain amount of energy and you can't put it in other than light from the sun so photodissociation was the most likely thing.
Speaker 1: And can you define photodissociation?
Speaker 2: Photodissociation is, you take a light source, which is the sun, and it has, it has light that, like your blouse absorbs light and you get different colors out of it, the sun has a lot of different colors and these molecules, individual molecules absorb light and if the light has enough energy in it, it could break the chemical bond, and so that's photodissociation and it is what drives the free radicals you see in comets. And so we started studying photodissociation.
Speaker 1: And you had the tools to do that?
Speaker 2: There were light sources that we used originally.  I was, there were also some thoughts about using electrons to excite the molecule.  The electrons have energy if they hit the molecule they can excite the molecule.  The guy who I told you who studied comets and measured the infrared spectra of comets--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --when he came to work for me we built a big apparatus that was supposed to use electrons for that process and we got a couple of papers out of him and then he got promoted and became a section chief and he went off doing something else.
Speaker 1: Then he's not making equipment anymore (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, he was not doing that particular exper- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 673554
Speaker 1: And by that time I got ready, I had switched to something else which is the first, I would say, the first really great experimental technique that I invented myself.
Speaker 2: And what was that?
Speaker 1: And that was to use tunable light sources made (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Tunable?
Speaker 1: Tunable lasers to study, to detect and measure the reactions of these free radicals that we've been talking about this whole period.  These reactive molecules that you cannot buy in a bottle but you have to make 'em and then look at, be able to monitor them and look at what happens to them, all right.
Speaker 2: And, and you're figuring this out meant what?
Speaker 1: It meant that, for the first time, chemists could devise experiments that measured rate constants for the individual reactions of these free radicals in the, in their laboratory and we did this by using, making tunable dye lasers.  I didn't make, I didn't come up with the idea of, of making a dye laser.  I didn't even know what making a dye laser was until I saw in an article that you could take a nitrogen laser and pump a dye and it would lase and you would get light out that you could change the color of, which is the frequency which is basically what we're talking about, change the color of, or wavelength of, and it would produce a lot of photons and I did 'em, and by that time learned how to do a lot of back of the envelope calculations and I was able to show that the intensity of that dilator was brighter than the sun in the same kind of band width and the same frequency and it was because I was studying comets I, that gave me a clue because the light you see from comets is not the free radicals burning, it's, you make, you dissociate the molecule into say a free radical that absorbs light from the sun, excites it up to excited stage.  Remember I told you that these states are like ladders so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it absorbs a specific frequency and then it radiates that down again.  Now, in the comet's atmosphere, collisions are very infrequent.  So before this radical is lost or destroyed, it can do that process a thousand times.  So for one free radical, you get a thousand photons out and that's what makes these things so bright.  So, I said, well, if the sun can do that and this dye laser can do that, then we ought to be able to detect very small amounts of free radicals in the laboratory using the same process, so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 673555
Speaker 1: How can you apply that knowledge that you've just discovered in, you know, a practical application?
Speaker 2: Well, you can put fluorescent tags on biomolecules and detect them, you can make new--and they knew that.  You, you can measure the speed of a reaction and then put that in atmospheric miles and try to predict whether CO2 is going to warm the earth or something.  You can, or whether ozone is going to be destroyed in, by the ozone hole.  Those are all practical applications.  You can use, you can try to model atmospheres of the moons of Saturn.  You can, that combustion process that I told you about, you can use the same techniques to measure the individual rate constants and then try to make the internal combustion engine more efficiently and they have done that and now we can get more, we can design better internal combustion engines.  You can, there are, anything that, any time you can measure something, you can figure out how fast those reactions that particular material has with something else.  You can, you can make more sensitive tests for cancer.  You could, there are, the possibilities and the things that they have done since 1973, using tunable dye lasers, extends to maybe ten thousand, a hundred thousand papers.
Speaker 1: And is this something that you were able to patent?
Speaker 2: No, I, I'd never think about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You didn't, no.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I mean, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you could have?
Speaker 2: I could have sat down and written down possible--I don't think you could patent the dye laser, nobody patented it.  I mean, they make them commercially now.  When I first did it, I ended up making one in my laboratory by myself and I had never made one.  In fact I did two things, I made a dye laser and made a source, at the time, that could produce free radicals that were observed in comets so that I could measure the properties of those free radicals that observed in comets.  And so that, that is actually how I applied at Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Got it.
Story_ID: 673556
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about the organization that you co-founded, the National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers [NOBCChE], that was in '72 [1972] that you found it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: There were three, there were four of us.
Speaker 1: Who, who were your co-founders and what was the purpose of this organization?
Speaker 2: This was, now this was at the height of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Actually, you know what, we'll pause and do it on the other side.
Story_ID: 673557
Speaker 1: So the organization [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)], who were the cofounders?
Speaker 2: William A. Guilory, Charles Merideth, they both got their Ph.Ds. from UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], William A. Guilory finished Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], Charles Merideth finished Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], he was one of McBay's [Henry Cecil McBay] students.  The third person was Jim Porter [James Porter], he was a chemical engineer from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the first African American to get tenure in the chemical engineering department [Department of Chemical Engineering] at MIT and he, then there were some other people who came along--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but the first four at that meeting, the first meeting, were those four.
Speaker 1: And the purpose of the organization?
Speaker 2: This is 1972, height of the Civil Rights Movement, all kinds of black organizations were being--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --started and, but we, you know, I'd been a member of the ACS, American Chemical Society, for over fifty years.  You know, I joined, I know in 1960, it may have been in 1959, I'm not quite sure now, but I'd go to ACS meetings and I see Henry Hill [Henry Aaron Hill], who later became a president of the American Chemical Society, and occasionally McBay.  Actually, I didn't see many people and so Bill Guilory and Charles Merideth called me up and said, "You know we ought to start a black chemical organization for chemists and chemical engineers."  And so he called a meeting for the four of us at his house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and we got a five hundred dollar grant, he got a five hundred dollar grant from the HAAS, I think it's HAAS, HAAS, H-A-A-S, foundation [William Penn Foundation], which was a chemical company [Rohm and Haas Company] because Higginbotham, Judge Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] was his next door neighbor, or lived right next to him, and he was on the board and he told him about the idea and he gave him, you know, he got the foundation to give us a grant.  I was still at Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland], Bill Guilory who had taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] had, by that time, left and gone to Drexel University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he and Charles Merideth who, he was at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia] writing a dual degree program at the time, he was a professor of chemistry at Morehouse.
Story_ID: 673558
Speaker 1: So we got together and Bill [William A. Guilory], I think, knew Jim Porter [James Porter] and Jim Porter came down.  So he represented the chemical engineer and we represented the three chemists [in National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)].  And there were two other black scientific organizations at the time that we knew of.  We were before the black physicist organization [National Society of Black Physicists], I know that, and I think we were before NACME, the national, the black chem- engineering society [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering, Inc.], but I'm not absolutely sure of that.  So we got together and we talked.  We decided that we needed an organization of chemists who would provide, try to raise money for chemists and chemical engineering students who would help each other become better professional chemist and chemical, chemical engineers and who would represented--represent the interest of black people in chemistry for the country, okay. We went to have a joint meeting with the two other, the National Institutes of Science [sic. National Institute of Science] and Beta Kappa Chi.  Do you know Beta Kappa Chi?
Speaker 2: No, what's that?
Speaker 1: Beta Kappa Chi is, started in the '20s [1920s], I think, and is a--
Speaker 2: Fraternity?
Speaker 1: --it's a scientific honorary society like--
Speaker 2: Like Phi Beta Kappa?
Speaker 1: Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], Sigma Chi [Sigma Chi Fraternity], National Institutes of Science was another, they went together, it's an organization for science teachers or science professors at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So those were the two black organization- and we, we tried to first join them.  Now, the difference between us and them was that we wanted to have not only HBCU chemists but we wanted to have industrial chemist, we wanted to have government chemist, we wanted to have anybody, any--you could join, you could still join if you are interested in furthering the aims of the organization.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't limited to where you went to school?
Speaker 1: It wasn't limited to where you went to school, where you worked and it wasn't even limited to--
Speaker 2: Chemists.
Speaker 1: --you being a chemist.  You could just believe that you needed, we needed more black chemists in the country or in the world so that's what it was about (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 673559
Speaker 1: And you mentioned that one purpose was to keep in mind the best interests of black people in chemistry.  What does that mean?  What--
Speaker 2: I'll give you an example.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think one of the greatest accomplishments that we've had was, shortly after we started the organization [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)], about 1973 or somewhere in there, about the same time, in fact, at that time, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was the chair of the Senate Committee on Human--I've forgotten, Human Resources [U.S. Senate Committee on Human Resources; U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions] or something like that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but it was a committee that did the budget for the National Science Foundation.  Now most people think that the National Science Foundation just gives, is just interested in giving out scientific research grants but a sizable part, the charter of the National Science Foundation is it is supposed to promote the health and welfare of science in the United States and that includes education, all right.  So it has a, if you look at the, I think its budget now probably is a trillion, I don't know, I, but it's large, I mean, I, it's in the billions or trill- or even possibly a trillion dollars at this stage.  I know that at one point that, that directorate that part of the National Science Foundation's budget was close to a billion dollars on its own.
Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it was in, 600 or $800 million--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --all right.  So, the--Ted Kennedy's staff, you know, senators never called anybody, their staff called Bill Guilory [William A. Gilory] and said, what can we do about getting more African Americans of black chemists in the country, okay.  So Bill, Bill, by this time had gone to, I think he left Drexel [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and went to Utah or he may have still been in Drex- Drexel, but he called me and said, "Well since you're in Washington [D.C.], why don't you go and meet with them," because we didn't have a lot of money.
Speaker 1: And were you at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] then?
Speaker 2: No, I was still at Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland].
Speaker 1: You're still at Goddard, okay.
Speaker 2: Still at Goddard.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 673560
Speaker 1: So, I called and made an appointment that--we arranged to meet and that's when I met Joseph Martinez who was Hispanic and one of the founders of SACNAS, Scientific Association of Chicanos and Natives--Native Americans in Science [sic. Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science] so we both started about the same time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so we both go to this meeting with the staff and we sit down and so they talk about what we're going to do and so on and so on and I said, I did a little research before I got there, I mean, I always try to prepare myself for a meeting, and I knew that HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], I didn't know anything about Spanish serving institutions, but HBCUs educate 25 or 30 percent of the African American's who get undergraduate degrees and they're counted for in that time about 75 percent of the advanced degrees that African Americans get in medicine, science and everything, in fact.  So I said, we need to do something to help the HBCUs, all right, and in the '60s [1960s], there was a program that National Science Foundation ran, it was called the Centers of Excellence program [Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology] and it funded R1 universities [research I university] to increase their science.  So I said we needed a Centers of Excellence program for HBCUs.  I said, the, the federal agencies, which are the principal funders of science were not really giving big grants to HBCUs.  So, I said, "We need to, you know, fund, get, give these HBCUs the kind of grants that they could really do something.  They give $25,000 grants or $30,000 grants, while they were giving major institutions $100,000 or $200,000 grants."  And they said, "Well, that's a good idea, so we'll take it back to the senator [Edward M. Kennedy]," and they did.  Said, "Well you can't call it the Centers Excellence program, you've got to come up with another name," because they killed the Centers of Excellence program once before and they're never going to name something again the same way (laughter), the name, did before.  So they called it the Minority Resource Centers for Science and Engineering [ph.], okay--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --with the goal of providing substantial funds for those institutions to increase the number of minorities who get advanced degrees in science, all right.
Speaker 2: And was this offered, minorities including Hispanics?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we included, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So, it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we included (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the two of you were together and it became--
Speaker 1: --yeah, so we became, it included Hispanics.  And so, for the next two to four years, I was in Washington [D.C.], I contacted all the chemists that I knew, I got them to write their senators and congressmen to support this, we, I testified, I think, before the--I, I know what I did, I testified before the [U.S.] Senate and House [U.S. House of Representatives] authorization committees and the Senate and House Appropriations committees [United States Senate Committee on Appropriations and United States House Committee on Appropriations] because you have to do authorization and you have to get appropriations in both houses otherwise you don't, they'll do, I mean they pull tricks, as you know if you lived in Washington or in the Baltimore [Maryland] area, they'll authorize something and not appropriate it and say, oh we did a great job, we authorized it, and it was them that didn't put the money up.  So, you know, they played that game.  So, I think in one testimony it was one of the senators or House, members of the House on the committee, asked me, "Well, how much money are you talking about?" And my answer was, the same amount of money you spent on the F-1 jet, which is about $100 million and, you know, that's what I asked for (laughter), you got to think big, right, and he looked at me, but we got it through.
Story_ID: 673561
Speaker 1: And how much money were you able to get appropriated [for Minority Resource Centers for Science and Engineering (ph.)]?
Speaker 2: The first grant went to the Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Atlant- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: AU Center--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and that was, I don't know, $10 million for five years or three years, something like that, it was about a million dollars a year, that's what it broke down.  The second one went to the University of Puerto Rico [San Juan, Puerto Rico] and, actually, that was one of the most successful programs, I think, and I think it was more successful than any other program because in Puerto Rico, they control the whole education system so they didn't have to fight like we do here--
Speaker 1: The bureaucracy.
Speaker 2: The bureaucracy.  The, and in fact, well that's another story, let's don't get into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's all right.
Speaker 2: --because we can talk on and on about why Puerto Rico is having so much trouble but we don't want to do that right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that, I do know that Clark AU got one, or the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia] I think it was at that time, because Clark AU had not been merged by that time, before that.  In fact, Tom Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], who was the first director, was the, he helped in the lobbying and the, it was University of Puerto Rico, Clark AU, the City College of New York [New York, New York], university of--City College of New York and New Mexico Highlands [New Mexico Highlands University, Las Vegas, New Mexico], those are the first four that I know of.  Now, after those four, I don't know what happened but then other agencies, defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] started giving bigger grants.  NIH [National Institutes of Health] gave bigger grants.  So--
Speaker 1: So this sort of triggered--
Speaker 2: It's triggered bigger grants to these institutions and as a result, I think, you have more Ph.D. programs in HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: HBCUs.
Speaker 2: --than you had at that time.  Some of the institutions have gotten much stronger in science.  They still don't have it and they still don't have enough and we still don't, we haven't significantly impacted the overall number.  We, we've gone from maybe 1 or 2 percent Ph.Ds. to 2 or 4 percent.  We've doubled it, that sounds great but if you recognize that we are what, 10 percent of the population, that's a long way away from 10 percent of the population (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So that's one of the things, that's an example--
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 673562
Speaker 1: What work was done on behalf of women, you know, in--because, and what is the percentage of black women who are chemists?
Speaker 2: Now in the beginning, there were several, there were not that, we didn't know that many black Ph.D. women.  There are, if you go to a NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] meeting now, you will see a lot more black women than you ever have but that is a general, you don't see many black men now and that is actually one of the things that has happened.  It was clear ten or fifteen years ago that we were losing a lot of African American males partly, I guess, because a lot of them have been put in jail to be honest. (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Chemists?
Speaker 2: The--no.
Speaker 1: Just men in general?
Speaker 2: Men in general--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --if you drop the number of young men and put 25 or 30 percent of them in jail--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --you're going to drop the number who go to gradu- to undergraduate school--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: --and so, I mean, it just pervades the whole society.  So, that's part of the problem.  I mean, I don't deny that and then for smoking pot and that's, or selling pot, and that's what a lot of 'em are in jail for.  So that's one of the problems, I think.
Story_ID: 673563
Speaker 1: Let's move on.  You spoke a little bit before about your time at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  You, you were there in '72 [1972] to when?  How long?
Speaker 2: No, '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: Excuse me, '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: --to '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: So you were there for nine years?
Speaker 2: No, eleven years.
Speaker 1: Eleven, I can't count, eleven years, yeah.  That's a significant period of time.  This is, you know, a premier HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], what is the chemistry department like at Howard?  How is it evolved during the time that you're there?
Speaker 2: How did it--it's more integrated than any chemistry department in the country, first.
Speaker 1: Back then?
Speaker 2: Even then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it had a significant number of white faculty which is true, has been true over much HBCUs anyway.  If they weren't white, they were Asian or Indian because we aren't producing that many Ph.Ds. in science, I mean, that's the same problem.  So that was one thing.  The--I need to stop saying um--it was underfunded, it was a department, we had fourteen thousand students at Howard, twelve to fourteen thousand students at Howard.  Fourteen was, I think, the maximum when I left in '85 [1985].  We had twenty-five faculty members--
Speaker 1: Twenty-five?
Speaker 2: About twenty faculty members.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We had one storeroom manager, one secretary and maybe three staff, okay.  When I got to Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], we had about the same number of total student body as Howard.  The budget in the university was twice what the budget at Howard University was, even though How- and that, even though Howard had a medical school and all of the other stuff that a lot of, didn't have an ag school [agriculture school] but it had, an engineering school and so forth.  So a fact of two doesn't make any sense whatsoever.  The chemistry department had twenty staff members.  Now we taught, the chemistry department at Davis really does teach more than the chemistry department at Howard [Howard University Department of Chemistry, Washington, D.C.] because the undergraduates at that time probably were of the order of, I don't know for sure, but you can look it up, but was probably four to six or eight thousand students and I don't think Howard has ever had that many undergraduate students.  We have graduate students--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at Howard but still, twenty staff versus three or four.  I mean, you don't have a decent support staff, the, so the other thing is Howard's capital budget was entirely different than the capital budget of UC Davis at the time.  The capital budget of UC Davis was budgeted completely separately from the capital budget of what Howard's was.  The capital budget of Howard comes directly from the federal government, but it's part of the federal government's appropriation.  So the physical plant is older, older physical plants mean greater upkeep so all, everything that you--Howard was constantly working under a, under more hardships than UC Davis was and then as you increase the complexity of accounting for the monies, then Howard's staff for accounting has to change.  It's a, you can, everything that you can, if you want to make something hard, just be an HBCU, yet the students at Howard were some of the smartest students I had ever seen.  We had our, in the distribution of good students and bad students is the same at Howard as it is at UC Davis.
Story_ID: 673564
Speaker 1: And so, we were talking earlier about equipment, which is important in order to be able to do the work.  Does Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] have enough money at this point to have whatever state of the art equipment exists in order to--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So what happens?
Speaker 2: So, during that time, when I went to Howard, I insisted that they give me some money for equipment startup.  I finally got $25,000 from them.
Speaker 1: Which can buy you what?
Speaker 2: Part of a dye laser.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, part of a dye laser or part of a laser.  It doesn't--so, I then generated enough money, I, when you were there, did you ever hear of the laser chemistry building?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You said you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I left in--
Speaker 2: You know where the old hospital [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] was?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: There was a morgue there, right behind the chemistry buildings.  So we got money to renovate that building for labs for laser chemistry and that was there, built there by the time you were there.
Speaker 1: Okay, around what year?
Speaker 2: That was in the, I left in '85 [1985], so it had to be around '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you raised additional funds in order to be able to bring in this equipment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I raised a lot of money.
Speaker 1: That ended up being part of your responsibility even though you took it on?
Speaker 2: It's always part--it's my, part of my responsibility here [University of California, Davis, Davis, California].  It's part of my responsibility when I'm retired.  If I want to do research, if you don't get money, you can't do research.
Speaker 1: And so, that's just part of it because you mentioned part of the reason why you wanted to go into the university system was so that you would have the freedom to do the research that you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which inherent is that, in that is raising the money to do it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do chemists understand that from the outset that fundraising is part of their job?
Speaker 2: If they had (laughter), yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you had a R1 university [research I university] and you want to do research, yes, they understand it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Now some of 'em don't do it but they are doing, they are, I mean, they are not holding up to their end of the bargain.
Speaker 1: And does that mean constant grant writing?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and is that something that's taught or you just learn how to do it?
Speaker 2: You learn how to do it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 673565
Speaker 1: Who else is in the chemistry department teaching?  What other professors are there when you're there?
Speaker 2: African Americans?
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: Price [Elton Price] was there, and when I get--when you're eighty-one years old--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You don't remember every name.
Speaker 2: I don't remember all the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: --but Marty Taylor [ph.] was there, Price was there, the, I'm thinking of, trying to think of all the African Americans and I'm missing some.  Marty Taylor was the one that hired me, I was there as a full professor.  Peter Hambright was there as a full professor.  I have to go back--
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: You can go check--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --in 1974 who was there.
Speaker 1: And, so the budgets are restricted compared to other places.  Describe your, your experience of being on this campus, this HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], teaching students there, the pros and the cons.
Speaker 2: I love teaching black students.  I never had a black, they didn't like, they thought I was hard and I walked into a general chemistry class the second semester and 95 percent of them had left because it was too hard at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I didn't have that happen here [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], but I never had a student tell me they didn't like my voice, I don't like anything about, on the review so that--I don't like anything about this class and, you know, there's a lot, it's a lot different.  I mean, one thing in the HBCU, you don't have to, they may hate you but you're not facing racism, they just hate chemistry or hate you, you know.  But you do, you're going to run into race.  I don't know, I have talked to other African Americans who teach at other universities and they all say the same thing, that they all have trouble with the reviews, student reviews which is part of where you get your money and that they all, in science, have problems getting good reviews from faculty which I find, I say is racism because at Howard I got great evaluations and got even a teaching award.  So, I come here and then suddenly I can't teach any more.  So, and I can tell you different experiments I tried but I'm not going to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 673566
Speaker 1: You were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for eleven years and then you took a sabbatical, is that it?
Speaker 2: No they, they, I came here [University of California, Davis, Davis, California].
Speaker 1: You came here, okay.  What, what was the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: Oh that was, I was on a sabbatical at the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in 1980, at the, 'cause my sabbatical was--
Speaker 1: But that was in the middle of your Howard stay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: After, I mean, that's, I mean Howard gives sabbaticals like the white institutions, which they should--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: And one of those included going to Germany, right?  Was that a sabbatical or what was that?  The fellowship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was, that was an award, well you got, when you go on sabbatical, they only give you half salary so you have to figure out a way to get others.  So I got an award from Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, then I got an award from the German foundation, Deutsche [Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bonn, Germany], the DDG [sic. DFG] they called it but this is a German foundation for the support of sci- it's the equivalent of NSF [National Science Foundation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was in Bielefeld, I think, right?
Speaker 1: In, it doesn't say, University of Erlangen [University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, it's Bielefeld [sic.], in (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And what, so what were you studying there?
Speaker 2: I was, there was a young man, who's young--a little bit younger than I am, he's no longer with us, but he had been a postdoc [post doctorate] at Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland] and he was, he came over to the U.S. and he went back to Erlangen where he became a professor of astronomy and we both studied comets and I was just studying comets with him.
Story_ID: 673567
Speaker 1: So you come to UC Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] in 1985.  Why do you leave Howard?
Speaker 2: There was an old professor here, Professor Volman [David H. Volman], who called me up and asked me one day would I be interested in moving to the University of California and my answer to him was, "Everybody had a price," and, I mean, I was, you know, really just joking and he said, "Okay, well, let me see what I can do."  And then I called my wife at that, my present wife, say, "You want to move to California, I got this call so and so and so?"  Said, she said, "When we moving," (laughter), 'cause first she, she grew up in Washington [D.C.], I didn't think she would even consider moving.  So then I called him back and said, "Look, I'm doing very well here, this price is not going to be cheap," because I was a graduate professor, I was a professor of physics, a professor of chemistry, I had the laser chemistry building, I could, I mean, I had made it at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  So, they said, well--and so I told him everything that was going on.  I said, "If you still want to try, go ahead."  And now I told you about Harry Morrison who was at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and he was out here and Harry, I mean, we've known each other, he was in my wedding, you know, and I would come out to visit him a lot.  So I told Lydia [Lydia Jackson (ph.)], we ought to go, we'll come out and we'll stop at Berkeley and we'll spend some time with Harry and then we'll come down and drive to Davis. 'cause I said, I had no idea where Davis was.  And Harry was promoting Davis and then I got here, it, it was a, I mean, this is a nice area, it really is.  It doesn't have snow (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: --and the weather is very good.  I mean, it's, it changes seasons like it's cold now.  If you look around the trees, the leaves drop off the trees and it's very warm in the summer but it's not humid.  So all those are things that it had going for it and this was a, I told you it had fourteen thousand students but it was obvious at that time, it was going to grow to be thirty-four thousand students because this was the only UC campus that could expand 'cause they already had the land.  I mean, you can't expand Berkeley, the land costs too much.  You can't expand Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California].  If you go down the list of the places, very few of them can expand so this was one of 'em.  So that all seemed very attractive and then I told you earlier that I had argued that white people did not fund black institutions the way they fund white institutions but I had never worked at a white institution.  I wanted to see was it really different, that was another reason.  The, there have, there is an accusation out in the land that I, Howard did not try to keep me and that is not true.  I mean, in fact, Howard gave me a better offer than Davis gave me to stay and at the time, I got the biggest offer they had ever given anybody at this institution in 1985.  They had to go down to the office of the president [HistoryMaker James Cheek] to get the money to hire me.  So, I mean, and that to me is an example, they can hire anybody they want if they want to do it enough.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So--
Story_ID: 673568
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had both vying for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: And, and even though Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] ultimately made a better counteroffer, you decided to come here [University of California, Davis, Davis, California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for the reasons I told you and I, you know, I've always liked California.  I first came out here when I was nine years old.  My [maternal] grandmother [Della Waller] lived in Southern California.  My, I have bunches of cousins out here so I have always liked California.  I liked, I always liked Washington [D.C.] so that was not the reason, it was that I had polio.  In Washington I lived in a townhouse that meant, and I knew in Washing- in D.C. I could not afford a house all on one floor, here I could when I came out because the prices of houses in D.C. were the same as they were here.  The prices of houses in D.C. are now, the house I had in D.C. is probably, well, I know it's worth twice what I, the house here, and this has gone up, a factor of five--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --since I've been here, so--
Speaker 1: Right.  And you mentioned having polio as a child.  Has it plagued you over your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I had it.
Speaker 1: Well you talked earlier about the sports that you did or didn't do or, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not as, I couldn't run as fast as I would liked to have run on the tennis court.  I played tennis for years.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can't push off my right leg on the golf course.  I fall a lot of times on the golf course.  I fell a lot of times on the tennis court, of course it bothered me.  I tried not to let it define me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It, it gets worse over time.
Speaker 1: Like everything else, right.
Speaker 2: Like everything else, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you, here you bought a ranch style house?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 673569
Speaker 1: So you come to UC Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], you've left kind of, like you said, you'd made it at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you have, you have the lab, you have certain status with all the courses you're teaching, how do you enter UC Davis?
Speaker 2: I entered there are well defined ranks at UC.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I entered as, just like I had at Howard, I entered Howard as a full professor.  I entered Davis as a full professor.  I not only entered Davis as a full professor, I entered Davis at the, in the full professor level that was, and when I came, there was a critical step, it's what they call step six, which you had to prove that you had a national reputation and so I entered with a national reputation and then there is a step (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And how do you prove that, through your, your writings?
Speaker 2: You present your package with your writings and you present references and then they go out on references and they get references from all over the country and these people have to say you're one of the top people in, in your cohort, in the country, all right.  Then, there's a level called above scale, which is now called, distinguished professors, so eventually I got to be above scale and now you have to prove that you have not only a national reputation but an international reputation and so I retired as a distinguished professor here and I'm still working.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What year did you retire?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006].
Story_ID: 673570
Speaker 1: And so between--you, you were 1985 to 2006 building your career here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And describe what your roles have been because over time they changed and the research that you were doing?
Speaker 2: Okay.  In, at the University of California [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], you are, you are judged on three things: research, teaching and contrib- what do they call--contribution to the discipline and to the society as a whole, okay.  I've forgotten the, there's an exact word they call it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you have to present, a thing--you have to present papers that you have presented, awards that you have had over each period that you put in your package for going to the next step or for a merit increase, okay.  Your serv- it's service, it's called, service, research and teaching.  You describe your teaching.  Since this is a research institution, your teaching is both in your course work and also among the graduate students that you teach and any contributions you've made to teaching.  Service is service to the university, participating on committees, work and administration, service to the scientific community, service to the country as a whole or the world as a whole.  And teaching is, I mean research is, obviously, in your field and any awards you get for the research.  So, you present that package and you're supposed to present it in defined times as a normal merit process as well as a process for acceleration and a process, well, you can be decelerated if you don't do what you're supposed to do.  It's much harder to prove that than it is to prove at least--
Speaker 1: Some forward movement.
Speaker 2: Forward movement but you, you, it has happened, I mean, and people have been encouraged to move from the tenured tract professorial level to the tenured tract, senior lecturer, 'cause generally, you don't get to be tenured if you can't teach, you can't do research, and you can't do service, okay.  You must have been good in some of that, some of that to get tenure.
Speaker 1: By the way, were you tenured at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but not when I first got there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I went from Goddard [Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland] to Howard, I had three years to get tenure or I would be fired.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's accelerated.  It's usually a longer period, isn't it?
Speaker 2: It's usually six years.
Speaker 1: So then at UC Davis, was it a six year process?
Speaker 2: No, when you have tenure in one, or one institution, you have tenure at any institution.
Speaker 1: Any institution, okay.
Speaker 2: So if you don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And essentially tenure means you can stay as long as you want?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but as long as--
Speaker 1: Barring--
Speaker 2: Barring sexual harassment or anything you go to jail for, okay (laughter), and it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Or is it or also lack of output, would that be a reason?
Speaker 2: That is, you, you can--it's hard to, as I said, you're judged on three things.  So suppose your research starts going down and you can't get a grant.  If you tried to put in grants, that is--at least you're trying, okay.  I mean, sometime, I mean, it's hard now to get grants than it's ever been because federal government is always cutting back money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And there's still people, the, there's still people getting Ph.Ds. so, and there's people who's still doing research, so it's, it's getting harder and harder but you're still teaching and you're still doing service.  So, if you're doing those things, it is harder to fire you.  If you're doing nothing and you don't show up for your classes, you don't do any research, then, yeah, you can get fired.
Speaker 1: But that's gross negligence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But you have to, what you have to do is, the chair has to document it and you have to be given an opportunity to correct.  It's just like any other job from that point of view.
Story_ID: 673571
Speaker 1: When you arrived at UC Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], were there any other African American professors of chemistry?
Speaker 2: I am the first and right now I'm the only one who's, there is no other African American who has been a chemistry professor.  There are very few of us in this university.  I think there may be twelve or fifteen out of a faculty of two thousand or something--
Speaker 1: In the whole system?
Speaker 2: In the whole, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is that in part because the Ph.D. tract is so rigorous and not as many African Americans go for it in general?
Speaker 2: Partially.  Partially you're in competition with every other R1 universities [research I university] and everybody wants whatever they call the best which is, even when you give 'em--look, nobody can judge human beings with a ruler.  There is no ruler for judging human beings and there is a subjectivity for everything, including the students taking exams because a student taking an exam, one student may get an A but that doesn't mean that that student knows more about the subject you taught, that student may only know what you put on that exam or that student may interpret what you put on that exam better than the next student.  So it is an inexact science and so that's the hardest thing to get people in the academy to understand, all right, and there is, if you look at the faculties around the country, they are prolific catering the same people who were their faculty members.  So the top ten universities in the country in any field are producing more professors in other field, in their field.  So, there is a, there is an inexact, there is an imprecision of that particular judgment.  Now that's, to me, the background.  Part of it, though, is that there aren't enough faculty, people, with Ph.Ds. with the qualifications.  We, when I was chair for five years, and I brought in several faculty members, a couple of them we made offers, other people they went other places, that happens.
Speaker 1: So you did--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --make the effort--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --and actually bring black people in?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was, but in this institution, the most egregious case I've seen was a young man who came out on top on a 125 pool searches that they looked at and he was so, he came from a better instit--an institution with a better record in his field and the faculty even voted him from assistant to full professor, which is extremely unusual and won every award that you could win as a junior faculty member and when he got up to the previous administration, they couldn't find him enough money to hire him, to make him an offer that was better than the offer he got when he was, came in as an assistant professor at the institution he was.
Speaker 1: So they didn't want him?
Speaker 2: The administration didn't want him.  The administration at the time didn't want--they gave the excuse, well, he was just using us but the name of the game in academic life is, if you're a star, then people are supposed to want you and you, even if you, if you get an offer from another institution, that puts the pressure on your present institution to keep you.  If you, if, if we can't play the game that way, then they're already handicapping us.
Speaker 1: So as a chair, how did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in, I was not the chair.
Speaker 1: Not at that time?
Speaker 2: I mean, I was, it's not in chemistry, this was a different department.
Speaker 1: It's just in, in the university system (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No, no, I, as a chair, I tried, the offer I made was as good as the offer, better than the offer, I think, that the, but he had different reasons.  His primary reason, he was going to a department, that in his field, was better than the department we were, better than we were in that field, 'cause he wants to come back to California because he was in California at the time and it's cold where he is but I can't do anything (laughter).
Story_ID: 673572
Speaker 1: So it--as a--when you get to the point of chair [at University of California, Davis, Davis, California], what is your role?  What--
Speaker 2: Chair is just what it says, it's chairman.  You have basically no power.  The only power you have as chair is you can allot space and you can dissent on what the faculty says about a promotion but the faculty, this university, and I think it's correct, is defined by its, it's called share in governance and share in government--governance means the faculty, the administration and the students govern the university and that's great.  I mean that means that nobody, including the chair, can be a dictator, that's what it's supposed to be, and that, if, there are checks and balances on that system too.  For example, every five years every chancellor is evaluated by the faculty, his fellow administrators and by the students.  They all get a chance to send in their, what they think, that is then decided by, when he gets up to the president, so.
Speaker 1: What made you decide to stay here?
Speaker 2: Well, nobody made an offer that I couldn't refuse again, and that's the truth.  I mean, maybe I wasn't good enough to go anyplace else, I don't know, but I also liked this place, I mean, after I had been here for, I think, two or three years, some of the faculty at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] asked me to apply for the presidency when they were getting a new president and I did put in for it, but I wasn't good enough for that job, so, I didn't make the cut (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well what--
Story_ID: 673573
Speaker 1: What type of research did you conduct while here at UC Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California]?
Speaker 2: Still do work on comets.  Still did work on tunable dye lasers but the work I'm doing now is better than anything I've done.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: We still use lasers but we do something like take pictures of what happens when we excite the molecule with one photon and we then look and see and try to characterize everything that happens with it, all right.  So I'm going to go back to the example of CO2 [carbon dioxide], all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Why, you're going to ask me why is it important?  We can talk about that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --later.  What CO2 consist of, a carbon atom and two oxygen atoms, and we have done experiments that prove that when it dissociates, it not only breaks a carbon oxygen bond and gives you an oxygen atom and CO, which is what all the models of the atmosphere of CO2 put in, it also breaks apart and gives you a carbon atom and O2, all right.  That means that if CO2, if the state that that came from is excited in any matter, you will produce oxygen atoms and carbon atoms.  Well oxygen atoms are what we need in the atmosphere.  That changes the whole idea of how biological evolution occurred because now we can say, the atmosphere originally started with a lot of CO2 but natural processes, other than biological processes, can produce some O2, we can prove that, all right.  We have done similar experiments with nitrogen and found states of the nitrogen atom that live for a month with a lot of energy so they could react, the ground state nitro- the nitrogen atoms in the lowest electronic state react one in ten to the fourth collisions with H2 so it basically does not react with H2, at room temperature, and at 10 degrees Kelvin or 100 degrees Kelvin which is way below room temperature, room temperature is 300 degrees Kelvin, approximately, then they wouldn't react at all but we believe that some of the first reactions with hydrogen produced ammonia which is one of the building blocks of getting nitrogen to produce things that ultimately lead to the molecules that go to form you and me and the rest of the world, okay.  So, now we have a new mechanism for producing ammonia because this particular atom can react with a hydrogen in the interstellar clouds you see in the, in space and in the early history of the universe, so that's what I'm doing now and it's fun.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it.
Story_ID: 673574
Speaker 1: So you wanted to share something, a different description of your work?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I told you about going to, trying to figure out how you got from Davis [California] to San Francisco [California]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --by just looking at the endpoint and looking at where you started, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you were really traveling on a surface, right, and there were, there are a variety of ways to get there.  Now suppose that there were not only variety way- and there are, there are various endpoints that you can get to.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I told you earlier about CO2 [carbon dioxide] and I said that it could break up into O2 plus carbon and we--this is a new mechanism that we found out.  Well when we were doing our work in the laboratory--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I am sorry, I need to stop.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I have the wrong time code--
Speaker 2: Wrong what?
Speaker 1: Time--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Speed.
Speaker 1: So you were going to share with me a different way of explaining this work that you're doing today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically what we're trying to find out are the surfaces that these molecules can, do exist on and can exist on, because once we know that, then we know what happens when we put a certain amount, amount of energy in the molecule, all right.  The pathway I told you about depends on, in the way molecules exist now on different surfaces, they all stay in the lowest surface unless you do something to it, it's like being on earth, you're going to be on this surface of earth unless you somehow jump up or put a rocket behind you or get on a plane or something else, all right.  You're not going to leave this earth 'cause, well, the same thing happens with the atoms and molecules in their electronic states.  So once the electrons arrange themselves in a way to make the atoms comfortable and stable, they don't want to go anywhere, all right.  That's basically what we're doing, all right, and what we do is we put in energy and one way to do it is to put in light.  We put in energy and then put it to a different surface and it doesn't like that and if the different surface is high enough, then it breaks it apart and we want to know how it breaks apart.  If we know all the surfaces, it doesn't matter whether we use light or whether we use electrons or whether we just take a billiard ball--well, a billiard ball is not small enough but if we take a helium atom, for example, and somehow fire it at enough velocity, then it's kinetic energy is high enough to hit the molecule, it can actually break it apart, all right.  So that's what we do.  Now, imagine we right now have CO2 in the atmosphere.  We want to get rid of the CO2 or we don't want to put anymore in there--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --it may be harder to get rid of it because there's so much of it now.  There are natural ways to get rid of it.  In fact, the difference between the amount of CO2 that's warming the atmosphere is only a few percent a year because all the natural ways like the plants which eat CO2 like we eat oxygen, or breathe oxygen, they use CO2 in their metabolic processes, that's one way.  CO2 dissolves in the oceans, that ends up acidifying the oceans which is not good but it does do that.  CO2 reacts with minerals and form carbon, forms carbonate- carbonates, and that also gets rid of the CO2.  But we could, I can conceive of new ways to get rid of it based on the information that we have.  For example, if I can produce any of these excited states that produce oxygen and somehow take the oxygen molecules and some--take the carbon atoms that are formed or the oxygen atom that is formed and react it with something that was good, then I can make a good, two good things out of a bad thing.  And so, and I can do it.  I mean, I can conceive of an overall--that requires energy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And where am I going to get the energy?  Why not the sun?  Use the sun, which is the same thing the plants do anyway, use the sun with solar cells and now I can make a discharge, for example, like the fluorescent lights that you have and put the C- CO2 through the discharge with something else in it that allows it to react and give me my final products.  So that's another way.
Story_ID: 673575
Speaker 1: Does that help (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It, it helps a lot and actually brings up something that, I think you were talking about which is, we're all concerned about climate change.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Except our present president [President Donald John Trump].  I get, don't put that in.  I may not get my grant (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's okay (laughter), you're not alone in that thinking as well and what we know already is that through the evolution of technology, et cetera, we certainly are using fossil fuels at record numbers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and CO2 [carbon dioxide] production is related to that or emission, I guess.  In your research, and what you have just described, how can that be applied to potentially changing the course of climate change?
Speaker 1: I think the best way to change the course of climate change is to get rid of the major sources that you can control.  One of the major sources are internal combustion engines, okay, and another, power plants which is also, they don't use internal combustion but they do burn fuel.
Speaker 2: Lots of it.
Speaker 1: So I have sort of been toying with the idea but I don't know how to, I haven't gone through it yet.  I mentioned in the last segment that if you could add something to CO2 with energy where the CO2 gets the energy to dissociate into carbon atoms, oxygen atoms, give O2 or CO [carbon monoxide] and react the O2 and CO to produce something that is hopefully profitable, okay, then we could use the CO2 and energy plus whatever else we add to it to produce a profitable product and oxygen at the same time then we would be better off, okay.  Now how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: How theoretical is that--
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: --versus the ability to apply it to--?
Speaker 1: How theoretical?  I could put hydrogen in, for example, and the hydrogen would react with the excited oxygen atoms and the carbon atoms and produce C-H bonds [carbon hydrogen bonds] and O-H bonds [oxygen hydrogen bonds] and then that could react with other, I mean, it is possible.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, the real question is not whether it's possible but whether it's possible economically, economical and can it be done on a, can it be done in a way that it makes some economic sense.
Story_ID: 673576
Speaker 1: And then also, what about the political implications?  Isn't that part of it?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, I mean, look.  If we get rid of internal combustion in engines we'll save a whole lot.  Europe is doing that already.  I mean, Sweden says, Volvo says, they will not make any more internal combustion cars in the future.  There are people who say you can't do this profitably because there is so much combustion that is used, we can't do it but we need to think about other ways to do it.  Now, solar, solar energy is one thing, wind energy is another thing, geo energy is a third thing.  It is hard to, to get rid of CO2 [carbon dioxide] because CO2 is a very stable compound.  In, in chemistry we call it, it has been oxidized to its highest state, and when you oxidize things you really, usually release energy in the process.  To reduce it it would, it's going to require energy and there are chemists working on other ways to reduce it, but you've got to get the whole process to work and that's chemical engineering and I'm not a chemical engineer but that, I mean, it's feasible but we aren't spending enough money to look at this because who wants to spend money on something--I mean, the attitude is, why should we spend the money until we're all dead.  It's almost--we're not going to die and technology is going to help us, but we can't get technology to help us until we put the money in to let it help us and we're cutting back on money all over the place.  The present administration says there is no problem and there are some idiots, that I know, who say that that's true but these are the same, you know, look, I don't--
Speaker 1: Well but this is an important part of the conversation because you have chemists and other scientists from different disciplines looking to solve some of the real problems that we are faced with for our planet and for long term life on the planet and health of the planet and then there's the, there are the political wars that occur all the time that get in the way or depending upon your, actually, whatever your point of view, the political wars are getting in the way.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so does it take scientists to become lobbyists?  What does it take in order for people's eyes to open to what may happen in a hundred years, five hundred years, a thousand years or less?
Speaker 2: I think most people in the world are convinced that there are climate change.  Evidence for that is that we have the Paris accords [Paris Agreement] and the Europeans and the rest of the world are convinced.  Now, what is going to happen is they, if they start making money or they start solving their problems, China is convinced.
Speaker 1: Well America was convinced until a year ago.
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I mean, not, they didn't jump on the Paris accords with the enthusiasm that China has.  Of course China has a bigger problem than we have.  I've been to, you've been to China--
Speaker 1: No, I have not.
Speaker 2: --I don't know but I've been to China and when I was there in the '90s [1990s] is the last time I've been there, the, they're burning coal--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and the atmosphere was horribly polluted.  So they are convinced, India's convinced, so now that's two-thirds of the world's population.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right?  You had Indonesia and then the rest of us don't matter but we do matter because the United States represents what, a third of the population of the world or not even a third, 10 percent of the population and produces 80 percent of the pollution.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We do matter.  Now, if we keep doing this, that's going to create, it seems to me, an unstable condition and instability leads to conflict and we're going to either try to kill the whole world, which is stupid, or we're going to buckle down and try to do something about this problem.
Story_ID: 673577
Speaker 1: When you look at the career that you have built and the work that you've done in the space of chemistry, what do you, what do you see as your legacy?  What do you think it means, the work that you've done?
Speaker 2: Well I hope some of the work that I've done in science itself has been impactful in our understanding of those surfaces that we talked about, of the chemistry of those free radicals that we talked about.  I think I made contributions to at least get us on the road of getting numbers and numbers are important because numbers determine what you finally get out.  And so that is, I learned that at NIST [National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland], at NBS [National Bureau of Standards], many, many years ago.  So that's part of my contribution, I think.  The students I have taught and mentored is an important part of my contribution.  That may be the most important part, in fact.  The students I taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the students I've taught here [University of California, Davis, Davis, California], the department of chemistry here now produces 10 to fif- 15 percent of its graduate population are underrepresented minority students, African American or Hispanic or Native American, not Chinese, not that--we have a lot of Chinese or Asian students, that's fine, but they aren't underrepresented in science (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: We're talking about--
Speaker 1: They're overrepresented in science.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and which is great.  I mean, I, I mean, my work could not have been done without them--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because most Americans don't want to do what I do and if you look at my publications you'll see that but that, I think, is a big legacy.  The, the increasing the number of grants that go to HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], I think that was important.  There was an experiment that we did that we got a million dollars for from NSF [National Science Foundation]--
Speaker 1: And who's we now?
Speaker 2: I was a P.I. [principal investigator], it was my idea.  We here at UC Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] got--
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.
Speaker 2: --and we tried to see if we could increase the grade point average in the gatekeeper courses of general chemistry, general physics, the first course in mathematics, which is calculus and by pairing students with investigators in their laboratory from their freshman year on and compare that to students who did not receive that mentoring or that introduction to science and we increase the grade point average from the average of C to B, that's an important result--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --because that shows that acclimating underrepresented minority students in a big institution can improve their performance, making them feel comfortable to put a more human side of science or people side of science is important to make scientists.  Now if you don't get, if you don't get a good grade in those courses, most students get discouraged and stop.  You don't have to be discouraged.  Every--look, the hardest course in chemistry, in my mind, is general chemistry.  Why is it the hardest?  'Cause you're trying to teach all of chemistry in one year or at least introduce the students to all of chemistry in one year which I think is idiotic but I can't, you have to convince everybody in the faculty to do it.  But those are the things if you ask me what my accomplishments were, but the people that I have worked with, the students who come back--three weeks ago, one of my first graduate students' daughter walked in my office and said she was interested in what we were doing and interested in getting a Ph.D.--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --in chemistry and her mother had gotten a Ph.D. in chemistry.  One of my students from Howard is now in NSF's National Science Board.  I mean, another one of the students I didn't teach, I mentored, came to me with her husband and her baby and she's at Intel [Intel Corporation] and doing extremely well there.  She got her Ph.D. with somebody else.  It's those kind of stories that, if no, none of the other stuff that I did made any difference, to me that makes a big difference.
Story_ID: 673578
Speaker 1: How many Ph.Ds. have you helped to make over the years?
Speaker 2: Helped to make?
Speaker 1: How does it, how--or how's that work?
Speaker 2: Well I have taught probably about, I, I think fifteen who got their degree working with me.  Actually one of 'em is secretary, is director general of a company in the Ivory Coast--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: He was my second Ph.D. at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  The first Ph.D. is the vice president for research at a HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].  Anyway, I can think of--these are the, I think, when I got to Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] in 1985, I found out in the history of the Ph.D. program at Davis, which started in the '40s [1940s] as a separate institution, there was one African American and one Hispanic.  The Hispanic student is Professor Gutierrez [Carlos Gutierrez] at Cal State L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] where--who has made a magnificent career down there, teaching underrepresented minorities.  And the African American passed away, but he was chair of the department at one point at Cal State Hayward [California State University, East Bay, Hayward, California] and taught African--I mean, taught all kinds of students down there which is one of the reasons that I think the more we get African Americans and Hispanics and Native Americans as professors in universities all over the country, the more students we're going to get who get Ph.Ds. and that's going to filter all the way down the line.
Story_ID: 673579
Speaker 1: And you had mentioned earlier, and I'd like for you to say it on camera, the process of working with someone through the Ph.D., to the fruition of Ph.D. for the professor, what is, what is that engagement?
Speaker 2: Well, for the, the professor has to believe in the student, that's one thing.  I mean, the professor has to believe that the student can do this, I mean, that's, if you, this professor doesn't believe that it's going to get harder.  The student has to be able to connect with the professor.  They have to pass the courses, of course.  They have to understand that graduate school is not just getting a grade in the course, it is engaging in the research and learning how to think on your own, all right, and the professor has to help them do that.  It is discouraging, you can be doing experiments--and all experiments don't work or all theoretical calculations don't work.  And so you have, you and your professor have to try to figure out a way of making something work that you can get a product out.  And so you have to be able to communicate with your professor, sometimes that's difficult, mentors help because mentors can help you understand, they can't interfere with the process between the men- the, the Ph.D. advisor and the student, but they can try to help you understand the advisor and understand it's all of the things that you may think are going on with you, you A are not alone, there are other people who've gone through this, et cetera.  Now, I don't know whether I said this earlier, did I?  If you go back and look at the transcript, but I was in a critical position in my career when I was in graduate school [Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] and there was a professor who invited me to her house for dinner and told me that I was not the worst student who had on the comprehensive qualifying exams in the history of the college, in the history of the department, and that was critical to me because at that point, I had to go back in the chemistry department, I was going to switch to physics, I had to go back in the chemistry department and finish up because my wife at the time was pregnant with my first son [Eric Jackson] and somebody had to make some money for, to keep the family alive.  So, it's those kind of things that a professor interfere--and I have had to deal with students in similar circumstances and it's those kind of things you have to interact with the student and that's what I do as a mentor rather than as an advisor.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Advisors tend to be pushing the student toward the degree in the field that they're in.  Some of them don't interact personally with the student because that may, or they may feel it takes away from the objectivity of them evaluating the student at some later time.  I don't know whether I necessarily believe that.  I think it's, everything in life is a human interaction and you have to interact as human beings.
Story_ID: 673580
Speaker 1: When you look at your whole life, do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Not about my career, basically, if I think about it.  It would have been nicer to be at a, you know, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or, you know, Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] or something.  But I, honestly, I enjoyed being at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I enjoyed being in Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland], I learned a lot.  I mean there were setbacks but there are setbacks in life all together, everybody has setbacks in life.  I am actually very proud of my career.  I set out to make a contribution and I really think that I made a contribution and I think I'm still making a contribution.  I have been helped by a lot of people.  I've been helped by my wife [Lydia Jackson (ph.)] and my first wife even, even though we broke up.  I, I wish I could have been a better father than I have been.  I mean, I guess every parent looks back over that period of their life and wonder if they could have done things better than they have done and I wish I could have been a better husband and I, I don't like the idea that I failed in my first marriage and I hope I'm doing better but we'll see.  I mean, I'm still here.  We've been married thirty-three years, so--
Speaker 1: A pretty good track record.
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't get there without a whole lot of fights along the way, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: I bet.
Story_ID: 673581
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young African Americans who might want to pursue the field of chemistry today?
Speaker 2: If you love it, do it, you know.  In fact, my advice to all students is find something that you don't mind getting up in the morning and going to do, otherwise to me life would be extremely boring and you are basically a slave to getting a dollar bill or--that's not really a lot of fun.  I mean, so whatever you do, that's what I tell my grand- I've got three grandchildren, four grandchildren, that's what I tell them.  Find something that you really are in love with and will do even if they didn't pay you.  Now don't not accept the money because it (laughter), don't, don't misinterpret that, you have to get paid all the time and you should insist on getting paid all the time.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: No, I think I've spent, I mean, six hours is a long time, seven hours is a long time to talk and I don't even want to listen to this myself nor do I want to see it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well we appreciate your time--
Speaker 2: To be honest.
Speaker 1: --thank you very much.
