Story_ID: 31083
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Clifford Johnson, C-L-I-F-F-O-R-D J-O-H-N-S-0-N, middle initial, V, for Victor.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March, 1968.  Place of birth, Hendon in London, in England.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hendon?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-D-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's in London?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Okay, sir.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physicist, a professor of physics and astronomy at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I have no idea.  It is I'm thinking the twenty-fifth?
Speaker 1: Ah, there you go.
Speaker 2: Today's date is the twenty-sixth of April, twenty-eleven [2011].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the Irani Building on the University of Southern California's campus.
Story_ID: 31084
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  I love so many different cuisines, so many things within those cuisines, I cannot think of a favorite food off the top of my head.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I live Italian cuisine, Caribbean cuisine (laughter).  Too many options.
Speaker 1: That's funny.  Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  It's probably between green and blue, one of those two, depending upon what side of the bed I woke up on that morning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably my favorite time of the year might be--it might be the fall or the spring.  Maybe when I'm in California it's the spring.  When I'm in more in the eastern or northern climes, it's probably--yes, probably the fall.  It's something about the smell in the air and the dormancy and a little bit of decay, and the hope for the future that's so very poignant.  But when it's on the West Coast, it's usually the spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  Again, like cuisines of the world, there're just too many interesting places I've been on, you know, vacation or what have you to pick one.  The Caribbean is obviously a favorite because I'm from there, but there're so many other favorites as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question in this set is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  That changes over time, my favorite phrase or saying.  And I probably don't notice--too amusing a lot these days.  I think I tend to--I tend to say, "That's a sword that cuts both ways," a lot because there are always two sides to things, and sometimes it's interesting to know what they are.  And a personal saying I guess I say a lot is, "You're very kind," when someone says something complimentary.  (laughter)
Story_ID: 31085
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm going ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: So my mother's full name is Delia Margaret Johnson.  Her maiden name is O'Garro.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Sorry, yes.  Delia, D-E-L-I-A, Margaret, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, O'Garro is, O, apostrophe, G-A-R-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry, the last name again.  That's spelled?
Speaker 2: O'Garro.
Speaker 1: Garro?  G-
Speaker 2: O'Garro.
Speaker 1: O'Garro?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: The name is Irish origin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: O, apostrophe, G-A-R-R-O.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Like O'Brien or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --"O" something else.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother, January 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry for the trouble.
Speaker 1: No problem.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Mahaut, in Dominica [Windward Islands, West Indies, gained independence from Britain in 1978] in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have to spell (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I thought you were going to ask me to do that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So Dominica, I'll shoot for, but I'm not sure about Mahaut.  So it's, D-O-M-I-N-I-C-A.  It's one of the Windward Islands in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, well, what can you tell us about your mother's background and her family?  How far back can you trace her side of her family?
Speaker 2: Actually, I've not really done that, so I imagine there's some work to do there.  I know of her mother and father and her grandmother, and that's as far as I know in terms of, you know, the immediate relatives.  So she actually--her mother, Victoria, was--actually died when my mother was five years old, and then she was raised by her grandmother after that.  Her father is Joseph O'Garro, who I think moved to Trinidad in later years and died there in the '90s (1990s).
Speaker 1: Now, is there a tradition that basically the family had like deep roots in Dominica on her side or--
Speaker 2: No.  It's--that's actually something that's very true about a lot of the Caribbean, especially the smaller islands, such as Dominica, Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory], Antigua, places like that.  You'll find that there's a huge amount of migration amongst all these different islands.  And so, it'll be very unusual, I think, just anecdotally, I've done the research, to find someone who has their roots all in one--in one island.  So my people are a mixture--a lot of the tracings you do will take you to either Montserrat or Dominica a lot.  There's a lot of communication back and forth between those two places; people moving around for work and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that makes sense, you know.  People probably don't stay on the same little island and then move around and (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you go where the work is and people move to--for whatever reason and people send for each other, and especially in those days, in the early twentieth century, there's, you know, a lot of little boats going back and forth carrying various goods, and people, and workers, and what have you.  So people move around, and so--
Story_ID: 31086
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories in the family that are passed down that, you know, that your mother [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] told you about, or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Of what kind?  You mean--
Speaker 1: Just stories about life in the Caribbean.  It could be political stories, it could be stories of going to school or (unclear)
Speaker 2: I mean, there certainly--well, my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] tells lots of stories of her own upbringing, how she was, as far as I can gather, an extremely strong-minded individual--girl, who I think, she tells stories, for example, of being teased at school and finding her way to--to fight her way back by the, you know, eventually after being tormented by, you know, kids, eventually finding a way of showing them that she should be left alone and things like that.  So there are lots of stories where you'd get a sense that she was a strong fighter.  And one good thing that I think was part of that is that it seems that her grandmother, who was raising her, kind of supported that; realized that she was very individual and very strong, and was supportive of that, I think.  She tells stories of when she was when she moved to Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory] and stayed with her aunt [Anne West], her brother's sister, Anne, and she would actually be keen to go out and have fun, you know she was a teenager, and the husband of her aunt, Mr. West, didn't like her doing that, so she would sneak out through the window and go off to the dances and things like that.  So she would tell these wonderful stories of, again, of, you know, trying to enjoy herself, but still be a good person.  I think that on the other side of things, she was extremely keen to show her worth as a person who could do the crafts and, you know, cooking and sewing, and things like that.  But a lot of her older--people raising her were not sure she was really good at, you know, they wanted her to prove herself, and so she would do that.  And she would do things in secret and just sort of leave it there and go, "Okay.  Look what I've done."  And they'd go, "Wow.  You did this?"  And so that was very much the kind of story I've been hearing.  She's [mother: Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] been reminiscing in recent years about that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about her [mother: Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] going to Britain?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It's very interesting.  Again, this fits a lot with the Caribbean history of the time, what was going on.  A number of ships would go periodically to Europe, ultimately with people destined for the U.K. [United Kingdom] and other countries; primarily the U.K. because it was one of the major--it had a lot of colonies, including at the time, Montserrat, of course, and other islands.  And there was the big call-out that happened in the '50s (1950s) when the Mother Country called out for workers to come and do some of the jobs that needed to be filled in the U.K.  And so, actually, my father [Victor Reginald Johnson] went up first.  He and my mother had met and, you know, the romance happened and, etcetera, etcetera, and then he left to go to England to find work.  And then ultimately he sent for my mother, and so she went up by ship; I forget the name of the ship but, you know--
Speaker 1: (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It's one of those stories of--yeah.
Story_ID: 31087
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's--well, I'm going to get back to the story of how they met.  Maybe after we jump and go back to his gap--we'll go his story first, then we'll (unclear).  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Victor Reginald Johnson.  V-I-C-T-O-R. Reginald, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D.
Speaker 1: And what is his month of birth and year of birth?
Speaker 2: August 1934.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory]; I'm thinking in Plymouth, the capital, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: So, he was one of, I think, seven brothers and he was the youngest, I think.  And they--they had quite a line which did stay in Montserrat, as far as I understand, for at least a couple of generations and further back.  As far as I knew, the brothers all at one time would work for the major landowners at the time.  So a lot of Montserrat at the time was carved up between, I think, a few landowners with either growing limes or cotton--Montserrat was very famous for its limes and its cotton in the past.  I think on the famous sea island cotton, which was known worldwide, was--it originally came from there.  And so, the people on my father's [Victor Reginald Johnson] side would work for those landowners, whether it be helping tending crops or managing animals, moving them around; those sorts of things.  And so, my father's--my oldest uncles, I think, had, you know, were much more senior than my father, and I think he just sort of came up through the ranks working with them until he, you know, came into his own.  I think a lot of his coming into his own as perhaps the youngest was to go away to the U.K. [United Kingdom]--that's a guess--and look for work there.  There may have been other drivers, but I suspect that was maybe part of it.  And things changed as well.  The agricultural base became less strong in the Caribbean in terms of being a major exporter so as people went elsewhere to find different work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're saying that they were--there was a call out for people to go?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  This is sort of--I forget exactly what the year was, but this was one of those sorts of key things that happened in the history of Britain in relation to its colonies.  There was a big move to have people come up from the colonies to, you know, do the work that, I guess, the English people didn't want to do themselves.
Speaker 1: Now, there a lot of, you know, when you hear various strands of this, you know, if you're here in America, you wonder, Well, why would the people from the Caribbean, it's a beautiful place, want to go to England where it's cold and damp, and this is for work, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and (unclear) going to eat (laughter).
Speaker 1: The way--we've seen the side of it where I think 'Sixty Minutes' did a--back in the '70s (1970s) I know they did a piece on The United Front Of England.  This is like the whole thing, Neo-Nazi, they were angry about the Caribbean (unclear) and then the Indians and everybody else who wasn't a British, you know, or Anglo-Saxon origin or whatever.  And the--and they cast it as, all these people are invading England, you know--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --for, you know, and not that they were invited or recruited to do work.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They were just--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --got there on their own.  You know, it doesn't seem plausible frankly if you think about it, you know.  I don't believe they had the means to just rush en masse to England.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's not like--it's not like there's a, you know, an open border they can just walk across.  It's kind of an ordeal to get there, and it's--yeah.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  It has to be paid for.
Speaker 2: It has to be paid for, and it has to be--you know, you have to suffer the culture shock and what have you.  You're not going there because, as you say, you're not going there because it's, you know, land of sunshine, milk, and honey.  It's a place to go and maybe--I think the dream in everyone's mind was they we would go for a while and, you know, earn a living and, you know, eventually return in a blaze of glory and back to their home, and I don't think that dream, that last part of the dream every really worked out quite as well as people imagined.  But, you know, such is the way with dreams.
Speaker 1: Right. Right.  Even a study of Marcus Garvey shows his sister, Indiana Garvey, is already in England working, when he's, you know, in the United States (unclear) the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association].  So he has a sister there already in England doing something.  So this migration--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so that makes more sense to some of the stuff we have (laughter).  That happens.
Speaker 2: But--the Windrush, that was the name.  I think that was--it was either the name of the ship or the whole movement or both, I think.  I think if you look that up, you'll probably get more information than I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So about what year is it when they [Johnson's parents: Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] moved to Britain?
Speaker 2: All right.  When would that have been?  I want to say late '50s (1950s).  I'm thinking something like '56 (1956), '57 (1957).  Maybe a little later, but not much later.
Story_ID: 31088
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before--okay.  Before we talk about their life in Britain, there's a story about how they [Johnson's parents: Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] met that you were going to tell.
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, yes.  The story is kind of nice because it's--it involves them both doing, you know, their--whatever they've been tasked (unclear) to do that day.  My mother [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] apparently was bringing a goat from one part of the island--this is now Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory]--from one part of the island to another, just leading the goat along.  She had been told to go fetch and bring it, and apparently she was walking along and having some difficulty at some point where that actually moving--you know, goats can be stubborn--and then apparently this gentleman [Victor Reginald Johnson] came along with two sheep.  He was going in some other direction, and he encountered her, and so he said to her, "If you just let me go ahead on the path with my sheep, the goat will probably follow the sheep," because they do that, you know, the herd instinct.  And so, that was how they met by getting the animals moving to wherever they were going.  And then apparently in the days that followed, my father [Victor Reginald Johnson] began to write notes and--send other messages to try and win over my mother romantically.  So it was there---it all began there, over two sheep and a goat (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a good story.  Now, did your parents--were they able to finish school in Montserrat or--
Speaker 2: So no.  I think--my understanding is my mother left school very early on in Dominica [Windward Islands, West Indies, gained independence from Britain in 1978], I think, by time she was twelve.  She moved--I think she moved to Montserrat in her middle teen years.  By then she'd long left school.  My father, I not sure how far he went in school, at least, you know, in those initial years.  Later on when he went to England, he did do sort of night school and things like that in training at work in order to learn new skills.  But I think the school part, you know, finished early on, which wasn't unusual at the time in that place.
Story_ID: 31089
Speaker 1: Okay.   All right.  So they [Johnson's parents: Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] were in Britain for--until--you say about 1972 (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So we, my brother [Robert Johnson], sister [Carol Johnson] and I came along in the '60s (1960s), and then my father [Victor Reginald Johnson], I guess, began to go on the second phase of the dream, as it were, and then he decided to bring us all back to his home, back to Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory].
Speaker 1: Now, he had obtained training as an electrical engineer or an electrical electrician or--
Speaker 2: So yes.  So he, you know, he worked, both he and my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] worked in various factories and things in the U.K., and I think at some point then my father got, I guess at the time it was called the--think it was just called the Post Office, but that meant in the U.K. [United Kingdom], but that meant not just sort of postal stuff, but also telephones and other communications.
Speaker 1: (unclear) telephones.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so he actually started working for that, I guess, nationally--nationally-owned company.  And at some point, because they, of course, have this colony or several colonies in the Caribbean, they need people to do things there.  And so, I think a job came up that he decided to take and come back down there to do.  So he returned with us, the family, in 1972 to Montserrat in a senior position essentially overseeing the improvement of the infrastructure, you know, laying of telephone lines and things like that.  And that sort of thing.  So his training was in that aspect of, you know, wiring things up, and what have you.
Speaker 1: So that is the fulfillment of the dream.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it really--you know, he actually did the arc; he went up, he got the job, he worked for a while, started a family; same with my mother, you know, they did this whole project together, and then they returned with us to the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have a brother and a sister--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and where do you fall in the order?  Are you, you know--
Speaker 2: I'm the baby.
Speaker 1: You're the last one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 31090
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' [Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] talents and their gifts, their habits, you know, their dispositions, and persuasions; who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a tough one.  I think I have strong elements from both.  That might be because they relatively well matched, and so, maybe that's why.  But I certainly have my--I'm known for a lot of attention to detail, you know, and appreciation of sort of technical things and what have you, and I think a lot of that comes from my father [Victor Reginald Johnson].  Apparently he was the same way.  I didn't know him very well as an adult, you know, by the time I became an adult.  So I've heard secondhand that a lot of the things that I mentioned, attention to detail and things like that, I have from him.  But there's a high degree of sort of determination and just sort of strength of will that I think comes from my mother [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson].  And I think together these things help me a lot in what I do.  You know, I have an inclination towards explaining things, figuring out how things work and what have you.  And that will get you so far when you need to go all the way, is to have the determination and the will to stick at it.  And so, I think I get aspects from both.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.  Now, we have to take a little break here.  This is a half-hour break.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 31091
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, sir, you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  Earliest childhood memory, yes, actually.  A very strong one which is probably why I remember it.  I remember, it would have been--so I would have been younger than four because it was still when I was a child in the U.K. [United Kingdom] in England before we went to the Caribbean.  And I can't quite remember who I was with; it was presumably some older children and I was out somewhere, so I couldn't have been too young because--so I would say around four.  And, all I remember is that there was a nest of hornets or bees, something in that family, and somebody throwing a stone at the nest we're all looking at.  And I still have this vivid memory of watching this bee or hornet just getting bigger and bigger in my field of view as it came towards me.  I probably, you know, dramatized it a little bit in my mind, but I just remember that instant and turning and running, and then the next thing I remember is waking up at home and being shown the shorts that I was wearing with the little hole out of the back.  And I can't--I presume it was cut that way to get at the sting or what have you.  I presume that the creature didn't do that, but I just remember the drama; people showing the hole and saying (laughter), "That's what you get when you play with a hornet's nest," or whatever it was.  So that's probably one of my earliest sharp memories (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when you were about--does your memory--it's beginning--your family has moved to Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory]--do you have very many memories of Britain in prior to moving?
Speaker 2: Some.  I remember a few things, a few details, mostly around things that must have been happening around the house, which is presumably where I spent most of my time.  I remember--one thing I do remember very distinctly, and I think probably if she [Johnson's mother: Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] were to do this now, she would be told--called a bad parent, but my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] used to go out to the shops to get whatever she needed to get--I don't know, milk or what have you--and, you know, those sorts of things, and so, she would have to go out, and she would sometimes leave me in the house on my own, and apparently I was a very good kid.  She would basically tell me that I was allowed to watch the T.V. program called, 'Play School,' a particular show, and apparently I was able to tell when the hands on the clock were in the right place, and I would apparently she'd remind me, she'd go out, and I distinctly remember looking at the clock and switching on the T.V., and then apparently I would switch once the show was done.  And then I would have a nap or something.  And so, I remember impressions of that.  I think now if you did that as a parent that will be a crime of some kind.  But--
Speaker 1: I don't.  You'd have to have a genius child.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I don't know if I could tell any other time, but I certainly knew when it was eleven--I think it was 11:00 [o'clock] in the morning when I'd switch on the show (laughter).
Story_ID: 31092
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you remember the trip back to Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory]?
Speaker 2: I remember that I was in charge of the Christmas Tree.  We moved back with everything and there was this, you know, one of those hold-up, artificial Christmas trees that you would have.  And I do remember that it was a little one, and that was what I was carrying.  And we were all, you know, dressed up because that's, in those days, what you do when you were traveling, going, you know, you're going on the plane to the airport, it was a big deal, you dressed up.  And so, we're all dressed up and I had my outfit and my--and the Christmas Tree.  And I believe that part of the Christmas Tree was lost on that trip, and so, we had a shorter Christmas Tree in later years, and I was probably reminded of that (laughter) because it was in my care when the top part disappeared laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I certainly remember that aspect of the trip.  The most striking thing which still is with me today as though it happened yesterday was the first day I woke up--the first morning I woke up on the island [Montserrat] very early in the morning and just hearing these sounds I'd never heard before.  So, of course, the main thing is that there was just this constant sound of crickets, because it's still a little dark outside, the crickets are going.  So that--well, you know, you wake up as four year old child, "What is that sound?"  So that was one amazing sound.  And then, of course, a little bit later on you have the--as dawn would come, the cock crowing, that was an amazing sound I'd never heard before.  But the crickets, I think, was just amazing to me, just that--that constant sound of the chirping of the crickets.
Story_ID: 31093
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in that same vein, we always ask this question:  Can you describe the house and the neighborhood you grew up in, and describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Certainly in the early part of the time in the Caribbean, we were all staying in this little house of my mom's [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] aunt, Mrs. Anne West, the same aunt who, she used to jump out of the window when she was a child to go to dances and things like that, so that same house, it's a little house we were, you know, many of us to a bed because it wasn't that much space, and we were definitely there as a family of five in this lady's house.  So it was a little cramped, but I was small myself, so it probably wasn't as big a deal for me as it was for everyone else.  We were very close to the ocean.  This was actually--probably the last house but one before you go over the road and then it's down to the ocean.  So if you sit in the right place in the house, you're looking at the ocean.  It's right there.  And so that was significant.  You'd see boats going by; you'd hear when the fisherman came in with a catch; you would hear because it would be happening near there, they would be coming on the--to unload.  So there was the sound of the sea.  There was then several of these houses.  These were colonial-style houses because it was, you know, a colony (laughter).  That's sort of classic, louvers on the windows, the wooden shuttered louvers with the storm shutters that came over the rest of it as well because it's hurricane territory as well.  So that was noticeable.  All those little houses would have the veranda, maybe with either a rocking chair or some kind of chair for you to sit out.  As you walked along those streets in that area, you'd wave to all the people who'd be sitting out on their verandas or on the stoops; children playing in the streets.  Sometimes people leading animals along, less so by time I got there, but it was less common than perhaps it was because now the streets were beginning to be paved and there were cars and things like that.  But there's still a little bit of that.  And it wouldn't--you wouldn't have to go more than a few minutes until you were out in pasture land where there would be livestock and agriculture and things like that, stepping out and going towards the heart of town.  This was in an area of the island called Whooping, (ph.) which is very close to Plymouth the capital.  So you'd walk left as you stepped out of the house, up the road, over the bridge to Plymouth proper where my school was, etcetera.  And you pass a number of interesting things; the bridge itself was interesting.  There was sort of dry river which would become active during the storm season, so it's mostly just a trickle.  Sometimes on very dry days the, you know, you have that sort of dried, stagnant water smell that might come up if the wind was in the right direction.  And then you'd cross into the area where the market would be.  So on every day there would be the market but, you know, there would be major days when you'd go in the market, and then the sounds and the smells of fruit and meat, fish, things like that, would be strong.  And I love markets to this day, and I suspect that that time is a huge influence on me.  Just on the corner before you go over the bridge, in the evenings there was--I can't remember his name--there was a man who'd sell--it'd be peanuts, and he'd roast them and put them into little paper bags, and that was a major treat.  Having getting the bag of peanuts and bringing it back down, we'd all sit around shelling peanuts and eating them and sharing them.  Oh, the house next door was a shoemaker Mr. Morgan, and so, there was the smell of leather and glue and the sound of him putting nails into shoes and things like that.  That was a major thing.  So those are some of the sights and smells just in that immediate area.
Story_ID: 31094
Speaker 1: Now, what was the transportation like on the island [Montserrat, West Indies, British overseas territory]?  Pretty much foot traffic or--?
Speaker 2: Pretty much foot traffic.  And so, we later on--we were only in that house maybe for a year or two years, I forget.  My father [Victor Reginald Johnson], as part of the, I guess, the big return part of the dream and all that, he was actually building a house; there was a house being built, what was considered to be a big house by the local standards.  When I went back many years, I saw that it wasn't a big house but it was "the big house."  And in the hills, Saint George's Hill, more toward the middle of the island, and the main way of getting there, especially as I grew older as a child, was basically just walking.  And you either go by the roads where there be various shortcuts, which would be considered a major hike these days, but that was I did every day on the way back from school.  And so, there were cars.  When my father was with us there were, you know, he had a car and other people had cars.  Cars were beginning to come in a lot, perhaps like with many places, perhaps a little too much.  But certainly was the case that you'd be walking along the street and somebody who knew somebody who knew your family or what have you, might stop and go, "Hey, you're going to so-and-so, I'm going to so-and-so?" "Yeah, jump in."  Many trips on--and pickup trucks, you know, you just jump--you just wave and run and jump on the back, and yeah, the days before seatbelts; good times (laughter).  Yeah, so lots of rides in pickup trucks and things like that.  Later on they had bus taxis.  The big deal was that they'd have these sort of small vans which would go, you know, go from town to wherever, to take people and bring them back and, you know, you would basically say I want to stop here, and you'd jump out.  And so, people did that a lot.  I think later on for--when I went to the big school, the secondary school later on, I guess it would have been eleven--from age eleven onwards--there was a school bus that served that school.  And I think I took it a few times, but in the end I was mostly walking.  I'm not sure; maybe because I didn't live in the right place or something.  I'm not sure why.  But, yeah, it was a mixture of things.  One interesting thing I learned recently was that back when my father was young, he used to ride his bike a lot, and not only did he ride bikes a lot, he also used to build bikes and repair bikes.  I only really realized this recently.  I'm known by, you know, people who know me now as someone who rides a bike a lot.  I get around in L.A. [Los Angeles] a lot not just driving and walking, but also public transport.  And I mix it a lot with bikes.  You know, I ride bikes a lot and I like bikes--use bikes a lot through my life and, apparently, there's a bike aspect to my father that I was not aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of cars did they drive in Montserrat?  I'm just curious.
Speaker 2: I think--so, what did we have?  I think our first car was maybe a--I remember a 'Triumph'-something or other, which I guess was a British car.  And then there was a 'Mini' or maybe it was the other way around, I forget.  And--but I think in--once it came to the late '70s (1970s) and early '80s (1980s), it was mostly Nissans, which I guess was then called Datsun, and maybe Toyotas, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah.  So I think eventually the Japanese imports began to come in, but they were, in that earlier phase, there were British cars and I'm not sure what else.
Story_ID: 31095
Speaker 1: Now were you aware as a youth of the volcano?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  So the volcano--well, I should say--let me take a step back.  A major tourist attraction down there [Montserrat, West Indies, British overseas territory] was the Soufriere Hills.  Soufriere is the French term usually used for sort of a volcanic area.  And so, what you would do either as an interested local, or if you were taking some tourists up, or if you were tourists who came on tour, you would do the hike up to the Soufriere Hills and you'd get to a point where eventually all the vegetation would have disappeared, and it was yellow; I remember that being very striking.  And then, the yellow was basically crystalline sulfur everywhere.  And there were places that were hot spots.  You could--I don't think I ever saw anyone do this, but it was said, I mean, I was a kid, so you didn't question everything at the time.  It was said that you could put an egg in there and it would boil in seconds, and that's how hot it was and, you know, there would be steam rising up.  And there hot--some of the beaches had hot springs that were apparently connected on the ground to the runoff, I don't know exactly how that works, but those hot springs were--so that, and then, of course, you had the black volcanic sand all around most of the island's [Montserrat] beaches.  So that was, you know, it was known to be an interesting active place.  And occasionally you had the earthquakes.  You'd have days every now and again, during the hot summer when they would be a smell of sulfur, and you knew, Ah, there's some activity going on.  So it was a known thing that, you know, there was some semi-dormant volcano--volcanic activity that the island had in its heart.
Speaker 1: Was there any fear attached to that?
Speaker 2: No.  I just think it's something you grew up with.  It's kind of like growing up with the knowledge that there are earthquakes in California from time to time, and every now and again you get a little bit of a shake, but you're not sitting there in fear of the big one all the time.  And, in fact, when I think--I actually haven't tracked this down exactly.  I think eventually in the '90s [1990s], long after I had left as a child and gone back to the U.K. [United Kingdom].  But the year I actually did visit there in the, I guess it would have been '95 [1995] or '96 [1996], whenever--I forget when it erupted, but I went back.  But this is much later, it did erupt and essentially, you know, the top of one of the mountains just, you know, blew, and there was a huge explosion had started the whole thing, which devastated probably two-thirds of the island.  I actually don't think that was the part that was exactly the tourist part.  I think it was a little bit.  See, it wasn't quite the bit, you know, that you knew was active.  I think it was a neighboring bit.  But that whole mountain was--or collection of mountains, was active.  And, of course, now it's very active.
Story_ID: 31096
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what did you like to do growing up?
Speaker 2: Ah, lots of things.  So, I spent a lot of time outdoors.  I loved  gardening.  I loved growing.  We did a lot of growing food, just planting things and what have you and looking after animals and things.  This is after we moved to that hill [St. George's Hill, Montserrat, West Indies, British overseas territory] with the house.  And--so I did a lot of stuff outdoors of that kind.  But I was also very much--I liked watching a lot of what was going on with people making things of various kinds.  So we moved into the house before it was finished.  And so, I actually spent a lot of time just watching the construction of the house; it was kind of interesting, seeing what people were up to.  There was this fantastic stone oven, the old-fashioned sort of Dutch oven that you put wood into, and what have you and that was built out of stone.  I remember watching that being made, and that was a wonderful thing; shaping the stone and things like that.  So very early on I loved to craft as it were, and then helping making bread and things to go into that was fantastic.  That was great.  I was mostly watching.  I later on took up bread making, but that was not necessarily fully connected to that.  The-I think I learned later on from my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson].  But as long as making things, and the other thing I did a lot, I got very interested in, was various kinds of, I guess what's called needlework; arts and crafts, I think.  I did a lot of crochet, you know, with the single needle and the thing and you make--people make, you know, sweaters and things like that.  What I did, actually, I made what I called doilies, I guess after the French; doily-type, these sorts of lace-type patterns.  But I realize in retrospect that I loved that sort of thing because they were beautiful patterns, and I love patterns.  And, of course, a lot of what I do in my work now is patterns, you know, mathematics; sequences of numbers, things like that.  And there's a lot of that in various kinds of needlework.  Knitting, there's a lot of counting, there's a lot of repetition; do this fifty times, then turn, do it another fifty times, alternate this, and then, you know, you get this amazing pattern.  So I actually enjoyed making those things.  And I used to help my mom decode some of the patterns.  She'd be--she didn't quite understand the instructions to this and I used to love to explain to her, "Oh, no, no, no.  They mean this.  You have to do it this way," what have you.  And then I ended up doing it myself showing her.  And then I just loved doing that.  I also loved knots, macrame or macromie (sic).  I used to make things of that kind.  So again, there was a lot of doing stuff with my hands.  And then later on it developed into projects.  To this day I tend to be a little bit melodramatic when I have, you know, a project I'm working on.  And it goes way back to when I was a kid, and I would, you know, the summer would be coming, especially for the summers, I would have a project I was going to do and I'd plan it out.  I would draw diagrams, I would keep secret files, I would work out all the details, and then I'd spend all of the time trying to find the stuff I would need to build this thing.  Now in those days, mostly--it was more planning than execution because I really didn't have a lot of resources, you know.  So I remember, you know, one of my grand projects was going to be a remote control submarine.  And I worked in all the details and all the diagrams, and elaborate things would get drawn.  I would refine it, and refine it, and it would become more and more elaborate to the point where it would be impossible, even if I had, you know, an engineering lab to build this thing (laughter) that I had conceived with the amount detail.  But usually it started very modest, you know.  I had this nice, big plastic bottle that I was going to cut holes into and that was going to be the submarine (laughter), but then it turned into this thing; with electronics and it would fly, and all these things.  And, of course, I couldn't build those things because I didn't have the resources.
Story_ID: 31097
Speaker 1: But I did get a lot into electronics.  And so very on I taught myself, well, sort of electrical circuits and things initially, but then got more and more into electronics in detail.  And there was a RadioShack in town.  So what I would do, whatever little bits of pocket money or wherever I got; loose change or what have you from, I would buy components and then would actually begin to build things from that.  And--but one interesting thing which I never--I never got to tell my father [Victor Reginald Johnson].  He actually left when I was fairly young, and I can tell you more about that.  But--so by the time I began to really become into my own as a sort of my own internal world, this sort of getting strong, he'd already gone.  But I never talked, so I was never able to tell him that I began to learn electronics because I used to rummage around in old boxes and things upstairs, and I actually found some books which must have been the books he used when he was doing whatever course he needed to do for his work back in the U.K. [United Kingdom].
Speaker 2: That's when he was a telephone installer?
Speaker 1: The telephone stuff.  So a lot of the stuff I learned about, resistors and things like that; basic electrical stuff, came from that.
Speaker 2: I read that you didn't have a lot of distractions in terms of--was there television on the island?
Speaker 1: There was but we didn't have a television.  This was connected to lots of things.  I think partly, as I had mentioned, at some point my father left and disappeared--
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: So this would have been--I guess I would have been eight.  Something like that.
Speaker 2: You were, like, starting to do your experiments (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's when I was beginning to sort of switch on from that time onwards, eight or so; seven or eight.  I guess maybe he disappeared in '77 [1977], something like that.  Yeah, that makes sense.  So one of the interesting things was that I had--you know, there was a good library.  It was a really good library that was really key.  And I would begin to discover things.  So I began to try and find things in lib--there weren't so many great, you know, books.  There were a few basics of how-to books, and what have you; those were great.  But at some point I began to use up the library because the kind of things I was interested in it didn't have.  But then somebody, and I have no idea who it was, used to give their old electronics magazines to the library, just donate them once they finished with them.  And I used to read, I used to consume those.  And learned a lot from those.  And then I started--I think I ordered some books.  There was this orange, red and black series of books.  I can't remember what--it was something--it was either 'Made Simple' or something like.  But that was when I began to then teach myself electronics proper.  So then I began to learn about things like transistors and things like that, which is, you know, it's sort of different from, you know--there's electrical and then there's electronics, and these are sort of distinct things although people tend to mix them up.  And so, when you're just dealing with resistors and capacitors, and things in simple telephones and transmission lines.  That's mostly sort of electrical stuff.  Then when you start shaping and controlling signals and things like that and using transistors and--in the old days valves.  That's more electronic, you know, sort of you're not just pushing electricity around; you're using it as a-  The control circuitry like microphones and things in telephones, that's electronics; but the wires are sort of more electric.  I don't know if that makes any sense that distinction.
Speaker 2: Yes, it makes sense.
Speaker 1: So I began to learn about those sorts of things.  And then I would go to RadioShack and buy my components and put them together and start making radios and things like that.  It all began back when I used to take stuff apart.  You know, someone would have some thing that they were throwing away; a camera, a radio, because it was broken, and I would go, "I'm sure I can fix it."  So I would take it apart and figure out how it works, and then figure out what was wrong, and then I'd fix it.  And then I'd go "Okay.  Here it is."  And, of course, people wanted new stuff.  So I would end up with that thing because although I'd fixed it, they didn't want it, so.  My first camera was a camera I had because someone didn't want--I'd fixed it but they didn't want it back, so "Fine, I'll have it," and things like that.  So it's a lot of just dabbling, getting my fingers into making things and building things.  And then some of those wild and crazy projects really weren't just flights of imagination.  I knew what I was doing and I was able to build some of those things.  And so, later on once I went back to the U.K. [United Kingdom] and had more, you know, access to more resources, more knowledge, more components, soldering iron, things like that.  I was building all kinds of things.  I eventually built a computer.
Story_ID: 31098
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this.  I was just wondering did--now did you model any behavior after your brothers--or brother [Robert Johnson] or your sister [Carol Johnson]?  Were they involved in this kind of type of thing?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  I think they, you know, they were somewhat older than I was, and so, there was a little bit of a gap.  I wasn't, you know, separate from them, but I was very much in my own world, and their world was different and they had their things they were doing.  Our worlds would intersect, so when it came to things like--my sister, for example, would spend a lot of time sewing with my mother [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson].  And that was largely that's how we all had our clothes.  Right, the school uniforms, you know.  The day before a big, you know, either the beginning of school or a major thing at church, there would be a lot of sewing going on.  In fact, there were many times when we went to whatever the big thing was still with pins holding up things that didn't quite get finished.  And so I did get involved in that, and later on got interested in sewing and made things myself, and things like that.  So, you know, there were things that we had in common.  My brother, because my father [Victor Reginald Johnson] left, my brother left school and basically he was working to help support us.  So I didn't spend--
Speaker 1: How much older was he then?
Speaker 2: He's five years older than me, so I guess he would have been in the middle of his teen years when he was doing that.  So in some ways he made a big sacrifice there to do that.  So he was working a lot, so again, I wasn't playing with him because, you know, he was working.  So, but like I said, there was some, you know, we had friends in common and things like that.  But, you know, when I got into all the sorts of things that I did, either with my own internal hobbies or games that I did play with my peers, my brother was very separate from that because he was, you know, he was with the older kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here again for another chapter.
Story_ID: 31099
Speaker 1: So did you have any colleagues to help you on any of your projects?
Speaker 2: So what actually happened was that there were a lot of things on my--I did play with various friends, but I had--I didn't have many friends who were interested in the kinds of things I was interested in.  I was getting more and more into what I now I recognize is, you know, the path that would eventually have me become a scientist, etcetera.  And very early on I learned what a scientist was and thought that would be just great to do because it was what I was doing anyway, asking questions and trying to find answers to them; essentially all I had ever been doing.  And someone told me one day that a scientist is someone who gets paid to do that, so, that's cool.
Speaker 1: Was that in school?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, I think I learned about that just from reading and then what I didn't know was that there were different kinds of scientists.  A family friend one day came along and said, "What do you want to do?"  That's, you know, he'd always ask the kids or some friend, you know, "What do you want to do when you grow up?"  So I said, "I want to be a scientist."  And then they say, "What kind of scientist do you want to be?"  I remember being stumped by that and a little annoyed because I, you know, was the only person who I knew who knew what a scientist was and what have you, and I was annoyed that this other person knew about it and asked me a question I didn't know the answer to.  So I remember actually going away and sitting with a dictionary and just going through on all--page by page trying to find all the "ologists" and the what have you, reading the definitions to see which one I wanted to be.  When I hit physicist, I thought that's got to be it because the way it was written, in a way allowed me to keep my options opened, because it sort of underlies--it said it--it was--the dictionary said it, you know, it's a science that underlies all the under or something, you know, thing that these things usually say.  And that--so it meant that I could continue to just dabbling in all these other things.  I just didn't have any friends who were interested in that.  And so--until later.
Speaker 1: Not even, say, the clerks at RadioShack.  I mean, who--did you have discussions with people about any of these (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Not until later on.  But there was this long period where it was just me essentially and, you know--they had a nickname for me at school, which they think--they thought that I all hate--they thought that they were giving me a hard time, and I actually secretly loved it.  Because I was the one they would--I was the one who would try and come up with an explanation for something.  And I knew some from reading of it but not always.  So sometimes I'd be in a little awkward situation.  But--so their nickname for me was the professor, ironically.  And that was--they would--but I loved that because that's ultimately, yeah.  But I remember I would say things like, you know, someone would talk about the sun or something, and I'd go, "Well, you know it's just a big nuclear explosion."  And someone would go, "Oh, don't be ridiculous," right?  Because why--how's it been exploding for so long?  And I didn't have an explanation.  But I mean, essentially it was right, but I just--I didn't--you know, so it's things like that.  So it was a little bit frustrating.  And there were some kids were interested, but there was no real partner in crime until later on.
Story_ID: 31100
Speaker 1: There was a family that came from Hawaii.  They were American, they lived in Hawaii for a while, and then they came, I think through connections with the church.  I think the father, Maurie Ebi (ph.), was a deacon in the church.  And so they came as a sort of posting to the local church, our church.  And this was Maurie and Barbara Ebi (ph.) and their two sons, Philip and Sean (ph.).  And Philip was my age, and, so, you know, I took to him immediately; probably for two reasons.  I think initially because he was kind of an outsider, and I tend to warm towards outsiders and the underdog and what have you.  And I was kind of an outsider in a way, but he was more overtly an outsider.  He was a little white kid in a school on an island that was predominantly people of African descent.  So, you know, people were a little bit suspicious and, you know, give him a hard time and what have you.  But our family was always the, you know, especially my brother [Robert Johnson] and sister [Carol] and I when we were younger, we known for befriending the tourists, you know.  And a lot of people probably thought we were odd--those odd English children who would kind of hang out with the white people and what have you, so those--
Speaker 2: What was this about--there was a distinction made about too (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah..
Speaker 2: --that you were English--?
Speaker 1: And it remains to this day, you will hear--it's still you have, you know, people kind of giving people from elsewhere a hard time.  Not necessarily in a bad way, it can go both ways.  But the phrase then was that we had "snow on the brain."  "Snow in our brains."  (unclear)  We talked different and things like that.  So that was kind of interesting.
Speaker 2: Did they consider you more--did they consider your pattern of speech more proper, you know?
Speaker 1: I don't know about proper.  I just think that--
Speaker 2: That the word is often used (unclear) like southern--a speech that's more like white Americans (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I think older people might have thought that, but our contemporaries probably just thought we were talking in a funny way, and we were just different.  And--but it meant that we had a foot in both camps, you know.  We were descended from the people there, and we were from there in that sense, but we also had an appreciation for the other, you know, other people, people from outside, what have you.  So we did make lots of friends with (unclear)
Speaker 2: (unclear) was there an island Patois [non-standard language] or (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--and my brother and sister can probably speak a little bit of that.  I mean, it's English, but heavily accented and with certain turns of phrase. And I can hear it, I can speak it, listen it, and understand it, but I cannot convincingly with a straight face pull it off.  But my brother probably could, and of course, my parents [Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] could.  And from my mother's [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] line, and there's actually a Creole-French that she used to be able to speak when she was younger.
Story_ID: 31101
Speaker 1: But coming back to the school thing; so this kid came to school, Philip, and he--
Speaker 2: What was the name of your school?  I just want to (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, it was just called Montserrat Secondary School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's another interesting issue, because there were two schools.  That was the big school you went to if you passed the right entrance exam and stuff like that.  And that was--the primary school, you went to that at eleven.  The school before that, the primary school that I went to was called Saint Augustines, and that was a Catholic School with a, you know, associated to the church, etcetera.
Speaker 2: So that was the primary school, Saint Augustine?
Speaker 1: That was the primary school, Saint Augustines.  Yeah.  So this was when I was at Montserrat Secondary School, so I would have been eleven; maybe twelve, I'm not sure which year I was there when he [Phillip] arrived.  And he came with--he clearly had a lot of interesting--a lot of interest as well.  So in some sense we pushed each other along because that was around the time when I sort new a lot of my electrical stuff and getting into that.  But then I think we would consume those magazines together.  In fact, I think he may have discovered them before I did in the library.  And then we were partners--we'd spend a lot of time talking about electronics and stuff.  And he at the time knew more about computers than I did.  Probably still does actually, I think.  He probably went on to be a consultant in the computing area.
Speaker 2: Now, what does that mean in those days?  And would they (unclear) we're talking about the mainframe computers there (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No.  In those days there were--so what did he have.  He actually came with something--
Speaker 2: Maybe '78 [1978] or so--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: '78 [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that would have been '79 (1979), '80 (1980), there would have been these, I think--I can't remember what it was, but there was a computer of some kind, which was, you know, the beginnings of what we would now call a P.C., but they were incredibly underpowered, little machines with the keyboard and the green screen and what have you.  And I think he had one of those, and so, I got exposed to programming maybe, early on.  But he was doing most of that.  I was mostly interested in building things.  He was more into the programming, etcetera.  And so, I later on got more interested in computers and then used my electronics to learn about computers, and build a computer which I was interested in learning--as an excuse to learn more about digital electronics, which was--but that was many years later after I returned to the U.K. [United Kingdom].  But, yeah.  So the family--so then I spent a lot of time with the family because they lived closer to school.  So after school, typically, I might go and play at Philip's house for a while, and occasionally I would see television there.  We didn't have a television of our own because by then, as I mentioned, we were probably, although as a kid you don't notice, but at the time I think we were probably struggling quite a bit in terms of putting food on the table.
Story_ID: 31102
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit.  Now, you said your father [Victor Reginald Johnson] disappeared?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened and how were you?  You were about ten, you say
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I would have been more like eight.
Speaker 1: Eight?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So we all still are not entirely sure what happened in detail.  But the facts are that my father, something happened as far as I understand it.  Something happened to do with work or something that happened at work.  I don't know whether there was some reason he had to go to the U.K. [United Kingdom] or something, but anyway, all I remember is that he went to the U.K. and did not return.  I think he was writing, you know, letters from time to time, presumably phone calls.  But then he disappeared.  And some years later then my sister [Carol Johnson] eventually got together the money that was--she actually had some health issues.  She was beginning to be highly allergic to lots of things on the island.  I think she had a series--strong allergies, and so, in an island with lots of flowers and things, it was not so great, so she had a lot of seasonal problems.  And so, that meant she actually was able to get help from a family friend, and I think also from someone connected to the government to get essentially, I think, if not a grant, at least a gift to help essentially a plane ticket to go to the U.K.  And so, she actually went to find my father ultimately and found him.  But there was this period where he just disappeared.  And so, my sister went back eventually, and my brother [Robert Johnson] went back later on to London to actually find my father, and eventually moved in with him and what have you.  But yeah, there was this long period where--it was just my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] and my brother trying to support us.  My mom was doing housekeeping of various kinds.  This is what she's always done, but she was, you know, she'd taken on extra work now to get more money.  Sometimes I would go and help her on her cleaning jobs and things like that.  And my brother--
Speaker 1: (unclear) awful baffling for you--the children to--your father just leaves you and doesn't come back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.  But my perspective was a little different as someone who is very young essentially living in, you know, paradise, as it were.  As a kid you're just playing really.  And so, I think it affected my brother and sister more than it did me.
Speaker 1: Well, you were younger, but did you have much of a relationship with your father before he left?
Speaker 2: I don't--actually don't have many strong memories of spending that much time with him except--what would happen is that, I remember we would--we would all go to town to school presumably--I think maybe we went in his car.  That would make sense.  But what I do remember, and I still have fond memories of that, is that at lunchtime we would go to his office.  And, you know, he'd make sandwiches and what have you, we'd be sitting there having lunch together at his place of work, at the Montserrat Telephones or whatever it was called.  That I do remember.  And those are actually some of my strongest memories of him.  And then, you know, I would see him, you know, overseeing what was going on with the building of the house from time to time, things like that.  And maybe also with, you know, on Saturdays maybe when we're all doing stuff like making bread.  I think there was a time when we were planting and moving animals and things like that where he'd be there.  But not necessarily--not really a whole lot more than that.  I mean, that was a lot, but I don't really have a strong--I spent much more time with my mother.  And, of course, later on out of necessity because that's--who was around.  After my brother and sister went back to the U.K.  I was--it was me and my mom.  And it feels like we spent a long time together, me and my mom.  After a long period, I now realize it was actually less than a year, but it felt like it was years (laughter).  I mean in a good way, because, you know, sense of time as a kid was--apparently it wasn't very long after my brother went back that eventually--maybe it was about a year--eventually we then were able to put together the money, and I'm not sure what other sources, maybe my brother helped, I'm sure, so that my brother and I--so that my mother and I then went back as well (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, did your father when he went back, did he continue to work for the phone company?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as I know, the only thing I know he was doing back in those years was driving taxis.  So I have my own theory as to what happened.  I feel that there was some situation occurred.  Maybe he had a major disagreement or something at work or something like that, and I think somehow things went wrong; he either resigned or something like that.  I don't know any of this factually.  I just have this suspicion.  He could be quite strong headed.  And he maybe resigned over some issue or something, and then went back to the U.K. maybe to find work or what have you.  I'm not sure.  But then, of course, things like the mortgage on the house and things like that fell by the wayside and things like that.  So I think what happened is that he probably had something like a nervous breakdown, I think, and just disappeared.  I think he just couldn't handle it, and he kind of stepped away for a while.  That's my suspicion.
Story_ID: 31103
Speaker 1: So when you and your mother [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] went back to Britain, did--was the family reunited, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  We never all lived together again.  But what actually happened was that--so we had some friends who we got to know, you know, back when we were in the Caribbean, who lived in Preston in Lancashire; that's north of England, about 250 miles north of London on the west side of England.  And so, they lived--so when my sister [Carol Johnson] went back, she actually went to stay with them for a while just as a place to stay, kind of get her bearings as it were.  So when we, my mother and I went back a year or two years or however long it was later, we went to Preston [England], not London.  So we were in Preston and that's where I, you know, finished school and things like that; high school I mean.  My brother [Robert Johnson] was in London [England] and my father [Victor Reginald Johnson] was now staying with my brother in the flat my brother had.  And then later on my father actually up to Preston [England], and he got a flat, an apartment of his own nearby, and eventually that fell by the wayside, and so, he eventually moved back in with my mother and, because by then we had a little house.  It was a government subsidized rental accommodations, these flats I'm referring to.  In the old days they were called council flats, and it's just part how the welfare system works in the U.K. [United Kingdom].  And so--so we somewhat ended up all in the same house.  But my brother and sister were now older and leading independent lives.  My sister moved to London to work; my brother was down there working, things like that.
Story_ID: 31104
Speaker 1: Question about that.  Now, you came back basically on--after, like, the urban upheaval in Britain where there's a big riot in Brixton [London, England, 1981] and five thousand people faced the police and it was on all international news, and people were shocked.  First of all, a lot people didn't know there were black people in Britain.
Speaker 2: (laugher).
Speaker 1: And then-especially over here, you don't really focus on them.  I mean, some people do if you're into political--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --stuff, and Pan Africanism, you might know that, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, a lot of people, the average black person here didn't even know--
Speaker 2: No, I've heard that.
Speaker 1: --(unclear). (laugher)
Speaker 2: When I came to the U.S. [United States] in the '90s [1990s], I was in New Jersey at Princeton, and I would get talking with some of the people there.  Oh, there was this great guy who was driving the institute bus, for example.  We'd talk and at some point he confessed to me, he didn't know there were black people in Britain.  You know, he still had, you know, umbrellas and Bowler hats sort of image of what England was like.  And, indeed, then I think I went to a wedding or something with his family just to, you know, meet sort of, you know, real people in Trenton, New Jersey, and, yeah.  It was--I had a lot of interesting conversations of that nature; people--black people here not really being aware of their, if you like, their cousins in Europe or in England.
Speaker 1: Right.  Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you were going to ask another question.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was just along that vein, just how did you--did you--when you--you don't remember much from when you were there before, but it appears now this--the experiment of bringing lots of black of people to Britain to do work and stuff is starting to turn south at some level.  And, now--
Speaker 2: At that time maybe.  But it was always going to be--I think these kinds of upheavals perhaps have to happen eventually at some point in order for things to really change and wipe the slate clean.  And you know that was the '80s [1980s].  I forget what year the Brixton riots [London, England, 1981] happened, and I guess I came back at fourteen, so that would have been--yeah.
Speaker 1: That may be four years before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I'm thinking '82 [1982], '83 [1983]; I'm not sure when.
Speaker 1: (unclear) they're saying the early '80s' (1980s) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was enough of--I mean it was close to that time.  I forget exactly when.  Either way, I would have been a little--I would have been a little young to be sort of fully politically aware of it.  But certainly I was made aware of it by the fact that I was a black kid in what was still fiercely--especially in the north of England--fiercely--what's the word I'm looking for?   Well--a lot of people who have very strong opinions about the role of people like myself.  At a time when the country was trying to figure out this multicultural experiment that had (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So this is--you all lived in--did you live in--where did you live when you moved back (unclear) the north of England?
Speaker 2: So yes.  So my mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] and I and for a while my sister [Carol Johnson], were--we're in the north of England--
Speaker 1: What do you call that area?  What's the name of that area?
Speaker 2: Preston.
Speaker 1: Preston okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so this was--so this was not, you know, this was not London [England] which had, you know, had a very long history relatively speaking of a large immigrant population from the Caribbean.  And Preston [England] and some of the towns like that did also have that history to some extent because of certain factories and aspects of the aerospace industry, I think, that did have the number of people of African descent very on.  But still it was--it was still very much a venomous attitude as there was in London.  People will tell you many stories of--especially when were young there in the '50s' [1950s], of, you know, the old standard thing of there being, you know, rooms to let or jobs but--not to blacks or Irish people or, you know, there were various groups that were not so welcomed.
Speaker 1: So this attitude was prevalent or was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was about?
Speaker 2: So that was very strong in the '50s [1950s], in the '60s [1960s]; I can't really speak for the '70s [1970s] because I wasn't there in the '70s', but when I was there in the '80s [1980s], yeah, you know, you'd have a hard time at school, you know, with certain kinds of kids would give you a hard time.  The National Front Movement and the skinheads were kind of prevalent at the time, and a lot of kids would--it was becoming cool in a way, right?  Because it was becoming associated with certain movements, certain ways of dressing; you know, ironically, and wearing Doctor Marten boots, which at the time was a symbol that the skinheads used to use.  They'd have the shaved heads and skinny jeans and Doctor Marten Boots with the holes all the way up to their calves and, you know, that was for kicking in the heads of the Irish, and the Pakistanis, and people of African descent whether they'd be from Africa or the Caribbean, etcetera.  And so, it was all that.  Ironically, I'm wearing those boots now because they are kind of nice.  But--yeah.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: You don't have to kick any heads in.
Speaker 2: No, I don't have to kick any heads in.
Story_ID: 31105
Speaker 1: but--so at school that was a very interesting time for me.  It should have been a terrible time, but it wasn't for many reasons.  And it was partly because I came back.  Like I said, when I was down on the island [Montserrat, Leeward Islands, British overseas territory], I'd gotten to the point where I sort of in some sense used up the library I had.  I was thirsting for more.  I was looking in these magazines and learning more electronics but, you know, as an article.  So you had the sense that, You know if I lived in America or in England or what have you, I could get these components, and I could get this and that.  So it was that, and I could get more knowledge.  I think at some point I was sort of bursting to expand more, but I was confined.  So I loved it there, but I think I just got to the stage where I was beginning to be aware of this other world that would give me more of this stuff I wanted.  And then we did indeed eventually go back.  My mom [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] and I went back; we were last of the family.  So the dream kind of shattered when we went back.  But for me, that was great, because I was just--so in the U.K. [United Kingdom], at age fifteen and sixteen, you'd--of the two years at school where you do what are called the "O-levels" that you like; well, they're not called that any more.  But at the time it was the school-leaving qualification that you would then use to either get a job or go to the next level of education, higher education.  So I arrived there at fourteen, just enough time to get attached to the school and choose the subjects that I was going to do, you know, at the beginning of those, you know, for those last years.  So for me it was just fantastic.  We arrived; we were led to the principal's office.  There was--I still remember this amazing conversation where we sat down with these--you know, in these chairs with whoever it was, the principal or what have you.  We said, "So--," looking at my mom and me and saying, "So you'd like--your son is interested in joining this school?"  And he was talking to us as though I was the father and my mom was the mom.  And for some reason he was unable to read that I was a kid.  I still find this bizarre.  But anyway, it was all corrected and, you know, he was--
Speaker 2: Do you have a young looking mother?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I just think, again, I think there was kind of a cultural thing.  It was very much, you know, yeah.  I don't want to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's not clear.  But it was--if you look at pictures at the time, I don't think it was easy (laughter).  I could have been confused.  But he clearly thought--but anyway--but what they did basically at the time, so you get assigned to the school by geography or what have you and also, you know, we were Catholic, and so, it was good it's a Catholic school.  And my mom must have chosen that.  And then they basically gave me, because there was no father I guess, and Mom just assumed--I guess she knows me enough to know that she should just give it to me.  It was basically the timetable of subjects and the different subjects you can pick, and all I had to do was just pick them, and this was great.
Speaker 2: So this was a role that your father should have (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (unclear)  You got to (unclear) and chose your own (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So basically, I saw mathematics; yep, I'll have some of that.  Physics; oh, yeah.  Chemistry; biology--so I basically ticked, all of these things, as long as they didn't clash on my calendar I could tick those subjects.  And so I ticked--and so, I just ticked the subjects and then just had a ball for two years essentially.  And I think it was--it is an amazing time for me because, you know, I was ready to go; whereas, I think the kids who'd been in that school for the last however many years, was kind of, you know, getting jaded and what have you.  But for me it was, yes.  So it was the perfect time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We have to pause again.
Story_ID: 31106
Speaker 1: So, I just want to go back for a minute and ask you about the school system in Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory].  Was it a good--
Speaker 2: It was a good school; it was a good education.  The school system was kind of interesting in that it was a small island with--so there were a number of primary schools, a lot of which were associated with, you know, one church or another, I guess.  And then the entire island of kids at the right age, I guess it would be ten, would take an entrance exam, and you would--it's a big deal.  you take the exam, and then what would happen is that there would just--they would publish--it was a big thing in the newspaper basically, the entire ranked list of how people did in the exam, and then the school--the second --Montserrat Secondary School would take a certain number that year.  And so, I remember--actually the first year I actually didn't get in.  I think I, if I remember correctly, I took the entrance exam and I came forty-ninth in the whole island.  And they took forty-eight that year, or something like that.  And so, that year it was pretty harsh (laugher).  And so, you either take it again if you were of the age where you could still go back or you would go to what was called the Junior Secondary School, which was kind of a secondary school, but it kind of--it was just kind of looked down on as not quite the, you know--
Speaker 1: More like a vocational school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think that was the--I think it was a little bit of, yes, it was more of a vocation--I mean, ultimately, it was all in the large a vocational, but I think it was--that was sort of more, you know, yeah, more of a vocational.  This is very, you know, remnants of classism that you get in education anyway to some extent.  I would guess--I guess I was young enough to retake, so I went though that last year again.
Speaker 1: Were you considered one of the better students?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't I was, and I think there were a number of reasons for that.  I think I was mostly--well, let me take a step back.  There were a couple of things that I think changed things a lot, maybe one really big thing; and that was glasses, believe it or not.  I assumed everyone saw the same things I did.  Why would you question that, right?  And so, but I was terribly short-sighted already, I just didn't know that.  So what would happen is, I would spend a lot of time--you know, a lot of stuff was teacher writes stuff on the board; you all write it down; you know, you answer questions, what have you.  And so, I do remember that I, you know, the really keen kids sat at the front, so I didn't do that; I was somewhere, you know, towards the middle or the back; but it meant that I would have to be sort of, you know, helping, copying what people were writing down because I couldn't quite see.  But I think what I used to do a lot of was committing to memory everything that had been written on the board so far as you do.  And then, if you're called on to ask something, you kind of do it from memory.  But occasionally, I would misremember, and so, I'd get the answers spectacularly wrong.  So I think some of the teachers probably thought I was an idiot or something.  I don't know.  Maybe not.  But, clearly there was something going on.  I didn't--I just thought everyone was in the same boat.  But then the Canadians were doing developmental aid or something.  They were going around the Caribbean; they put money into sending out optometrists to, you know, they'd come to the school and they would--well, they come to the island and you were just told that you had to go get your eyes measured, and so everyone went.  And then, I guess they saw that I needed glasses, and then some months later a box arrived, I opened it and put these things on and the world changed; the entire universe changed.  Everything looked different, I could read the board, things like that.  And I think it happened around that time and that made a huge difference.  I remember things like I used to walk--when I used to walk home at night I used to look at the stars.  I loved looking at the stars, but I always used to play this game.  The stars were not little points of lights for me, they were disks because they're slightly blurred by the fact that I was shortsighted.  But I thought everyone saw like that.  And I used, if you sort squint a little bit, you could put lines on the disks, just a line of tear fluid on your eyes.  So I used to do games like that.  And I remember all of that went away when I got my glasses, and everything was sharp and amazing.  And I could be wrong about this, but I think that then meant that it also changed what I was doing in school somewhat.  But going back to the whole entrance exam thing; what happened is that I sat at it the next year and I came third.  And so, unless they were taking two people that year, I think I was set, and then I went to the secondary school.  That was sort of an earlier example of what stays with me now, which is that I kind of have that, Okay, they didn't want to take me last year, I'll show them, kind of thing.  So I think I did that extra push to make sure that it was beyond doubt that I was going to get in.  And so, then I went to the secondary school which was very good.  And so, you know, you did, you know, the usual subjects you do at age eleven and what have you.  And in the end, I had some-- I remember fun things we did in art  class and chemistry class.  It was just mostly just messing around.  You know, art class was mostly there's a room, it's full of paints, have fun for a couple of hours; that kind of thing (laughter).  And chemistry was a lot of, you know, burning things and blowing things up and what have you, and that was fun.  And I'm not sure what we did in physics.  And then there was Spanish, and French, and English, and things like that.  It was all fun-- Geography, lots of geography, lots of Aztecs and Mayans and what have you.  Lot of good, I guess, regionally appropriate--regionally Caribs and Arawaks; lots of regionally appropriate geography was taught, which was good.  It's a good system.  It was inherited--it had the structure of the British school system, being a British colony.  And--yeah.  But it-- you know, I was getting more and more thirsty in my hobbies for other stuff, so moving to the U.K. [United Kingdom] when I did at fourteen was almost the perfect--if I'd gone any later, I would have had as much time to prepare for the "O-Levels."  If I had gone any earlier, then maybe I would have just been another kid sort of jaded with school, and what have you.  So I arrived at exactly the right time and just ate everything up when I went to the school in the U.K.
Story_ID: 31107
Speaker 1: Now, who were--were any particular teachers or people that served as mentors in terms of, I guess--because you do a lot of things.  Now, I--were you playing the trumpet then?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no, no.  No.  I--
Speaker 1: I know you draw, you painted a few things (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I guess in those days I used to read comics a lot, and a lot of my drawing maybe was related to being interested in the art that was in comics.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite comic books?
Speaker 2: So, in those days, most of the comics we got were the usual sort of Marvel [Marvel Comics] or D.C. [D.C. Comics] type, you know the American comics with mostly sort of superhero stuff.  And so, you call--
Speaker 1: You had a favorite of that group?
Speaker 2: --it various titles.  Oh, that was in--it changed because, you know, Marvel and D.C. were, you know, were, you know, would change things.  I think for a long time I used to be more interested in a lot of the D.C. characters; you know, Superman and Batman, and things like that.  And at the time, I think a lot of the Marvel stuff was--it was just characters with big muscles fighting monsters.  That's how it seemed to me.  So there was a lot of, you know, The Hulk is fighting some thing or some big, you know, thing with tentacles, and what have you.  That didn't interest me so much as the (unclear)--so, you know, there were things like, you know, Batman, Green Lantern, and the Legion of Superheroes and things like that; and the Teen Titans, and all those things were kind of interesting.  And then later on, I think, then Marvel changed and got more interesting.  That's when they started all of the mutant stuff, the 'X-Men' and stuff like that, and the stories were very interesting.  The characters were interesting.  And then the D.C. characters seemed one dimensional in comparison.  And then--you know, this was all before some of the, you know, the real explosion in the graphic novel world happened.  But I now realize in retrospect that some of my favorites were the precursors of that; probably my most favorite character was in later years was a character called Daredevil, and I most loved that stuff during the Frank Miller [American comic book artist] period.  He took over that character and made it wonderful.  And he was essentially practicing all of the elements, both in writing and with his artistic collaborators that would later on become the 'Dark Knight' stuff.  He'd use it on the Batman stuff, and the whole revolution in the comic book world, from the superhero side with graphic novels and it maturing with things like the 'Dark Knight' and the 'Watchman,' and things like that.  But--and Frank Miller was responsible for the Dark Knight.  But a lot of that stuff he had all ready sort of begun to do in essence with the Daredevil character I used to follow.  And so, it was kind of interesting.  But, yeah, it was an interesting time.  So, yes.
Story_ID: 31108
Speaker 1: I don't know if this is worth saying, but it seems as though a lot of the comic book characters in the superhero mode have--are scientists.
Speaker 2: I was going to get to that.  That's a very interesting point.  And I think it has not--it has not escaped my notice that there were a lot of scientist types or there was certainly not a lot of--there wasn't hesitation in the writing to talk about science or science topics, even if it, you know, in retrospect, wasn't always very good.  It was definitely it was upfront.  And a lot of those characters were either scientists who'd, you know, something had gone wrong, right, in the lab (laughter) or what have you.  And that resonated with me, you know.  I had my lab which was either at, you know, sometimes it was a tree house, and other times it was this little thing under the stairs where I'd keep all my little bottles of powders that I thought were really exciting; chemicals but was, you know, probably no more exciting than baking soda, and maybe some sulfur crystals; that was really exotic, (unclear) stuff like that.  And, you know, pressing interesting leaves between pieces of paper; that was my lab.  So the whole secret hideout thing, all that was in the comics as well.  I don't know which came first; whether I was in to that and then the comics fit with that, or whether it came out of the comics, I'm not sure.  But either way, yes.  Definitely the comic genre had a lot of scientists.  I mean even Peter Parker--
Speaker 1: He's a scientist.
Speaker 2: --he, you know, he was a kid into science.  His mentor, Curt Connors was, I guess, a biologist.  I guess in these days, we call him a geneticist.  And he was trying--he had lost his arm, and so, he was trying to learn how to regenerate his arm from amphibians.  And so, that's how he became The Lizard, who is the big nemesis of Spiderman, and lots of stuff like that.  Yeah.  When I said Marvel [Marvel Comics], lots of monsters, Spiderman was an exception.   Everybody loves Spiderman.  Spiderman was always good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Professor X, he's a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Professor X.  When the mutants came along, Professor X was a (unclear)--well, he was called Professor X; it wasn't clear exactly what science he did, so he wasn't actually that interesting to me.  I was more interested in him because I was very interested in the mind at the time I was beginning to read about telepathy and meditation and things like that; and began to work (unclear).  So it was more--he wasn't interesting because he was called Professor X or he was--because he didn't really, you know, as I remember there was no sort of lab where he was doing stuff.  If anything, Magneto was the technical one, but he was on the bad side of things.  But anyway, I could go on about comics a lot.  And I shouldn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: (unclear)  That's a lot.  I just wanted to know the things that influenced you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were very important.  But the comic books do in a--you know--the muscle side is one side, but the other side is scientists.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was--and in many cases it was a lot of mind over matter, right.  Reed Richards, another one, Fantastic Four.  Right.  (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Bruce Banner was a scientist, yeah.  Actually, so what--later on I began to create characters of my own.  I had these long stories--I wish I could remember them--in my head basically.  I had various characters that I would create, and they would have these, you know, challenges and what have you.  And maybe I should have, you know, been a writer and written all that stuff down, but, you know, they were just characters of mine.  But the characters I most loved were not the ones who necessarily--and this became--this was later on--they were not the ones who necessarily had all kinds of fantastic powers.  The ones that were most interesting to me were the ones who mostly were sort of ordinary human beings, who would then build stuff, because, you know, that sort of fit, I guess, with what I loved doing as well.  So Batman was interesting because, you know, he was putting together lots of equipment, etcetera.  And so characters--and so the characters that I made up were often not just people with amazing superpowers, but people who used, I guess what we now call technology, to enhance themselves to do these extraordinary things as it were.  It was kind of interesting.
Story_ID: 31109
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I was asking you--about--I was asking you about--
Speaker 2: Mentors--
Speaker 1: --mentors.
Speaker 2: --yes, yes.  That's a really good question.  I don't think--I don't think that I've had through that period especially anyone who I would point to and say was a mentor in any sort of overt sense.  I think what people did at the time for me was they recognized, and often perhaps against the prevailing judgment, they recognized something in me, and then either stood out of my way in order to let me explore it or just sort of made sure that I was able to get access to things.  So basically I had lot--I think there were lots of teachers--what they did originally in that school I went to in Preston [England] and when I went back to the U.K. [United Kingdom], I think there were a number of people who assumed that I should go into--there were essentially two streams in the school; the sort of the "A stream" and the "B stream," if you like.  And in a number of cases, I was put into the "B stream" by assumption.  Now, it might be that they had certain, you know, unhealthy views about what I was capable of, given the color of my skin, but it may also be that they decided I was from a different culture, and different school, and maybe I shouldn't be thrown in at the deep end.  I'm not sure why they did that, but there were a number of cases where I was in the "B" group as opposed to the "A" group.  And within the few months of being at the school, I think it became clear to a number of the teachers that I was actually doing really well, and I was much more capable than perhaps they had assumed.  And a lot of those teachers then, I think revised maybe what they had to their credit, the original view they had of me.  And then they just stayed out of my way.  I mean--I don't mean that in an arrogant way.  I just think they just allowed things to be possible.  So if I wanted to do, you know, more--if I wanted to spend more time doing technical drawing, for example, which I loved--there was just this class where basically you were learning what would be, I guess now called engineering drawing; it was, you know, lots of T-squares, and set squares, and compasses and things; drawing bits of machinery that you didn't know what it was, but that was the assignment.  That class was mostly just us sitting, drawing.  And I loved it.  And so, the teacher would just let me do as much of it as I wanted; after hours if I wanted to.  Same thing happened in mathematics.  The first day of school--the first day of class for mathematics, the teacher started with a test.  And I remember being so embarrassed because I had no idea what most of the terms meant; I hadn't done that kind of mathematics at that level, and I didn't have a clue and I scored terribly.  And I think everyone was expecting me to.  And so, that would have been in--whenever school started, September, what have you.  And I just remember being given the textbook, and then I could take it home, and I loved it.  And I, you know, I just sort of ate it up.  I really, really loved it.  And so, basically, I'd read the chapter on my own, introducing the technique and then I would just do all the problems, and then I'd bring them, give them to the teacher and he'd grade them and, "So fine, you made a little mistake there," what have you.  And so, there was a group of us in the class who, essentially, we were allowed just to go through the textbook at our own pace.  And so by the end of that fall, you know, the end of that first term, we'd finished the textbook, which was supposed to be the textbook for the two years; we'd finished it.  And so, then we, you know, we'd done all of the problems, and what have you.  And so, again, I think, in other--I've heard of other situations where, you know, you've had a kid comes from school, there may be assumptions about race, and what have you, which become barriers because the teachers have preconceived notions, and they kind of stand in the way of the kids.  And to their credit, I think all of those teachers, if they did have preconceived notions initially, and I think there was some of that because I felt it, they very rapidly just held the door open and just let me go wherever I wanted to.  So I did a number of subjects early, did the final exam for the subjects early to allow me to do other things and things like that, because they recognize that I could do that.  And I think a lot of it was just, I just loved school; I just loved it.  And I had access to all this stuff I hadn't had access to before at just the time when I needed it.  I don't think I was a particularly special kid with special talents or anything, and I still think that.  I just think I was enthusiastic and the time was right.
Story_ID: 31110
Speaker 1: I have a question.  This is--I have a note here.  Now, I'm not consciously aware of this, but I have a note here that in 1984 when you were sixteen, the first superstring revolution occurs.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  (unclear)
Speaker 1: (unclear) superstring theory (unclear), you're talking about hereotic (ph.) string, you know, then in '84 [1984] Sylvester James Gates, along with M. T. Grisaru, M. Rocek [Martin Rocek], W. Siegel [Warren Siegel]--
Speaker 2: Ah right, the super symmetry book ['Superspace'].
Speaker 1: --a supersymmetry book, co-authored (unclear) 'Superspace,' about supersymmetry, was published.  Did you know about that at that time (unclear)?
Speaker 2: At that time, no.  No, no, no.  No.  I became aware of it not too long after, but then I would have--I would have been--yeah.  It would have been some--it would have been late '80s [1980s] when I got aware of that--but at that time I was--at that time I was in school and, you know, I was learning calculus and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's still very early on.  I remember--I just remember calculus was this amazing thing.  I just thought it was just incredible, and I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, perhaps--well, can you explain to the layman, which is me (laughter), what superstring--the superstring revolution was about?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So, well--so this is something I learned later on, you know, after high school and what in England is called "Sixth Form College," where you spend another two years, seventeen and eighteen, doing what are called "A-levels" in preparation for university, perhaps.  Then I began to--you know, by then I was interested in physics in a really big way.  I mean, I'd always been interested since eight or nine, but time with the dictionary; but now I was really to see now, what am I--what am I going--what universities am I going to apply to, and things like that.  So that's when I was beginning to read about things in particle physics, which was interesting to me.  And I think maybe around that time I was beginning to learn about what was going on in--there's this thing called "string theory."  And string theory, as I learned in later years, (unclear) much, you know, I learned much better, was and remains an attempt to try and understand the things we observe in nature in terms of what's it made of and where it all comes from.  It's an attempt to understand that at a deeper level.  So a large amount of the twentieth century was a huge triumph in physics, in that you had tremendous advances made about what everything is made of.  So, you know, the atom was understood, the laws that govern very small quantum mechanics was understood, the laws that understand--the laws that govern the fabric of space and time, relativity; both special in general, were all began to put together in the early part of the twentieth century.  And out of all that came out modern  particle physics eventually; the idea that of all these subatomic particles are made of even smaller particles, and then they fit together with certain rules using certain kinds of forces; the four fundamental forces, and things like that, and the universe seems to be made up of all these things.  So it's a great quest, and that really turned me on when I was very young.  And that's what I wanted to study and eventually did; do my Ph.D., and those sorts of things.
Story_ID: 31111
Speaker 1: String theory came along in the '80s [1980s] as a rebirth of an earlier version of string theory that actually was around in the late-'60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s], but didn't make it to the press.  And it was an attempt to understand certain things that didn't quite fit and still don't fit.  So if you go to any physics department in America, maybe in lots of places in Europe as well, you'll see a poster which, I think, maybe the NSF [National Science Foundation] or the DOE [Department of Energy] put out perhaps, and it's called--and it just has this--it's the standard model particle physics.  And it tells you all the different particles we know and how they fit together; what their masses and charges are, and the different forces they interact by.  It's like the sum of knowledge of everything we've done with all of these experiments over the decades and the twentieth century.  So electrons, and positrons, and protons and neutrons, and quarks are different kinds and things like that; photons and what have you.  And if you look at that thing, it's a wonderful achievement, but what the standard model can't explain is why it is the way it is.  So, there're all kinds of patterns in those particles they've--sort of family groupings, if you like, and we actually use that term--which work the way they work, tightly and beautifully.  But we don't know why they're that way and not some other way.  It's actually a family of particles, so the electron that we use in electronics, what I call the up-and-down quarks which go together to make protons and neutrons, that made nuclei, and then you put electrons in there and you have atoms, and that's all of chemistry.  So all the ordinary stuff around us in this room are made from that family of particles.  There's also a cousin particle also called the neutrino, which goes with that, which is important in aspects of nuclear physics, radioactive decay and things like that.  So, that's a family.  And what we don't know is why there are other families.  There's another family that looks just like that one, for example; exactly the same players, but slightly heavier.  And we can create those in experiments, but ordinary stuff isn't made of those so much.  But it exists and it's like an echo of the original one.  And there's a third one just like that as well, even heavier.  So it's like a cousin of the electron, a cousin of the up-and-down quarks and what have you.  I'm tell you this because it's important to appreciate that we understand how these things work and how they interact with each other mostly; but we don't understand why there these repetitions and other kinds of patterns that I could tell you about.  And as a scientist, especially as physicist, if you see a pattern, you want to know why that pattern came about.  Is there something underlying that pattern?  It's the same thing that goes on in biology, right?  If you go all around the planet, you find people and they kind of all look the same, right?  They have the structures, features in all the same place.  And you can just go, That's a wonderful accident.  That's just the way life is.  Or you could go, There's something that controls that and means that when we develop, we still follow the same, morphological paths, to make us all look like human beings, right?  Now we understand what it is; it's DNA, etcetera.  So if you like what's the DNA of the standard model, what is the code, what is the deeper level that's telling you why the certain structures.  And the tools that have been developed called field theory, as it were, quantum field theories which came out of quantum mechanics and relativity and things like that, don't do the job, and don't look they're adequate to do the job.  So that's the long, long background story.  String theory is one of the attempts to try and find a new set of tools to explain some of those things, or at least to describe them, describe the origins of those kinds of things, which in science we call an explanation.  But explanation is all always just a deeper description in terms of simpler things.  So that's the quest.  So the first superstring revolution was the realization by various workers in the field, who I've come to know; you know, I didn't know those people at the time, but I've come to know them now.  But it was a major calculation that Michael Green and John Schwarz did in the early '80s [1980s] to show that problems that the string theories had sort of for their internal mathematical and physical consistency could be removed.  They weren't problems if you worked with them the right way.  And so they suddenly found these theories were consistent.  And then, basically, the five superstring theories that people know and love these days, were born fully understood within a few years of that revolution.  And people got very excited because the key thing that string theory did that nobody was able to do before was to show you how to put gravity, [Albert] Einstein's gravity and quantum mechanics together.  And those two theories had always been kind of in contradiction with each other.  And string theory remains the best understood theory of quantum gravity, how gravity can be described quantum mechanically, that's out there.  Now, I should say having said that, it's a theory of quantum gravity; we don't know if it's the one that nature cares about.  So it's still to be developed.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We got to have a little break here.
Story_ID: 31112
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the last year of secondary school?  I guess you--now, did you--now in Britain, do they have like the same kind of frivolity as we do here in high school (laugher)?  Clubs and such and, you know?
Speaker 2: You know, it's very different.  I mean, I imagine--and again, I have to say that was the '80s [1980s].  I'm not speaking for Britain now on what goes on in schools and what have you.  But my own, you know, looking at some of the classic movies depicting high school at that time in America, comparing it to my high school at the time in the U.K. [United Kingdom], I have to say that--I mean, there were similarities there's, you know, anxieties and what have you, but it seems like a whole other level of craziness and concern.  I'm amazed that anyone got any schoolwork done in (laughter) these high schools thus depicted.  For me, I was still a kid who spent a lot of time on his own reading, what have you, so maybe I was still, maybe relatively unusual.  But that was not a weird thing to do; lots of kids spend a lot of time on their own reading and, you know, you weren't--there wasn't all of this business of the division between the nerds and the jocks or what have you.  All of this tribal stuff that seems to go on here and, you know, that be the main tropes (ph.) of high school in the U.S. [United States], even then.  It seems a lot--I mean there was a little bit of that--you know, there is a little bit tribal stuff, but it didn't seem to be almost the point of school (laughter).  It was there in the playground, you know, you're playing and, you know, you're in class and, you know, that person over there is from that other group and you might want to--something happened, you might want to go a different way home from school that day.  But it wasn't this major--there weren't these major rifts that there were--there were divisions based on--division is a bit strong.  There were certainly groupings that were based on people's similar, sort of, perceived class, you know.  This is a working class northern town I was in, so in the larger scheme of things in the U.K. everyone was in the same class.  But still, you know, the kids who, you know, maybe were slightly better off than others, would gravitate towards each other, you know, things like that.
Story_ID: 31113
Speaker 1: I wondered how you felt about that because we're on the verge, I think, tomorrow the Price of England [William Arthur Philip Louis Windsor] gets married--
Speaker 2: Ah right.
Speaker 1: And people are just going gaga over that.  And I just wanted to--is class still a major factor in British life in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, it is a major factor in British life, but it's not as--oh, I could go, there's lots to be said about this.  It's there.  I don't think it's as paralyzing as perhaps it used to be in terms of people being unable to proceed beyond a certain point.  So I think that is gone to some extent.  And in some ways there's also been a reversal in that there were certain times when I think if you were perceived from having from--having come from an upper class, it would be to your disadvantage in certain circles; whereas, you know, there are other circles where it's the other way around.  So I think it's all mixed up, but it's there still.  I think that's maybe the most accurate thing to say.  And--but I think the--yeah, I think the really big, sort of paralyzing aspects of it, in terms of social mobility, if you want to put it in that way, has largely been pushed back; still there, but it's been pushed back.  So, I think issues of race and recent and less recent immigration and things like that, probably are much more central in the discussion than class, for better or worse.
Story_ID: 31114
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, I--you showed me a photo a little while ago of a guitar that you planned, and you showed me a photo of the plans, and then the finished guitar.  And this is a fairly sophisticated electric guitar, and you conceived and built this in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was--that grew out of my earlier period that I had mentioned where, yes, I spend a lot of time going, "Okay.  The big project is going to be 'X'," and then it would start with some sketches, some ideas, and then it would mushroom into this thing.  By those times, I--my technical ability and my ability to generate pocket money to buy components, I delivered newspapers; and then later on I worked in a department store, you know, as a sort of janitor-come-what-have-you, so I was able to get extra money to buy stuff.  So those things are caught up, so now my projects could things like I conceive, design, and build, and actually be working things.  And so I guess the two most examples--the two best examples at the time sort of in my middle teen years were the guitar and, because I was getting also into music then; I was playing a lot of guitar with friends.  Some things I did do with friends would be some musical things later on, although I was very, very shy.
Speaker 1: What style of music did you play?
Speaker 2: Then I guess I was following a lot of this rock guitar-type stuff.  So I was a big fan of groups like, 'Dire Straits,' and 'Queen,' and groups like that.  So lots of guitar and, yeah, guitar or drums, bass; that sort of thing.  And I listened to a lot of--a lot of electronic music; in fact, that was my passion at the time.  It was a little embarrassing to remember how snooty I was about the current pop music scene.  So, you know, the 'Duran-Durans,' and stuff like that, I rejected all that; it was just ugh, and so I got more and more into obscure German electronic music.  Yeah, I must have been unbearable (laughter).  So I would listen to groups like 'Tangerine Dream,' and 'Craftwork,' and stuff like that.  But that got me connected to--through that aspect of music to more electronic, but more digital electronics.  I got interested in synthesizers, digital synthesizers, and then decided that, well, what I should just do, instead of trying to build dedicated digital synthesizers, what I should do is build a computer and then I can program it to make any noise I want it--so, any sound I wanted.  So that was my ambition.  So on the one hand, I was doing the analog stuff with, I was building--I don't know if you know about electronics--electric guitars, you know you plug into sometimes effects boxes that do, you know, distortion and what have you.  So I would build analog circuits that could do that, distortion, compression, things like that.  So that was kind of fun.  But then my other project was to build this wonderful computer.  It was going to be--I never did finish it, but it was going to based on what at the time was the state of the art was the Zed-80 chips, microprocessors.  And so, I designed all the circuitry for that and started basically constructing that.
Story_ID: 31115
Speaker 1: But the guitar was--actually, in retrospect, and I now think it's a much more elegant project because it was not just the electronic wiring that was going on the inside, electrical wiring with some sound treatment and some boxes I built, but it was the engineering of the instrument itself.   So it meant that I had to do the woodwork for it, and I made it from scratch.  What I first did is actually I took apart this other guitar I had and modified it, and so I learned a lot about, I guess, you know, the kinds of things you need for an electric guitar.  But then I went and I sourced the wood, I made it out of--I think it was a kind of sycamore, actually.  And then I sourced the rosewood for the fingerplates and all of that.  And then I designed from scratch how I was going to mount--I wasn't using the standard.  I wanted it to be headless.  I didn't want the tuning knobs on the end like a guitar had.  I want it to be this compact, neat, almost sort of feminine shape that it had, very, very, (unclear); it was called the "Black Widow."  I always named my projects (laughter).  And this was the "Black Widow Two," I think.  And so the tuning was here and it was done through this metal thing I designed in metal class, and whatever it's called, metalwork class, that mounted the strings and then you tighten then here with an Allen key, which it's actually designed flaw, because if you lose the Allen key, you can't tune (laughter), you know, okay.  But it worked.  And I built that stuff in metal shop class and mounted it all, and then built it in the electronics.  I couldn't cut the plastic casing that went over the holes that housed the pickups.  I didn't make the pickups myself.  I got certain kinds of pickups and wired them in a certain way to get a certain sound.  The plastic stuff, I then--I actually measured it all out and gave it--took it to this company that cut the--it wasn't plastic, it was kind of--almost like a Formica kind of finish; and then screwed that all on, painted it.  I ran the rod down the center to tension it and, yeah, it was a beautiful design.  I wanted it to have a low action, which meant a lot of the guitarists at the time who, you know, everyone idolized, were doing faster and faster stuff with their fingers.  And eventually you figure out they were doing that because they were able to get very low action on the--sorry--meant the distance between the strings and the fret board was very, very slight.  So you could essentially just touch and sound at the same time.  So you didn't need to pick every note.  You could--so, you know, all of the guitars at the time were doing all of this fancy stuff with this.  So I wanted really low action for that reason, and so I designed it that way.  And then the electronics, yes.  I wanted to be able to have different kinds of guitar sounds, so I had two--I borrowed this from the Gibson Guitars.  They have the, what are called the "Humbucker Pickups," and I had two of them; one close to the bridge, and one further out.  The closer you are to the bridge, the more high frequency you get.  You get more like the Fender Stratocaster-type sound.  And then further in, you get more like the Gibson sound, but then you could also wire them, you know, in and out of phase with each other and get signals from both or just one.  So the guitar has four switches, and those were all the different combinations.  And so, I could get all this range of sounds out of the guitar that way.  And, yeah, anyway, so that was fun.  I built that.  That was the last major project I did before I went to university, so I guess I finished that around seventeen or eighteen, something like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 31116
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--how was your social life?  You're a black, British scientist (laughter).
Speaker 2: Budding scientist.
Speaker 1: Budding scientist (unclear).  Were there--did you date in high school and (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, again, that whole sort of dating world thing, no.  I had, yeah, again, I must have been such a weird kid, but I--so I had--actually, anyway, I had lots of friends, both male and female.  I was--because of my sort of unusual trajectory, and this has stayed with me in a way--because of my unusual trajectory, I was kind of partly an outsider in every camp, which made me kind of an insider in partly in every camp as well; in that, you know, I would be friends with people from that group who didn't talk to that other group so much, but I did.  I would be sort of the bridge because I was kind of no one knew really how to classify me.  So it meant that I was without classification, and so, I could move between these different groups.  And so socially that made things interesting for me just generally in terms of the kinds of friends I made. So also, it didn't seem odd to me to have friends who were girls who, you know, I wasn't necessarily interested in for any reason other than the fact that they were interesting people to talk to and had--like, one of my best friends was really into 'The Police' and 'Sting,' and you know, we both loved--well, at the time, she idolized 'Sting' to a great degree.  And I loved the music and what have you, and yeah, we'd spend a lot of time talking about, you know, music and what have you.  What I would do, I had lots of girls who I thought were great and probably would talk to me or didn't--you know, weren't interested in me in that way, if you like.  But one thing I remember I used to do is I used to have a list of my five favorite girls and then--who was sort of top to that week, would move around, depending upon, you know, who I managed to get to talk to or walk home or something like that.  But in terms of sort of dating or any of those kinds of things or, you know, kissing a girl, or what have you, no.  I didn't do anything.  But it didn't-- it wasn't something that was kind of consuming me all the time.  It was something that was interesting to me, of course.  And--but it didn't distract me so much from the stuff that I was doing.  I remember the school, the end of school dance being a big deal because there was this girl who I thought was fantastic, and I was going to ask her to dance, and lots of my friends knew that I fancied her; the term in those days was, in north of England was, that you fancied someone.  So I fancied her.  And so, I remember it was a big deal.  I actually did dance with her and it was a big deal.  I have no idea what happened to her (laughter).  But there were lots of girls who I had crushes on at various times, and they would get to the top of the list.
Story_ID: 31117
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Okay.  Now, when you were--okay.  So you're getting ready to graduate.  Now, how did you--did you know you were going to college at that point or did you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  So I had decided at a ridiculously early--basically when I decided that I wanted to be a scientist back--and then a, you know, a physicist eventually, I settled on that, back, you know, way back when I was in Montserrat [Leeward Islands, West Indies, British overseas territory].  I learned from this doctor friend of the family, an Indiana doctor; well, my mom used to--she cleaned at his house--you know, cleaned his house.  So I used to go there sometimes and sit.  And I remember he actually told me that--what did he tell me.  He had--he gave me a book to read or he told--it was a magazine or something but, you know, he said, "Yeah, this is a good career that you're interested in."  So I kind of, you know, got a good sense that this was something interesting.  And it was the time I think I began to try and find out well, what do you do; you do certain subjects and then you do certain exams, and then you go to university, and then you do a Ph.D., what have you.  And so, I have to say, I mean, it's, you know, compared to the kind of options that kids keep open these days compared to that, I was utterly boring and I pretty much decided what age I was going to be doing the next thing.  Because, you know, in the British system I knew, you know, I knew the British system; you do two years doing this, two years doing that, three years at university doing undergrad, three years Ph.D.; and then I'll be a physicist.  That was kind of my set up.  So basically, once I had done the subjects that I wanted to do and I did my "A-levels" in--I chose my "A-levels" precisely because by then I knew I wanted to be a physicist.  So I chose two mathematic subjects and physics; mathematics, further mathematics and physics were the subjects I chose.  And I just did those, and then what you do is, at that time, there was a system; I think it's called the UCER (ph.) system, University Central-something or other.  It's a system everyone in the U.K. [United Kingdom] basically fills out these forms, and put your five choices of university, and you send them to the central thing, and then the universities either invite--I think they invite you for interview.  So that was a big adventure for me because I hadn't traveled the country much.  So I remember putting--so the place I wanted to go was in Imperial College [London, England], which was the big, probably remains the largest class of physics students at the time that, I think, the incoming year were two hundred students just in physics.  And I--they--someone had suggested that I look into Oxford [University, Oxford, England] and Cambridge [University, Cambridge, England], and I guess I would have tried that, but apparently there was some language required.  There was--I had needed to have done some language at some level which I hadn't done.  And so, they would say, "Oh, you can't do Oxford or Cambridge."  And I said, "fine."  I--it was no big deal to me.  And I was--because I actually was very excited about to London because that was where I was from originally, and so, the idea of returning to London and going to Imperial College--so Imperial College was my first choice.  And I had a number of other choices as well.  And my--but my last choice was I put only because I had never been to Wales, and it was the University of, Aberystwyth [sic, Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, Wales], and I kind of liked the symmetry of the fact that the largest class was Imperial College and the smallest class in this out-of-the way little town in Wales was called Aberystwyth.  And I thought it'd be a great way of going to go there for interview, because they paid for you to come to interview you see.  So I went to Manchester [England] and London [England], and Sheffield [England] and Aberystwyth [Wales] and Birmingham [England]--I can't remember what my--what the other one was, went to all these places.  And then they made you an offer.  They say if you get the following grades you can come.  So it's how it works.  Because in those days, if you didn't have the means, which we certainly didn't, you--the government would give you a grant, a university grant to pay for your living expenses and what have you.  So basically, it was just basic--you applied for the grant and you applied to the universities, and then hopefully, everything all worked out and it all work the right way.  So I got the various offers.  So what they would--, they play strategy games as well, you know, they make very low offers to students they really wanted, and things like, in order to try and entice them and get them to accept them early and things like that.  I don't remember what my offer was from Imperial [College, London, England].  I'm thinking it was maybe--I think a lot of the top universities were beginning to offer two "Cs" to their top--to the top students, who would undoubtedly come with "As," but it was a way of saying, "We really want you."  I think Imperial may have done that.  Anyway, I got all the grades I needed and I went.  It was a big deal for me because I was very dramatic, in addition to all my projects having names, in addition to having projects all the time and having names, I would write in a diary, a diary.  So I remember ninety--1986 was a big year for me because what I was calling it, it was my turnaround year.  I mean, it was only called my turnaround year because you turn the six and the eight around and you get my birth year, '68 [1968], big drama (laughter).  So anyway, it was my turnaround year and then I was to go back to London, and I was going to see the city and have a great time doing physics.  And that's what I did.
Story_ID: 31118
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, well, tell us about Imperial College [London, England], then.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Imperial was amazing.  So--so first of all it was just, again, it was, you know, some years later now since I did that last big move, that last big change, there was another one like that.  And I was now in London [England], but I was living on my own and I--
Speaker 1: Did they pay your housing too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they pay your housing and everything.  So what I actually did, I was in what are called intercollegiate--so Imperial College is part of London University.  So London University has lots of autonomous major colleges which are universities in their own right.  So Imperial College was one of the big ones, University College was another one, Queen Mary was another one, Kings College was another one; in different parts of London.  Imperial College is in South Kensington [London, England], famous for things like Hyde Park and the Royal Albert Hall, and things like that; not far from Knightsbridge where Harrods is, and things like that.  But for me, another big deal is the fact that it's near all the major museums.  If you go to London, that's where you go to, the science museum and natural history museum, things like that.  So in terms of it being a major center for life of a certain sort; academic, intellectual, however you want to call it, Imperial College was just a fantastic place to be.  But I didn't live near Imperial College.  I lived closer to the center of things in Bloomsbury [London, England].  All of the colleges have rights, or in those days, had rights to put people in what were called the intercollegiate halls.  They had their own halls of residence where they'd keep students' halls of residence like dorms.  Halls of residence, but they did have halls of residence which they all had rights to which were called the intercollegiate halls in Cartwright Gardens [London, England].  So I was in Commonwealth House, I think it was called, in Cartwright Gardens.  And the reason that was a significant thing to mention is because it's near the West End.  So it's near all of those famous aspects of London, it's near all those famous touristy things, the theatres, the movie theatres which were--I was big-- majorly into; and things like that.  And so, I had these--I had this sort of--these two parts of London then which were my playground.  The West End at nights was being to discover things like jazz, etcetera; so the fantastic jazz.  British jazz at the time was beginning to explode with all these new young people as well, which is another story which is very interesting.  I hadn't fully discovered American jazz yet.  That was--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the artists in British jazz?
Speaker 2: Oh, the times, sort of, I guess, I remember getting out early of a lecture because Courtney Pine was playing at Virgin Records on Oxford Street [London, England] and launching his album then which was 'Journey to the Urge Within,' which was a major deal.  And it was a big deal for me too.  And Courtney Pine was a fantastic tenor saxophonist who--he had this aura to him because he was really good, and he'd apparently done his time in America in the important clubs in America, and apparently he'd been asked to stay there and become part of the scene there, and he opted to come back to the U.K. [United Kingdom].  So he was regarded as kind of a hero by the British jazz world because he was one of the young people who sort of came back.  He did well abroad, but he came back to sort of help rebuild the British--because British jazz at the time was mostly old men in straw hats playing for parties, playing Dixieland-type, sometimes sad parody of a certain kind of New Orleans sound that--yeah, it was bad.  And there were some nice aspects of it, but although a lot of it, it became a cliche, and it was--it was basically charmingly enthusiastic, old white men of a certain look with stripy outfits and what have you.  And that was British jazz at the time with a few exceptions.  And then all of a sudden, there're people like Courtney Pine and Andy Sheppard, and people like that who came back and brought the force.
Story_ID: 31119
Speaker 1: So I was discovering all of that while at the same time, then jumping on the buses and the subway to go to my lectures in Imperial College [London, England].  And that was just amazing because, again, it was an explosion of stuff that I always wanted to learn more about in physics and mathematics, that I was just going every day.  So the timetable was great.  It was basically, there were three hours in the morning from nine to noon of lectures, solid every morning, and it's a large class, so instead of there being lots of moving around the campus in different classes basically, you were essentially in that one lecture theatre, two hundred of you sitting, and the different lecturers would come in.  So basically, we just--we were just this community of people.  You had your place in the lecture theatre that you always sat, and for me it was always, you know, not too close to the beginning, that's too keen; somewhere in the--not all the way at the back because, you know, that's where people are messing around; somewhere in the middle, and that was it.  And I really just loved it.  And then in the afternoons it was labs and projects of various kinds.  And--but there's a lot of--I actually didn't hang around with physicists that much.  My friends were mostly from other fields because I was in these intercollegiate halls, which had people of all different kinds, not just Imperial College which was scientists and engineers, but I rubbed shoulders with people from music and medical school; and so my best friends were, in fact, people from medical school.  They were at Guy's Hospital [London, England] studying to be doctors, and one was at Kings College [London, England] studying music--musicology, music history and performance; and a few other people of that kind.  I didn't actually hang around with physicists socially as much as I did later on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We'll pause here again.
Story_ID: 31120
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Now, in--as you were working on your B.S., are you all talking about string theory by now.
Speaker 2: Not so much.  I think I was beginning to read certain books about certain aspects of particle physics.  But there wasn't that much talk of string theory in the air quite yet, at least as far as I knew.  So for me it was still mostly about particle physics in general.  That changed in my later years I think--by time I got to my third year because I applied to graduate school--actually, maybe I'm wrong.  Maybe it was maybe about halfway through because it's only a three-year degree.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I have a note here that in '89 [1989] you and your advisor and another student construct a whole new family of mathematical models for string theory?
Speaker 2: Sure.  But that was when I went to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you asked me about my bachelor years--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: --my bachelor's of Science.
Speaker 1: We got it out of place here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's a little bit--that's a little bit early.  That's when I moved to graduate school.  But let me tell you how--let me tell you the sort of string theory strand.  I think I began to hear about it at Imperial College [London, England].  There were people probably at the time who I had heard of, who were there doing some of that kind of thing a little bit.  Then what I was doing was applying to graduate school by, and I think I would have been doing that in my--thinking about it in late '88 [1988], because then you'd start in '89 [1989].  So I must have then sent out the applications to various places, and I remember looking--by then I had decided I wanted to do string theory.  I had heard of it and that was what I wanted to do because it sounded, again, like it was, you know, the thing that would get me that what I perceived to be the deepest level at that time.  And so, what happened was that I applied to various places, and what I actually did, apparently, so again, you go around for interviews, and they interview you and then they make you an offer or not.  And apparently, I learned later on because some of these people later became my colleagues in the field, these people that interviewed me.  I learned later on that I was kind of interviewing them to some extent, so the person who ultimately became my advisor, a guy called Tim Morris, in University of Southampton [Southampton, England], apparently, you know, he actually, if I remember correctly, was working on string theory or maybe he hadn't; he was coming back to it or something.  But apparently, I remember asking either him or someone there, you know, "Why aren't you working on string theory?"  You know, it was sort of in this little pointed way.  I guess I was very focused, but.  So I basically choice to go to graduate school to the place that was doing it in a way that sort of excited me most.  And Tim [Morris] seemed sort of very young and excited about what he was up to, and that kind of got me kind of excited.  Interestingly, I almost went into a different.  I almost got sidetracked because I got seduced by these things called quasi crystals.  So on my final year project, in the final year you do a project either theoretical or experimental, and that's part of your big thing you do at the end of the year.  And Imperial College allowed you to basically then work with an advisor who would be guiding you on that project.  And so I got talking to this very charming Frenchman called Nick Riviere, and he was working on these things called quasi crystals, which the--which were all the rage in the world in the theoretical condensed matter physics world at the time apparently.  And I got very excited about them and I started constructing models of them and trying to figure out stuff, because we were doing stuff--stuff had not been figured out right at the forefront.  And so as an undergraduate it felt like you had the chance to really contribute.  I got very excited about it, did this fun project, and actually I have a picture somewhere of the some of the stuff I made and the poster, and the models I cut out.  I got very interested in the mathematics, you see.  And it was again, all patterns, and if you look at those things, they remind you of those needlework things I used to make, those doilies.  Again, lots of symmetrical patterns moving outwards.  It's all connected.  But anyway, the quasi crystals made me interested in doing condensed matter physics instead of particle physics, maybe; so the condensed matter physics group at Imperial College were interested to know if I wanted to stay at Imperial College and do graduate work with them.  The high energy physics group, the particle physics guys, I remember to this day being amazed at this conversation I had.  I applied to them as well, and they--I remember to this day that this--the head of the group dealing with admissions to that group at the time sat me down and said, "Well, we received your application, but we're actually going to not accept your applica--not admit you to the group."  And he said--I remember this distinctly, he said, "We're actually going to choose someone smarter."  Yeah.  Yeah, he actually said that to this young kid, right.  And there was this kid at the time who was kind of the golden child of the year, and they went with him.  And, you know, he said that to my face in a way which I'm happy to say many years later I was almost in the reverse position, but I'll tell you about that some other time, later on (laughter).  But the key thing is that, so I felt a little bit crestfallen by that, but again, it was one of those many situations where you begin--you wonder whether there's something else going on besides what's at face value and, you know, you never know for sure.  But you don't let it get you down.  And you know, I went off to Southampton [England] and started doing string theory.  And we did so--we were the only--there was just me, my advisor, Tim Morris; and another student, Simon Dalie (ph.).  It was just us as part of the group there doing string theory-type things, and the rest of the group was doing other aspects of particle physics.  And string theory at the time was often the butt of every joke.  I was kind of the outsider-type thing.  It was this crazy thing that some people were doing in some groups.  And so, we definitely were the underdogs in the department, which I'm always happy with that kind of, like being an underdog in some ways. So that was kind of nice.
Story_ID: 31121
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now what was it that you all discovered?  You wrote a paper (unclear) mathematical principles?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.  We--the--we did some really nice work.  At the time there was a new sort of mini revolution in string theory.  It was the beginning of stuff which found its feet more in more recent times, but back then was the first hints of what we called non-perturbative string theory.  So what that means is that, the string theories of the revolution in the early '80s [1980s] that I've mentioned earlier, were formulated in such a way and understood.  You could calculate with them, but only in the regime where what's called weak coupling, perturbation theory.  It means that you--the interaction between the individual strings themselves is very weak, so they interact so strong they don't disturb each other too much.  And that means you can calculate their properties relatively easily.  And that's kind of nice for a lot of things.  It actually begins to give you the first broad brush strokes of how the theory might explain some of those things that the standard model can't explain; those patterns, etcetera, the different families of particles.  You can do a lot of that by staying in what's called the "string perturbation" theory; weakly coupled strings, etcetera.  And so, the great hope that people had, and still have, the string theory was based on one of those early hints.  There's still lots to be worked out.  One of the key things we need to understand better to see if string really is a theory of nature and all of these things.  We need to understand it in some really difficult regimes, where the string interact very strongly with each other.  And the techniques for those sorts of things were hard to come by.  So people had formulated.  There was a big breakthrough in '89 [1989], '90 [1990], that sort of area, by various groups at Princeton and Rutgers, who had formulated what are called matrix models of strings.  There were ways of making certain kinds of string theories, sort of toy string theories; so the simpler ones.  But in those theories, you could actually formulate the--you formulate them in this sort of strongly coupled way where the strings interact with each other arbitrarily strongly.  And so people got very excited because that was a major breakthrough.  But then the field kind of abandoned it because when they examined the models they constructed more carefully, they seemed to have problems.  They didn't quite do what people were hoping they would do.  And string theory can be very, very faddy; people work on the stuff when it's easy, and they kind of go of, and another shiny thing comes along, another easy direction; people go off in that direction, and so, tends to rush off headlong in other directions back and forth.  And now you don't have that luxury when you doing your Ph.D..  You kind of work on projects, and you work on it, and you work on it.  Anyway, we--so that's the background.  The short version of what we did is that we found that if you stuck with it and you work with slightly different approach, you can construct models that had all the nice properties that people wanted and more, and really solve a really interesting set problems about what's called the non-perturbative stability of these models.  The problems is, is the field is so faddy that by time we figured all that out and wrote papers about it, nobody cared.  Everyone had gone off to work on other things, because other exciting things had happened in string theory, and people tend to be very faddy.  And the big shots in the field had said, "This is no longer interesting," and so, we were in Southampton in England, not known as a center for string theory in those days, shouting and dancing, "Hey, we've done something interesting," and nobody cared.  But in some ways, it was the seeds for a number of things that everyone works on now; a lot of those things that we began to see.
Story_ID: 31122
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this as a layman.  How--what instruments or tools do you use to measure, I mean, or to observe or measure string theory accurately, I mean, to measure that activity?
Speaker 2: So that's the problem, you don't.  That's the problem we're faced with right now.  So string theory deals with issues that are underlying a lot of what's going now in terms of what we can access experimentally.  And so, a lot of the structures that it proposes and that theorists such as myself study and try and get right, are not things that you can probe directly experimentally.  So that has two problems.  One, it means that you don't have as much guidance in constructing the theory as you would like.  So you use things like mathematical elegance, consistency with other things that you've seen, etcetera.  But it also means that that you're always in danger of perhaps reaching in the dark, not knowing exactly whether you're going in the right direction.
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  Correct me if I'm wrong.  From what I understand then is that, there are things that you can see and you even observe or measure with an instrument (unclear)--
Speaker 2: But--yeah--
Speaker 1: --the string theory is something that the other measurements implied must be going on, but you can't really (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.  So that's where I was going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what you try and do, is you work the theory to a point where it tells you--it tells you if you like--it gives you signals that you can see experimentally ultimately.  Now, the issue is then, is because it's sort of indirect, you may ultimately what you'd like to be able to do is just say, "If the world is made of strings or whatever your proposal is, right, just build a big enough microscope and see the string."  That would be what you'd like to do, okay.  So that's what I'm saying you can't do.  But what you want to do is work out what the consequences are of that underlying description in terms of strings, and how it filters to what we can observe and what can do experiments about.  So the problem is, is that the theory is still being worked out.  There's a lot we don't understand about it.  So while it has given us lots of hints about the consequences that we may see in experiments coming up, for example, there not unambiguous hints because we haven't gotten all the mathematical tools we need to work out with complete certainty that if, you know, this particular kind of string is doing this particular thing, it'll predict this particular thing in this experiment.  We can't join all those dots yet because the theory is very complicated.  So you look for indirect hints that will help you shape the theory, etcetera, etcetera.  Now, there's a separate strand to all of that, that I hope to tell you about when I maybe tell you a bit more about what I'm working on now, which involves string theory in experiment in a much more direct way.  But that's kind of a different program, although I think they're connected in ways that are trying to explain.
Story_ID: 31123
Speaker 1: But finishing your question, direct experimental evidence for string theory in terms of understanding the standard model and the origins of the universe and things like that, we're a long way away from yet unless there's a surprise tomorrow or what have you.  And that's largely because we haven't finished working out the theory yet.  We don't even--now we know that string theory is part of a much larger framework.  So it's not even that we need to figure out exactly what string theory is; we actually know that ultimately it's--that's not the whole story.  There's a bigger thing we're trying to get to grips with that becomes sort of harder to characterize experimentally.  But it's--so it's a long journey which, you know, may not be finished for some time.  In the meantime though, we've learned a lot about lots of interesting aspects of physics, both in the abstract and in the sort of pragmatic sense.  And so, one of the outputs of string theory has been very, very powerful tools in trying to construct this theory and understand how it might tell us about how nature works, to do with particle physics, and standard model in the early universe, and cosmology, and these things.  We've developed a unique set of tools, both mathematical and physical tools that have been tested in so many ways because of the kinds of things we've been doing with them in order to explain properties of black holes and things like that.  So those tools, some of us now in the last--where are we now--in the last, slightly over a decade, some of us have been pushing even back when it wasn't fashionable as it has become now.  We've been pushing to say these tools actually have broader use than just the things we've been developing them for.  So now, there's a whole movement of interesting work that's been going on, that I've been doing and other people have been doing, and it's now become kind of an interesting additional strand of work, which involves using the tools of string theory to explain certain kinds of phenomena that are showing up in real experiments that are very difficult to explain using traditional techniques.  And it just turns out through a mixture of lucky accidents and serendipity and how physics works that some of these experiments, sort of the things involving collisions of heavy ions, for example, that create soup of nuclear matter which behaves in a very strange way, which has a lot of similarity to some of the things we've been describing with string theory.  So some of us have become very excited that, even though this other program that I've been telling you about, you know, explaining the origins of, you know, the universe and all the stuff in it, even though that program is a long way off from being completed using string theory and what have you, although we've made some wonderful progress on the quantum gravity aspects of it, understanding structure of black holes and things, there this other program where all of those tools are becoming useful in other fields of physics that a lot of us are excited about.  So a lot of my effort these days has been in trying to get people excited about that, writing papers about it, doing as much as I can training young people in these sorts of areas and things like that.  But some of us, you know, think that this is all connected in ways we don't yet understand.
Story_ID: 31124
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your Ph.D. dissertation.
Speaker 2: Right.  So the Ph.D. work was, as I said then, the finding of these new kinds of models, these new correctly working models of string theories that were strongly coupled, that achieved that goal of being consistent theories that described strings interacting with each other strongly in a way that seemed to fit together quite nicely, what we then noticed in subsequent, in a subsequent paper or two, was that you could build a model in the new direction and add extra pieces to it that naturally suggested themselves, that looked like a different kind of string was playing a role as well.  So I should tell you that there are many ways of classifying within string theory in detail, but there's one very broad classification, which is very easy to see.  The difference between closed strings and open string.  Closed strings, it's a string which is a closed loop; you know, it's like you join the ends and you have loop and then it vibrates in different ways.  An open string has its ends which are free; they can--they're not joined together.  And so, all the work in that context previously had been on--almost all the work--had been on closed string theories.  We showed how to make these beautiful closed string theories that had--that were consistent and had all of this nice, strongly coupled behavior.  But then we also showed that you could include open strings in that same model in a way that tied them all up in a nice way.  And we wrote this really beautiful paper about that and showed it all worked.  We didn't fully understand all aspects of it, but we pretty much characterized everything we constructed.  And much, much later on, after what's called the second superstring revolution, people realized that actually that those models we found were some of the earliest examples of something that we use a lot now in the field, which are called open-closed dualities; they're strings that connect--series that connect open strings and closed strings together in a way that had not been realized before.  And we'd found the earliest examples of those.  So that was kind of in retrospect a kind of satisfying thing as well.
Story_ID: 31125
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, after you got your Ph.D., you received an E.S.--I'm sorry, EPSRC [Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council], NATO [North American Treaty Organization] Fellowship, and the Lindemann Fellowship.  Were these to the Institute for Advanced Studies [sic, Study] [Princeton, New Jersey]
Speaker 2: Yes.  So again, you know, coming towards the end of my Ph.D., the question is now, what do I do next and, you know, the next thing on the list was to go--to was to be a post doc for awhile.  So--we do sort of postdoctoral short, short periods of research, sort of honing your craft and finding your voice as it were before ultimately, maybe becoming faculty somewhere.  So one way to do that is to get fellowships.  And so, I applied for what was then called a NATO Fellowship through the, what was then called the Science and Engineering Research Council in the U.K. [United Kingdom], which later changed to the EPSRC.  At the same time, I applied to a private foundation for what was called the Lindemann Fellowship, which was named after two brothers, I think, who were--they're either English who went to America or they were American who liked England.  I forget which way it was, but they set up a foundation to say, "Here's a pot of money for a young person to come to America for awhile to do"--yeah.  And it was administered by--you'll the name of this society--it was administered by the "English-Speaking Union of the Commonwealth."  That was the name of it.  And so, their job was to, which is now just called the "English-Speaking Union," and they administered lots of fellowships, including the Lindemann Fellowship.  So that meant that, again, it was another application process, and then more interviews, and then, so I basically went up to London [England] to be interviewed for the Lindemann Fellowship, for example.  And that was a big deal for me because it turned out that on the panel was the famous Roger Penrose, who's in my field, you know.  Just an amazing mathematical physicist in--well in the whole world, but he's sort of--he's fiefdom is at-- in Oxford [University, Oxford, England].  So it was a big deal.  And he asked me about what I wanted to do with string theory and why I was doing string theory.  And he seemed satisfied with my answers and I got the fellowship.  So I had the embarrassment of riches of having two fellowships.  And so, what I was able to do was defer one of them, I think the--yes, I deferred the NATO Fellowship by a year.  I'd say, "I will accept the Fellowship, but I'll take it up a year from now."  The Lindemann Fellowship I did first.  So basically, those fellowships allowed me go anywhere that was--and I wanted to go to--I mean, anywhere in the--to any institution, and so, I applied to the Institute for Advanced Study to see whether they would have me, and they said yes.
Story_ID: 31126
Speaker 1: Now the Institute for Advance Studies [sic, Study] [Princeton, New Jersey] is the institute that Albert Einstein made famous.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yes, so the institute is an amazing institution, going back to the early part of, I guess, the 1930s.  And--the late '20s [1920s].  And so, yes, Einstein, I guess, is its most famous member in modern--in--semi-modern times there were people--heroes of mine like Freeman Dyson there and, of course, Godel was-- Kurt Godel was there at the same time as Einstein, and Robert Oppenheimer was a director there for a while.  So it's a--and it's continues that all the luminaries in the various fields have passed through there at one point or another, either visiting or what have you.  And it's always headed up.  The permanent faculty are always luminaries in their disciplines.  So in my field at the time, the, you know, amazing Edward Witten was there and he remains amazing and he remains there.  And so, that's the place you go when you want to be--sit at the feet of the master, as it were.  And Edward Witten is the undisputed master of my area of theoretical physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So well, you were in--so did--I mean, did you have a decent relationship with Doctor Witten?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a fantastic time.  So again, it was a major upheaval because again I was moving, changing my entire environment; now I was going to America.  I had never been to America before.  It was this legendary place I'd been seduced by lots of aspects of the culture; the music, etcetera.  I discovered in graduate school American jazz as opposed to British jazz and realized that so many of the things I loved about British jazz were dragging me in a certain direction.  And then one day on the radio I heard 'Flamenco Sketches,' [American jazz composition written by Miles Davis and Bill Evans] and that was just--it just, amaz--it was an emotional experience.  It was just everything about it--it was just the pure stuff that I'd only ever had hints of before.  It was like the pure stuff was just gushing at me; it was just amazing.  And so, that got me more interested in America--that and the physics I was interested in--got me more interested in America.  So it was natural for me to want to go.  So I arrived in, you know, you know, a little bit later than in '92 [1992], having finished my Ph.D., in--at Newark Airport [New Jersey], caught me a Princeton air porter down to Princeton [New Jersey], and began to find my way.  Now, it was an interesting thing which was, again, potentially a barrier, and that was the typical education about British Ph.D. student in my area, it's very different from that of an American Ph.D. student.  You tend to be very narrow in the U.K. [United Kingdom], especially at the time.  You tend to--you only have three years; and it's actually less than three years.  You have a grant for three years.  That first year you come in you're doing classes.  You know, you're taking your undergraduate knowledge and you're doing advanced courses to develop the tools to do research.  And then after that first year you pass your exams and what have you, you start your research.  So you essentially have a year of research, so if you don't focus on that topic and get your best out of it so that you start writing papers, so that by the third year when you're doing applications, you have some papers to say, "Hey, I've written papers," you don't have time to be broad.  That's the point I'm trying to make; whereas, here the education in graduate school is, you know, five or six years.  So there's just more time.  So basically, I arrived at the Institute for Advance Study at the, what is essential the Mecca, the Vatican, the whatever, of physics at the time, and to some extent still is, right; the place to be with all of the gods walking around and all of the best students and post docs around, and here I am with my narrow knowledge.  So immediately, you kind of beginning to feel, and it's famous for people coming and just crashing and burning.  So you have all of that in the back of your mind.  And then you're in the aura of [Edward] Witten, the god of the field at the time, especially, where, you know, his reputation was such that, and still is to some extent, you would see, you know, grown, seasoned people in the field go to pieces talking to him because they're just--largely the sad thing is I actually--when I got to know him and looked underneath all of the hype, I began to see he was a really very very kind person, almost frustrated by the fact that people were so afraid of him that they couldn't talk to him.  And you could see that at times.  He would come in and he'd sit down; he's very, very concerned about the young people around him.  And I always thank him for being extremely patient and kind with me because there was a lot of stuff I clearly didn't know, and he could have just cast me aside as not interesting; I have nothing to say to him that he didn't already know.  And that's what everyone thinks when they talk to him, even if they had been working in the field for decades, they, you know, they have tenure at some fancy place, they come, they sit next to Ed [Edward Witten], they go to pieces.  It's kind of funny but sad.  And I think it's largely because people in their minds they say, "Yes, he's legend."  And so, what would happen is that I began to learn how to talk to him, and eventually find my own voice and how to talk to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have to pause.
Story_ID: 31127
Speaker 1: Alright.  We were talking about Doctor Edward Witten and the students, some students being intimated by him, and other peers actually (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Not just students.  Everybody was intimated by him to some extent.
Speaker 1: Did you find that--did you discover at some point that you may have discovered or come across something that he didn't know about?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was actually what helped me find my voice to some extent.  But there was a long period where I just decided, partly correctly, that I didn't really know that much.  And everyone was talking--like I said, my Ph.D. was on this topic that nobody cared about anymore to some extent.  And we'd done this really nice stuff, but no one cared about it.  And one thing I didn't want to do was what a lot of people do, which is you do that thing you do for your Ph.D., and then you essentially continue doing that for the rest of your career and, you know, that's fine.  There's nothing wrong with that.  It's--you do good work, and you stick with it.  But I had a thirst to learn more because I just felt like I didn't know enough to call myself a string theorist or a particle physicist or whatever have you.  So one of the things I wanted to was not work on what I had done before.  So I think I wrote one finish sort of follow-up paper to what I'd done for my Ph.D., and then I began to listen to what was going on around me and hear whatever--and everyone was talking about something that later on you'd become famous known, and known as a mirror symmetry and things related to that; it's an aspect of string theory, but a very beautiful mathematical relationship that was discovered in the context of string theory and had huge ramifications for the field and for mathematics, etcetera.  I knew nothing about that.  It required all kinds of mathematics I'd never even heard of called algebraic geometry, and things like that, and all kinds of physics I'd not seen before.  And so, basically what would happen at the institute there was the table.  You go down to the dining room and there're all these tables, and right in the middle, sort of towards the middle, there's a table with reserved on it.  So the first time I went down there I didn't sit at this table because it's reserved.  So it's clearly not for me.  And then I began to realize it that was where all of the physicists who worked on--the older people in the School of Natural Sciences [at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey], is what it was called--would sit.  And so, then I realized that that reserved was for us.  So then I learned to sit there.  But the big thing about the table there was that, everyone was afraid that Ed [Edward Witten] would come and sit next to them.  The big thing would be that you're eating your lunch, and then Ed would come with his tray and sit next to you and go, "What are you working on?"  And that was the big thing that everyone was afraid of.  If you were a visitor, you were afraid of it; if you were a regular there.  And so, I would watch this process happen--I'd would watch people go to pieces.  I watched people who had, you know, who had done amazing things with whatever they were working on, not be able to explain what they were doing.  You know, forget their own name, you know, in talking to him.  And then I realized that a lot of the problem was because people were doing what they thought they needed to do was make themselves seem smarter.  So Ed would ask you what you're working on, and what you would do is you would try and explain it in the most sophisticated-sounding terms that the great master would find interesting, instead of explaining it the way that you think about it.  And so, what people would do, they would get lost in trying to convert what they're doing to his language.  And so, they're doing everything on his terms.  And he wasn't asking them to do that because he could talk just as easily on your terms as his terms.  And so, I'd--what I actually did was I essentially, kind of spent a lot of time on my own just teaching myself all the stuff I didn't know.  So basically I worked through the famous textbook of the time which was "Green, Schwarz and Witten," Witten being one of the authors.  And so I'd work through that; Green and Schwarz being those two people who triggered the first superstring revolution.  So that was the textbook.  That was at the time the only string theory textbook.  So I--and then lots of other kinds of books on geometry and what have you.  So I spent a lot of my time essentially hiding and working on this stuff so that I could learn what people were up to.  And then I got talking with Ed one day all about--about this project that he thought would be interesting to do.  And he explained it all to me, and I didn't have a clue about a lot of the things he was talking about, so I went away and I learned those things and I came back.  And then I started building these models.  And there was this idea that had been out in this paper that some people on the West Coast had done, [Steven] Giddings, Strominger, and [Joseph] Polchinski, Giddings--Polchinski and Strominger, had written this paper with the certain kind of way they built this model, and Ed found this interesting.  And so, he suggested that I look into it.  So I started working on this, this set of models, and I figured out how to generalize what they'd done and build it into a larger framework.  And that was largely--it began with suggestions from Ed.  He said, "Why don't you try this," what have you, and then I'd try it.  And as I got more experienced, then I start trying some things on my own and what have you.
Story_ID: 31128
Speaker 1: And I would go--and I learned how to talk to him [Edward Witten] during that period.  And a lot of it was--and he was very, very patient--and in some ways he was, I guess, the closest thing that I had at that time to a real mentor in the sense that he gave a lot of his time, and I learned a lot about how to do physics and how to think about physics from him.  And he didn't by saying, "You should do it this way."  I kind of just began to see what was working by trying to figure out how to talk to him.  So one of the most important things I learned was, and again I could see how other people were doing things, and moved away from that because I could see that it was frustrating to him when someone would try and talk to him about physics or he would try to talk to someone about physics, and what they would do is they try and impress him with all of the equations they could write down.  And because everyone at the time would think, Oh, he's this incredible sort of mathematical, you know, genius-type, so you have to explain everything in terms of mathematics.  I began to realize, No.  He's actually a physicist who happens to be really good a mathematics as well, but at the core he's a physicist, which is something that's still not appreciated as much as, I think, it should be.  And so, what you prefer, instead you just picking up a piece of chalk and scribble all over the board all the fancy mathematics that you could do, which wouldn't impress him because, you know, he knows more mathematics than any of us, so why even do that.  He would at some point you'd see him talking to someone and they'd be doing that, and he'd go--he has slightly higher pitched voice--so he'd go, "I don't know what we're talking about."  And he'd say that.  And then the person would go to pieces because they think they've made a mistake, what have you.  But it's because they forgot to just say what the physics is.  So I learned that very early on.  Don't come into his office and, you know--he'd make a time and say, "You come by at two and spend some time."  Don't just stand there and try to impress him with equations.  Tell him the physics of what you're thinking about.  So I learned to do that.  And that made a big impression for me early on.  And then we'd have great conversations because then we'd be talking about how the thing should work out and what have you.  What actually happened was that, we got into an argument at some point because I was explaining to him this result I was stuck on, because he was saying that this particular result should have some technical properties; a certain kind of symmetry which translates into rotational invariance is the term.  And he [Edward Witten] would say, "Should be rotational invariant."  And that means that you should essential get certain kinds of terms disappearing in the equations and leaving you with just the things that were rotational invariant.  Doesn't matter exactly what that means, but it was--again he was using guidance from the symmetry.  He didn't want to look at the equations.  And I was getting stuck because I couldn't get those terms to vanish as should have happened.  He'd say, "Those terms should vanish."  We argued back and forth.  And I spent a long time, months redoing the calculation, trying all kinds of things, getting frustrated and blah, blah, blah; went through a really, really dark period trying to figure this all out.  And so, I ended up know that stuff so well because I was trying to find a way to get this work in the way he said.  And then one day we met and I was explaining it to him.  And then it became clear that actually what I was doing was actually right, and what he was saying should have happened was wrong.  He was right in the general sense; it should be rotationally invariant, but it was another way that the model could be rotationally invariant that he hadn't anticipated that I had found.  And to cut a long story short, it worked in a really interesting way, the whole thing.  I had these really new beautiful class of models that no one had seen before.  I wrote a really beautiful paper about it.  I was very pleased.  It's still one of my favorite papers.  And in the end, due to having to sort of fight with him about that, and actually turning out to be correct in the details; I mean he was morally correct in terms of where he was pushing me was right, but the way it worked out that I'd seen long before that he wouldn't accept, was actually right.  That kind of butting of wills, I think, was the place that really made me find my voice as an independent physicist for real that time.  And as a bonus, I learned how to talk to what was supposedly the scariest man in the field at the time, the smartest man in the field, and all of that.  I had a real understanding.  And so, that was just a really transformational period for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that gave you, I guess, a lot of confidence to (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My confidence--I found my voice, by which I mean my own particular style and my own particular confidence that I could actually, really go head to head with, you know, the best and have something to contribute.
Story_ID: 31129
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you were there [Institute for Advanced Study], at the laboratory for how long?
Speaker 2: So I was at the institute [Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey] as a member of the institute for two years, although I was at Princeton for three because I went--I--because I had this strange overlap between the fellowships, I was able to find a way to go a full three years--I wasn't to defer the fellowship, the second one by the full year, so there was kind of a overlap, but it meant that I could go into a third year and finish that third year if I got some extra work at Princeton University.  So Ed spoke with--Ed Witten spoke with David Gross, who was at the physics department and Curt Callan, I think, and they had some temporary instructor positions open, and so I was able to take one of those.  So that meant that I could be in Princeton for three years in total.  And by then, by that last year, I had secured my next post doc, which would be on the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's in Santa Barbara [California], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, how did you choose to go out to Santa Barbara?  I mean, what was the attraction?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: (unclear) being the most beautiful place (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, it was that.  But it was also interesting that--oh, sorry.  I am sorry, I have to tell you this--this story.  So again, you apply for postdocs and then various people get in touch, and call you up and make you, and you an offer or what have you.  So I applied for post docs, not knowing what was going to happen whether I'd make it in America as it were.  I also applied to some places back in the U.K. [United Kingdom], essentially all the groups doing the kinds of things I was doing in various places.  Anyway, one of the places that made me an offer, and in fact, called me, was this new group in Wales, now headed up by the same guy who had told me back when I was an undergraduate that they were not going to take me at Imperial [College, London, England] to do a Ph.D. because they're going with someone smarter.  So now I have this conversation with him where he's trying to entice me, because I'd been doing well in America, to come and be a part of their new group.  And what I should have said, and I wish--you know what happens when you wished you'd said that thing after you put the phone down--what I should have said was, "I'm going somewhere better," but I unfortunately didn't.  I just sort of politely declined and--but I did have some satisfaction in turning them down.  Yeah, that was a good time.
Speaker 1: You were the bigger person.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I like to think of it that way, yeah.
Story_ID: 31130
Speaker 1: Anyway, so I went off to Santa Barbara [California].  There's two main reasons.  Santa Barbara's one of the main places--at that time and still now what you do is, you apply to as many places as you can because the statistics are low.  There're few people who get these postdoctoral positions, so you apply to lots of them.  And you're not so lucky to choose the geography.  You just hope that someone gives you a postdoctoral position.  So anyway, Santa Barbara, I was particularly partial to because that stuff I'd been working on with Ed Witten under his guidance that I wrote those papers as a result of at the institute [Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey] was based on the germ of some ideas that were in a model that had been constructed in Santa Barbara.  So I kind of was interested in those people and their way of thinking because I had been studying their paper.  So Santa Barbara was a natural place.  But it didn't mean that I would have a chance of going there.  But it does--it did help, I think.  What I did was I sent out the applications, and then I bought a plane ticket and flew out to the West Coast and basically tried to give talks, research talks at all the key places that I had applied to because I--it does help you, it does help you a lot if they can put a name to, you know, a face to the name of the applicant.  They really get a sense--rather than you just being a piece of paper application, they could really tell is this person a good physicist, can I have an interesting conversation with them, all those things.  So I showed up and gave what I understand were some really, really good talks at Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], which is one place I applied to; UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] and Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara].  So I did this sort of mini tour as it were.  My first time in southern California in the torrential rain, yeah (laughter).  It never rains in southern California, that was my first experience.  So I had a great time, and I think I got--I think I got offers from Cal-Tech, Santa Barbara and somewhere else.  UCLA?  I can't remember.  But anyway, I went to Santa Barbara because, you know, it's Santa Barbara and I really wanted to work with [Joseph] "Joe" Polchinski, who I did work with.  And in some ways he was--again, there're three people I wanted--during those formative years who really took me seriously.  Edward Witten was the first; the other person was a young guy at McGill [University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada] in Canada called [Robert] "Rob" Myers who saw that paper I wrote as a result of that stuff I was arguing with Ed [Edward Witten] over, and thought it was really great, and emailed me and we actually wrote a follow-up paper to that together over email without ever having met.  That was a big deal in those days.  Now people do that that kind of thing all the time.  But in those days, you know, 1994--'93 [1993]; '93 [1993]-'94 [1994], something like that, to meet and essentially write a really nice paper together entirely over email was still a big deal.  So we did that.  So Rob Myers was another person who really took me seriously, and it was never sort of mentor-younger person arrangement.  We just clicked and we were like collaborators, and we just bounced ideas off each other, and we've been great friends ever since.  And then the third person was when I moved to Santa Barbara and Joe Polchinski was really, again, someone I had lots of physics conversations with and, again, who I really watched closely in terms of learning his style and his approach.  And he's a person I, you know, I learned a lot of things from.  The kinds of problem that I got interested in when I went over there [University of California, Santa Barbara] was influenced a lot by him.
Story_ID: 31131
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now [Joseph] Polchinski is the person who discovers that theory requires inclusion of higher dimensional objects called D-branes?
Speaker 2: D-branes, right.  Yes, yes.  So [Joseph] "Joe" [Polchinski] was indeed the main force behind the whole D-brane thing.  So Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara] at that time was just about to--it was a great--again I was--you know, in a really amazing place.  Great people coming through.  It was just about to explode in terms of being this tremendous center for a lot of activity in string theory.  And this time I didn't come late like I did at the institute [Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey] where there was all this amazing stuff that I was trying to plug into.  In this case, I was there and, you know, and played a little bit of a role in the explosion myself.  So that was a kind of a good situation to be in.  So the second superstring revolution happened.  Edward Witten gave a now famous talk in 1995, actually here on the USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] campus, explaining a bunch of new results that turned lots of things on its head.  All those different kinds of string theories that we thought were different were all connected in a way that was all unexpected, and all of that strongly coupled non-perturbative stuff that we had hints of before really exploded and became front and foremost and people understood it.  Later on I was to understand my--the models I worked on on my Ph.D. in the context of that, as I said, some of that stuff had precursors in those models I worked on; didn't realize it at the time but it was to come.  But anyway, so that explosion, that revolution happened, but the revolution needed sharp, sharp tools in order to do the calculations to really sort of make the revolution happen.  And the sharp tools were the D-branes that Joe brought to center stage.  And so, he wrote this fantastic paper that really showed the tremendous--some tremendous properties of D-branes that really began to drive the field.  But one of the interesting things was that the techniques in those papers were from a part of string theory that people had stopped learning because some other aspect of string theory had become center stage for the last decade or so.  And so, there were techniques of string theory that Joe knew about because Joe is Joe, he knows a lot of string theory and--but no other people knew those techniques.  And he gave some lectures at the institute to some of the people there, just some short lectures.  And I had the idea that what we should do is turn those lectures into notes, and so, I got talking with Joe and another young post doc at the time, Chamerlie Shurdery (ph.), and we really sort of convinced Joe that what we would do is we would take notes, and then we would collaborate with him to write essentially what would be a little handbook that people would be able to use to help learn this new language with this new technique.  And so, indeed, that's what we did.  So we put out these notes onto the web as it was at the time.  And that actually was one of the driving forces for the revolution [second superstring revolution 1994-1997] because suddenly everybody was on the same page literally.  They  had the same techniques in the same notation in the same normalization in a nice, handy set of notes that Joe had given, and we'd sort of expanded and helped him write into this nice form.  And so those notes became super famous.  Everybody had a copy of those notes in the field.
Speaker 1: Are those notes on D-branes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, those are the notes on D-branes.  And basically, everybody around the world read those notes and then it was their entry point into this new language, new set of techniques.  And that, that combined with the fact that around that time more and more people were using the online archive instead of waiting for papers to come out in journals, and all of that kind of stuff.  And so, there was this amazing time where these new ideas came out using lots of--showing how to use lots of old techniques in new ways, combine them with new techniques to bring out new things.  These notes came out, and then people were putting papers out which were instantaneously being read the following day, you know, within a day, all around the world.  People didn't wait for journals any more for this.  So basically our field was just boiling with amazing ideas, and nearly every day--there was a period when nearly every day there'd be an amazing paper that just broke new ground using these techniques or what have you.  And so, it was just great to be part of that and to help fuel it by writing those notes.  And then we all sort of had that--the common basis from which we could then do new research.  And then I wrote some really, really nice papers in those times in collaboration with student of Joe's, a guy called Eric Jamal (ph.), and under the guidance of Joe and things like that, and really just exploded in terms of the kinds of things I was able to do.  And then, you know, people began to invite me to come and give lectures about the techniques.  And so, I would then began to lecture in summer schools and things like that, and got to know a lot of the young people coming up, and help train them in these new techniques because, you know that--it was all coming out of Santa Barbara then.  For a while the balance of power, in terms of where the really exciting stuff was coming from, had shifted to Santa Barbara.  And from the East Coast to the West Coast, and that was--I made that move as well, so it was just really great timing, and I helped, I think, helped drive some of that.  And then, I really--that was sort of the second major aspect of my finding my voice, if you'd like, in the field.
Story_ID: 31132
Speaker 1: Now, this [Notes on D-branes] is your most important work, right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would say in terms of the--so, you know, in terms of the helping write the notes alone, although there was no original work in that.  It was just helping write some notes and helping connect people.  I list as a significant effort because it wouldn't have happened had I not pushed for it to happen and suggested to [Joseph] "Joe" [Polchinski], let's do these notes.  So, although that wasn't, you know, original physics per se, I think that plays an important role as well.  But then in writing those notes, I had to learn those techniques, so it then put me in the position where I could now use those techniques, and then I had Joe down the hall; and it wasn't just Joe, there were other people like Andy Strominger and Gary Horowitz, and [Steven] "Steve" Giddings, and people like that who were around.  And all the giants in the field were visiting.  They would come and visit and what have you.  The institute for theoretical physics, now called the KITP, Kavli Institute [for Theoretical Physics] is in part a visitor's center.  It has resident physicists, but it also has visitor programs, it has conferences and workshops and what have you.  So basically, just everybody, if you came to the West Coast you're probably going to come through.  And so, in addition to all the great people we had, and all the fantastic young post docs as well, we had all of these visitors.  And so, it meant that I was able to learn a lot of what was going on and contribute to it, and then I was just spending a lot of time doing some fantastic calculations that people hadn't done before, and putting things together in a great way.  And so some of my best work indeed was from that time, and there were times when we were just--we were just racing because you just had an idea, you worked it out, and you shaped it into a paper, you get it out because so much was going on.  If you didn't get it out, someone else was probably going to come up with something similar or you know, steal your thunder or what have you.  It was a very exciting time.  I was also still collaborating with [Robert] "Rob" Myers who I'd met before, and so we did some really nice things.  For example, when the major breakthrough in string theory, arguably still one of the most important results, was to show that you could use string theory to compute, from first principles, what's called the entropy of a black hole, a result that goes back to [Jacob] Beckenstein and [Stephen] Hawking in the '70s [1970s] in sort of early approaches to quantum gravity that were incomplete.  But what you needed to do was find the full view of quantum gravity and then show that their result was true.  And string theory was the first theory to do that, and it required to be done--it needed that realization of the stuff that happened in the '90s [1990s] to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have to pause here again.
Story_ID: 31133
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, what--I have to ask this again after we just talked about this.  What did--would be--can you summarize kind of like what is a day like for a physicist?  I mean, what do you do?  (unclear) people, you know, whether these are (unclear).  What are they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, a research day or a day that is primarily  research is--is of the following form.  So you either have--so one of the first things to mention, especially if you're a theorist, but it's true in general, is that you never really fully switch it off.  You know, you kind of to some extent live and breathe the physics in the sense that you're--there's just a quest to know--to know why or to figure this thing out.  And so, you kind of wake up, and once you've dealt with the basics you're back on--you're back on duty, as it were.  You've got your boots on (laughter).  And so, especially as a theorist such as I am, I don't have to go to this place where I do an experiment.  It means I'm already at work in my head.  Sometimes if it's a problem I'm currently working on that's really bugging me, it can be from the moment I wake up or I've been dreaming about it perhaps sometimes in the extremes.  Anyway, you wake up and you start thinking about the problem.  So often it really is that business of you come up with a good idea.  Wherever it comes from, you don't care as long as you have an idea.  And I should say ideas are cheap in the sense that what really stands the test is when you take the idea and you wrangle it and twist it and see what all the consequences are, and is it still holding up as an idea.  Then it's an idea.  But having a good idea in terms of some crazy thing you thought of; or some really super smart thing that you thought of.  Those are cheap actually, because no matter or how crazy or super smart they are, if they don't work, they're no good to you.  So you're constantly dreaming up ideas of one form or another, and then you have to test those ideas.  So typically what you're doing is you're testing those ideas against what is already known, what is already established.  So you have an idea and you go, "Well, does this mean I can now connect this thing and this thing, these two things that I've been trying to connect or explain this in terms of that."  And so, that idea goes, "Okay. Yeah, maybe I can put these things together in that way, using that idea."  Then you go, "Well, what are the consequences of that?  Does it violate some principle I already know is true because it's been experimentally tested or what have you?  Does it imply something that I know is already wrong because I've already put together some other piece of the puzzle, something like that."  So it is very much like--I use the word puzzle--it's very much like solving a jigsaw puzzle.  You're putting pieces together.  There may be some clusters over here that you've got right, and then you're trying to put together some cluster over here.  Now putting something over--putting in this piece over here might contradict something you did out there, so that's a weak test already that you shouldn't do that.  And then so eventually you then piece these pieces together and maybe you can then join them together and what have you.  So that's sort of the logistics in your head of what you do.  But then how do you do those tests?  Some of those questions I just asked like, does putting this together in this way contradict this other thing?  Sometimes that could be months or even years to check whether the answer to that question is.  And that, as a theorist, means you're writing equations, you're working out the mathematical consequences of that thing because the language of physics is mathematics.  The language of nature as far as we understand it, how the blueprint is written, if you'd like, the DNA is written in mathematics.  Nobody knows why that is the case, but it is the case as far as we can see.  So you use mathematical consistency as the first test of anything.  It's a mathematical process of extracting the consequences of a physics principle that you've presented.  So often that just means sitting around calculating, and from the outside that means you're sitting at your desk or in my case I like sit outside in the cafe--you know, in a cafe or, you know, even at the beach, or at home, or in my office, or on campus somewhere, and I'm calculating, or I'm staring into space; it looks like I daydreaming, and to some extent I am daydreaming.  And you're trying to see how it all fits together.  You're reaching for the ideas or you're trying to remember how that calculation went or that paper I wrote back in so and so and so; how did I do that?  I guess I'm going to go and look it up.  But sometimes you don't want to go look it up.  You want to refigure it out because the exercise of figuring it out is sometimes a very useful thing.  So there's a lot of the dreaming apparently, I mean, it seems.  But it's very useful mental exercises.  As an experimenter, you're doing kind of the same thing but a lot of that sort of working out the mathematical consequences of idea "X," instead as an experimenter, you're working out the experimental consequences.  You're going to look for it or you're going to see what the limits are on that signal that you predicted might existed, and you need to design an experiment and build it in order to test out that idea, that sort of thing.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 31134
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's why I guess the historical heroes of physics are mathematicians, and Isaac Newton and [Albert] Einstein--
Speaker 2: The physics and the mathematics often go together, but not always.  There are heroes in physics of all shapes and sizes, not all of whom are--were, you know, legendary mathematicians or invented entire new fields of mathematics like Newton did.  Because there's also skill and discipline in having what in the science world in the experimental circles you'd say good hands.  Just--there are people who are through experience and, you know, they're enthusiasm for doing that kind of thing, are very good at designing beautiful experiments, tests and things, because there's an art to designing a good experiment that tests just the right thing in the right way, that sifts through all the noise.  You know, if stuff was easy to discover, we would have figured it all out by now.  So what you have to do, a lot of physics, a lot of science in general is finding ways of getting everything else to shut up so that you can see the thing you want to see.  And so that requires someone to design a good experiment.  So just as important as someone to come up with a clever piece of mathematics to do a fantastic calculation, a smart way of doing this integral, or calculating this thing, inventing some new form of calculus that's going to do this thing.  Just as important as that is someone who's also able to say, "Well, given all the things we have available to us, you know, with our available technology, how can I put these things together to amplify just that signal to answer that question?"  To look in all of the junk that's coming out when you look out into the sky in all spectra, to be able to look at just the right things with the right sensitivity, to listen to the very earliest sounds that came from say, that particular collapsing star or the very earliest light that the universe ever emitted, right.  The Planck Satellite right now, that is--has been up there for a couple of years now.  It's going to tell us so much about the early universe.  It's a very delicate, beautifully designed experiment that's able to look with tremendous accuracy at the oldest light in the universe from when the universe, which is thirteen point seven billion years, and when the universe was just a few hundred thousand years old.  That's kind of amazing.  And that requires being able to shut out all that other junk so that you can look for that right--just that right thing, and then make sense of it.  So anyway--
Story_ID: 31135
Speaker 1: Okay.  After the postdoctoral fellowship in Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara], you--is that when you go to the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.  So around the time that I was finishing up in--
Speaker 1: This is 1997 now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is around 1997, so actually I had already been talking with the University of Kentucky earlier than that and so--so that, I could have left Santa Barbara early and gone and taken up that first, assistant professorship--at the University of Kentucky, and I decided that that would have been a spectacularly bad idea because, A: I wasn't ready.  I was still learning so much and still doing so much, and still finding my voice as a physicist than I already had.  And so, Santa Barbara was the place to be.  So what I did is I stayed there for as long as I could.  And actually, there was a year where I did a semester in Santa Barbara and then a semester in Kentucky to kind of start out, but then came back to Santa Barbara for a little while longer.  So it was around '97 [1997], but actually, I didn't really begin full time professoring (air quotes) (laugher) there until '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you think of the University of Kentucky?  This seems like the oddest choice in all the choices you made so far to me in some ways, but--
Speaker 2: Well, it seems that way if you assume that one has the luxury of choosing.  But in academia in general and in my field in particular, when a job comes you go for it, because it may be the only chance you ever get.  Because there's a ton of smart people out there, all wanting--you know, my kind of stuff is not done anywhere but in academia.  So if I want to keep doing it, I have to stay in academia.  And so, then you ask how many academic positions are there in all of physics?  Not so many each year.  How many academic positions are there in theoretical physics?  Even fewer.  How many are in my field?  Even fewer.  How many in my narrow corner of activity in my field?  Very, very few.  So when a job offer comes that wants you to bring your skill set to their department or what have you, it doesn't matter where it is on the planet, you're going to go if you love what you do enough.  So, you know, you will find that somebody is, you know, a professor a physics in some city in China you've never heard of and they're not Chinese or what have you, and it might be because they love what they do enough to go wherever on the planet they need to do to do it.  So Kentucky is not that strange a choice from that perspective.  It also turned out that it's not that far from Cincinnati [Ohio].  Lexington [Kentucky], which is a city that also is kind of exciting--it was beginning to be exciting at the time, at least from my perspective in terms of--they were revitalizing their downtown and what have you.  The University of Cincinnati [Ohio] has a good community of physicists as well.  So it's not like it's an isolated place.  It's not too far from Chicago [Illinois] as well, so in principle, I could have, you know tried to hop on a plane and go up and talk to the people up there, and in the end, I never did that.  I didn't go there thinking I was going to be hanging out with the Chicago people all that way north.  But my point is is that the world is not as--these places are not as isolated as all that with the web and with short flights and things like that.  That's my main point.
Speaker 1: Okay. (Simultaneous).
Story_ID: 31136
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So anyway I went to Kentucky, and another thing that was very encouraging to me there is how supportive everyone was.  They really wanted to go, you know, as far as I needed them to go to make me comfortable as a physicist there.  I applied for the early career NSF, National Science Foundation grant once I got there, and actually got it.  And that was a really big deal at the time.  And I missed out on meeting the President, because I was put forward--there's an extra--extra, the ones that they really, really like, you get the award, but then they--you get a presidential one, which is just sort of a extra icing on the cake, and you get to go to the White House.  And so, they called me to check the details and then realized that I hadn't yet had my green card, so I couldn't get the presidential one.  So I missed out going to the White House and meeting [William] "Bill" Clinton [U.S. president 1993-2001], but anyway (laughter).  So that was a good time.  I used that grant well because I basically got the grant to support my research and one of the things I argued for was a strong visitor program because I was, you know, relatively isolated compared to the places I'd been.  So I got extra money in to bring visitors in.  And so, I wrote a number of really exciting papers there using some of that visitor money because I was able to bring in collaborators.  And so my next round of activity that resulted in some papers I really still hold up as groundbreaking work, came from me bringing in some of my collaborators to visit for, you know, a week, a couple of weeks, what have you, and then we worked together there at Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  So there was a lot of stuff people are out there doing now in the field at large which is all the rage and fashionable, which all began with some of those papers I wrote in Kentucky, in the middle of nowhere comparatively speaking.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have a schedule that was--permitted you to do a lot of research or did you have to teach mostly--
Speaker 1: I had to teach, but if you're an active researcher, at least in my field, active researcher with external funding from wherever, it means that you can--you are understood as a value to the department for their research profile.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, they're smart enough to go, "Don't load them up with teaching," especially if they're a young person.
Speaker 2: So that's like--so you're like fifty-fifty, or--
Speaker 1: So the contract, the standard contract usually is fifty-fifty or thereabouts, but what that means, you know, is in the details.  So you have people on fifty-fifty contracts in places who are teaching more than one class at a time at a given semester with no time for research, although technically it's fifty-fifty, but in reality it isn't.  But typically, if you were a reasonably well-funded active researcher who was going out there and doing stuff and bringing in both research dollars and research prestige for the department, you usually have one major class that you're teaching per semester.  And then you do service and research on top of that.  So that's a typical contract for sort of active researchers in my field.  But it does depend upon the department I should say.
Story_ID: 31137
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in--this is a--now, tell me if I skip over something, but in 1999, you published three highly cited publications.  One was 'Charged--I don't know if I'm saying this correctly,-- AdS Black Holes and Catastrophic Holography,' with Roberto Emparan and--
Speaker 2: Emparan, Andrew Chamblin and Robert Myers.
Speaker 1: --and Robert Myers, right.  The Canadian that you been collaborating with.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: So explain what these are about.
Speaker 2: So these were--these were some of the immediate consequences of something tremendous that had happened in the field a year and a half before.  So I had gotten in on this game because of this stuff with D-branes in Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara], the fields was able to understand, as I mentioned, things about black holes that had long been conjectured, hinted at, but not sort of shown from first principles in a complete theory of quantum gravity because there hadn't been a complete theory of quantum gravity until we made these advances in string theory.  And so, so as I had said before, there was this groundbreaking paper by Strominger and Vafer (ph.) who showed how to compute the entropy of black--a certain class of black holes in five dimensions and actually with some collaborators, including Rob Myers.  the first paper to do it in four dimensions was one I wrote, when I was at Santa Barbara.  So that--we were sharpening our teeth as it were on that sort of area as a field, using black holes--understanding aspects of black holes, but also using black holes to understand some other things, which I'll tell you about shortly.  So then a young guy who was a student at the time Juan Maldasena at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] made a conjecture called the "AdS/CFT correspondence," which changed so much again in our field.  It kind of grew out of this business with the black holes and was related to it in a way, but it became an idea in its own right.  And in some sense, what it said was that, there are theories--there are things that are gravitational, things that have gravity going on, and then there are things are non-gravitational of a certain kind; certain kinds of theories we've been using in particle physics for a lot, to build the standard model of particle physics and things like that.  And these things have long been shown to be very, very different from each other.  But it turned out that if you look at them in the right regime, in a regime where they both become unfamiliar, they end up looking like each other.  So there's a--hitherto unrealized connection between the two different kinds of theory, and that connection is called the AdS-- Well, it's part of what all of us have been working on anyway called the "gauge gravity correspondence," which takes string theories and relates these things called "gauge theories" to theories of gravity.  And we've seen pieces of it in the black hole stuff, but Juan [Maldasena] and then [Edward] Witten and others really sharpened it into a powerful tool, came up with this example called the AdS/CFT correspondence.  So that's the background.  So very shortly after the AdS/CFT correspondence, and some of the subsequent papers that Witten wrote showing how black holes in that context can tell you things about particle theories, gauge theories.  I began talking with my collaborators, again Rob Myers and now Andrew Chamblin and Roberto Emparan, who all people who I had hung out with in Santa Barbara; and Rob would sometimes visit from Canada.  We began to push this further and began to show that, in fact, if you add some extra ingredients and look at a different kind of black hole, and it give you sort of more parameters you can play with to explore new kinds of physics, you could understand a whole class of new kinds of behaviors in this type of gravity theory.  But because of this connection I was trying to explain, it predicts new kinds of properties what are called phase transitions like boiling water and things like that, changes of phase of these kinds of non-gravity theories.  So this sounds like a really abstract "how many angels can dance on the head of a pin"-kind of discussion.
Story_ID: 31138
Speaker 1: But the reason this is very powerful has since been recognized.  But soon after these papers, I already began to explore the consequences of this and give talks to people saying that this is going to be really powerful, because those non-gravitational theories that I'm talking about turned out to be of a type that's used in other areas of particle physics already, and other areas of also condensed matter physics. So all of a sudden we have this new technique in string theory, it's as if we do things with these black holes in these abstract theories of gravity over here, and we do the right kinds of things, you can translate those results into new results for the kinds of theories that people already know are connected it to things in nature.  So what I'm saying is that there's this fantastic toolbox that we've develop in string theory to apply to other stuff to do with particle phys--to do with origins of the universe and properties of black holes and what have you.  And that toolbox, you know, something we're still developing to see whether string theory is going to be the useful thing we think it is for all of these things.  But that toolbox through this other connection turns out to be useful for a broader area of physics applications they were first invented for.  So it's somewhat one of the things I've began to push on.  So those papers were for me some of the earliest ones that were really explicitly going in that direction to make that connection with that new area.  And then a lot of my work after that, after the University of Kentucky and into when I went to the University of Durham [Durham, England], back to England, a lot of my work then was geared towards trying to make sense of this idea I had that we could be using these tools in this powerful way for some experiments that we're beginning to switch in Brookhaven [Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, Long Island, New York] and Long Island.  And so, that was sort of the direction I was pushing in and, in fact, I'm still working on today.
Story_ID: 31139
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you left the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] in 2000?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what happened?  You just--did you get another offer or something?
Speaker 2: I got another offer.  There were several things came together at the time.  One was at the time, well in 2000, I proposed to my girlfriend at the time to get married, and she was also English and there was the idea that I could actually go back to England.  She was also in academic and she would, you know, we'd be together in England.  So Durham [University of Durham, Durham, England] was in an area where there were--but Durham and one of its neighboring universities also had strong programs in the areas that she worked, so it's kind of a hope that if I took that position, maybe something would work out for both of us eventually over the time.  So there was that aspect and at the same time it was also a much more senior position, you know, in a much larger research group for my area of research with, you know, at a really fantastic university with a long history of great work.  Ironically it was one of the places that I almost went to to do my Ph.D. work, so I also had a soft spot for it.  And Durham is a beautiful city as well.  It has fantastic castle and cathedral kind of prominent in the cityscape, and then beautiful light, and it's a fantastic place to live, and it was back home in England.
Speaker 1: Was it close to where your parents [Victor Reginald Johnson and Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] lived?
Speaker 2: England's very small, so by U.S. [United States] standards, anywhere I went to in England would be ridiculously close to the rest of my family, so there was that aspect as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I meant to finish your family now.  Now what do they make of you becoming a theoretical physicist, and I often ask this question, what do make--I mean what do they really make of that, I mean--?
Speaker 2: So the honest answer is that I don't fully know, and you have to ask them.  Because--and I say that because of course none of them are academics, so to some extent the academic world, you know, is a world that they don't fully know, but what they do understand is I think the most important aspects, and one is that I'm reasonably successful at what I do, whatever it is I do.  I'm reasonably successful at it.  I enjoy it, have a passion for it and I, you know, and I work at it, and you know, I also can pay the bills with it (laughter).  So basically I think that, you know, my understanding is that they're very comfortable with that and they're very proud of the fact that, you know, I've gone out there and set my sights on this sort of thing and went out there and got it and did it, and to some extent with their support in the sense that, you know, whenever I was younger, especially I'd express an interest in doing X, Y, or Z, there'd been nothing but support, "Yes, go for it."  And so, I think that they're proud of that.  They're proud of what I've achieved, even if they don't fully relate to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're pausing again here.
Story_ID: 31140
Speaker 1: Now, what's the most notable thing about your stay at the University of Durham [Durham, England]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, now, that's a tough one.  I had a great time there.  I, you know, I was now part of a much larger group, one of the largest groups of that kind of research activity anywhere.  It was very large, both people from the mathematics department and the physics department.  Ironically, I was in the mathematics department.  There's something about, something sort of culturally about the departments in universities in the U.K. [United Kingdom] where some of my kind of work can sit quite comfortably in a mathematics department because it goes under what's called applied mathematics, and there's a tradition of applied mathematics in the U.K. that is sort of different from the same thing here.  And so, yes, I was in the mathematics department for a while which was an interesting time for me.  And so it meant that my, the rest of my colleagues outside of my area were not physicists so much as mathematicians which was, which was kind of nice because I have some affinity for that sort of cultural--the cultural trappings of the mathematician.  So that was, anyway, interesting.  I also did some nice, some nice work there.  I really began to sharpen my ideas about what kinds of things you can learn about what are called "strongly-coupled gauge theories" by using these correspondences that I was telling you about.  So I really tried to do more of that, tried to go, get a lot of activity going as well, and really help build the group, build up.  There was some need there for sort of new activity from young people in my area.  And so I was sort of the beginning of that on the more formal side to mathematics, the mathematics department side of the group.  And so I was able to come and then, again, get the feeling that people really wanted to do their best to, you know, help one thrive.  And so I was able to get a lot of activity going.  Even in the limited funding, circum--relatively limited funding circumstances at the U.K., I was able to do some good things, I think, in terms of helping the group run really, really good students.  You get some of the best students coming to [The University of] Durham.  That was a great time.  So I trained some really, really great students.  And it was just nice to plug back into the U.K.  Now, as a grown up, as opposed to when I last was there, you know, professionally, I was a student.  Now, I was back, and I was back at a senior level.  I was, I went there already with a senior position as opposed to coming in at the junior level and working my way up.  I'd sort of done that elsewhere, and then I came in at the senior level.  So that was an interesting aspect as well because it meant that I was also now able to count as my colleagues, my peers, people who previously were, when I last saw them, you know, I was the student looking up at them.  And I'm now I was sort of looking across at them as it were.  So that was kind of interesting.  And so it meant I could have a lot of interesting conversations with people who I'd heard of in the field, but not really known as well.  So that was kind of nice.
Story_ID: 31141
Speaker 1: It was the first time I really began to get to know people in the, in Cambridge [University, Cambridge, England], actually, interestingly.  So there's an unusual thing, it seems.  Usually, when people meet me especially in America, and they hear I have an English accent, and I'm an academic, they assume, if I'm a reasonably successful, British academic, that I've either been to Oxford [University, Oxford, England] or Cambridge.  And they're usually surprised when I say I've been to neither.  I've had nothing to do with either, very nice places, but I just didn't choose that route.  And so I sometimes, and sometimes I'm offered up as a counter example.  It is possible to do well in academia (laughter) without having gone to Oxford and Cambridge.  I mean everyone in England knows that, but the rest of the world doesn't seem to have realized that.
Speaker 2: That's right, seems like the only two that most people can name.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, but it is true that I didn't have much contact with a lot of, especially Cambridge, until long after, until I was actually now a senior person back in Britain.  And the change happened a lot because, well, A: I went back to Britain, but B: a good friend of mine who was a coauthor on some of those papers I wrote when I was in Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], was an American, Andrew Chamblin.  He's sadly now passed away, but at the time, he was a good friend, with a huge amount of energy.  And he'd done some of his work, his--he'd done his Ph.D. and some of his early post-doctoral years at Cambridge.  He was actually a student Stephen Hawking's.  And so what happened is that he would go back and talk with Hawking from time to time and go and visit and what have you.  And I found myself then going, when Andrew [Chamblin] would be visiting in the Cambridge area, I'd maybe go and see him in Cambridge.  And so I got to know some of the Cambridge people, some of whom, whose papers I knew very well.  I just never met these people.  Some of them are legendary people and had done great things in my field, people like Paul Townsend and Gary Gibbons and people like that.  And so I finally got to meet some of these people ironically, through someone who was from Texas.  So, go figure.  So anyway, I had really plugged back into the British community in a way that was good for me at a personal level as well as at a professional level.  Ultimately, I only stayed there for three years because the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] made me an offer I couldn't refuse, and you know, once you've been to California, southern California, you tend to find your way back eventually (laughter).  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 31142
Speaker 1: Well, before, while we're talking about Britain, I just wanna ask you what you thought of the movie "The Brief History of Time".  That came out around '95 [1995] or so.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Did you ever see that?
Speaker 2: I heard there was a movie.  I never saw it.  It, you know, it was based on, I think, [Stephen] Hawking's book.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it featured Hawking--
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: It featured him explaining (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it didn't interest me to see the film for many reasons, not the least because I--it wasn't really for me.  And I didn't think that the book was particularly--it's not, it wouldn't be the first book I would base a film on in that it was--it didn't strike me as particularly good material to base a book on--no, sorry, to base a film on, excuse me.  A good, certainly good material to write a book about, but it wasn't clear to me why you would make a film of it.  And so it sounded more like it was about Hawking than about physics.
Speaker 1: It was more of a biography of (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, you know, I wasn't that interested in seeing a biography of Hawking.  So I, I--you know, if people saw it and got some, and were led to find out more physics, that's wonderful.  And these biographical things or semi-biographical things are great for that.  I'm not saying there's anything wrong with that.  It's just that I saw no reason to go out and see it myself.  And there was a lot, I think at the time, there was just a lot of you know, sort of Hawking stuff in the air.  And I, you know, I'm interested when he had something interesting to say physics wise, but I'm not so, not rushing to find out personal stuff.
Story_ID: 31143
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, back at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California], right, 2003?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2003, indeed.
Speaker 1: All right, so you're a faculty member of the physics and astronomy department.
Speaker 2: Physics and astronomy, yeah, they're combined departments, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you're not really doing any astronomy?
Speaker 2: No, I don't sort of stare through a telescope for professional reasons although I do like looking through telescopes.  But I'm not by any stretch of the imagination a professional astronomer.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So well, give us--now, you worked with the high-energy theory group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everything I was talking about, in the old days often would be called particle physics or what have you.  But to call it particle physics, kind of doesn't give you a good place where to put the stuff on black holes and string theory and gravity and cosmology and things like that.  So a much more useful, broader term that has emerged is high-energy physics, which is used a lot now.  So we're the high-energy theory group here.
Speaker 1: Okay, also we have here that in 2003, you published a book called 'D-Branes' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, so this kind of continued on what I helped start back in the middle-'90s [1990s] with those notes on D-Brains that I wrote with Chamerlie Shurdery (ph.).  So as I said, the field was sort of mushrooming with activity, largely due to all these new things that had come about and some of the main tools were D-branes and so I, you know, I helped with the effort, worldwide, to show how to use D-branes in various ways and also to develop them as tools.  And as I had said, I was giving lots and lots of lectures around the world to people about those tools and how to use them and writing papers about them and what have you.  And I just realized that I had a ton of material there in a useful form that meant that those notes on D-Brains that we'd written before, could be expanded upon and turned into a useful handbook.  And I'd already kind of begun to write my lecture notes as a sort of handbook.  I actually wrote some lecture notes that were out there on the web.  Ah, yes, I called it a "D-brane primer" were would deliberately written in a way that could get people up to speed with D-branes and more of the techniques.  And I was using those as my lecture notes.  And then I had more and more material.  And then I, so actually, in 2000, actually '99 [1999] I already had the idea for the book.  In 2000, I sent the book proposal to Cambridge University Press, and they liked the idea.  And so I basically wrote the book.  And so it actually, it actually was published in 2002.  I think the American publication date was 2003, but it came out in 2002 in the U.K. [United Kingdom]  And so that book was written as the book, the one book that should be sort of must have for someone coming into that field that really needed to know those techniques.  Students, but also people who already, you know, as I said, seasoned practitioners, I think was the term I used, who just needed to learn this new set of techniques, written as a quick way of pulling people into the key techniques.  And so it wasn't a string theory textbook, per se.  You still had to go learn your string theory properly somewhere else.  It was really designed to get you up to speed on D-branes and what have you and the techniques and the applications and some of these new things that have happened since the notes on D-branes and what have you.  And so it went out there and people really loved it, and apparently, for a technical book on an esoteric subject, in Cambridge University Press's experience, this has been, it still consistently performs as a, as a book that people still want to go out and buy.  And people doing classes on string theory around the world buy it as textbook and things like that.  So, it's been another nice contribution to have made to help sort of bring people in and spread the word about the kinds of things you can do with these techniques.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you've been a codifier of a specific field of knowledge in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: In a way, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, you're the one that put it out there.
Story_ID: 31144
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have a question here.  What role does technology play in your field of work, computers and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, a huge role in many ways.  I mean there are, there are physics roles, direct physics roles that have played throughout the history of my field of particle physics, high-energy physics, the kinds of experiments that people build, etc., are almost always at the cutting edge of technology and in some senses, drive technology because there are things that needed to be achieved to do the experiments.  That meant you had to essentially push the technology beyond the limits it was at at the time.  So, that's one aspect.  But then, in addition to all of the, you know, new kinds of magnets and bubble chambers and things like that that have come up over the time, there's also been the issue of having to gather information and distribute information and the technological challenges that that has produced.  And I mention that specifically because the thing we now all know as the world wide web came from particle physics.  It actually began as an idea and a protocol that was developed by a guy called Tim Berners-Lee working at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research], the particle physics laboratory in Geneva [Switzerland], it's a world-wide facility.  And the, you know, infrastructure of the internet existed.  People often mix the web up with the internet.  These are two different things.  The infrastructure of the internet existed in terms of, you know, the wires that connect everything up and what have, existed to some extent.  And email existed and things like that.  But having computers talk to each other in a way that meant that essentially, you have a web of computers out there that talk to each other with a specific protocol that allows the exchange of information and the flow of information in a certain way.  The computers talk to each other and share information.  And the whole thing that we're now calling the "Cloud" which has become fashionable, all of that was invented to service particle physics experiments, sharing information.  So not only has technology played a role in particle physics, particle physics actually gave the world the world wide web.  So that's a major thing to remember.
Story_ID: 31145
Speaker 1: Now, it gets even more interesting than that from my perspective as a theorist because as I had mentioned before, one of the things that really was exciting when I was in Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara] was the rate at which papers were coming out, groundbreaking papers.  And a lot of that was driven, if you look at the history of our field and how ideas work and etc., we had the, in the space of a few years, we had the equivalent of what arguably may have been several decades of contributions in a decade, happen in just a few years because the turnover time, of how papers are published changed, and we used technology for that as well.  So in the early '90s [1990s], my advisor [Tim Morris] was part of a little group that circulated electronic versions of their papers amongst themselves.  My advisor was Tim Morris in Southampton [University of Southampton, Southampton, England].  He was part of this little group of people who had decided that rather than wait to publish their paper and have it printed and it appear in a journal and you go to the library and you read it, they'd send an electronic version of what were called preprints, so that was before printing, before they were printed.  And so you could start discussing the ideas before even, you know, they'd gone to print or been refereed or what have you.  It didn't mean that referees are not useful, the whole business of peer review, etc.  But in our field, which is purely theoretical, you can test ideas out by simply redoing the calculations and seeing whether it's right or wrong.  So if someone writes a paper and says, I calculated this, and I got this answer.  You know whether they're right or wrong cause you redo the calculation.  So peer review can be, is important to do, but it isn't necessary for you to have in place in order to share ideas because you can just test the ideas immediately.  So I'm telling you this long story because that group, that little circulation group of like-minded people among whom was my advisor, but I didn't really realize the significances at the time, turned into what, then became, what we now call the archive, which is this place where if I write a paper tomorrow--and I actually am writing a paper tomorrow.  And when I finish it, I will submit it to the archive and there'll be a place where my paper is, the title of the paper and the abstract will appear the next day in people's emails or however they subscribe to their Twitter Feed or whatever they now use to find out when something new is on the archive.  And they can immediately read those papers, that paper and digest it and maybe write a paper as well.  And so the point is, is that all of that completely transformed publishing.  That was the beginning of what now publishers not just in our area of academia, but all over academia, had to sit up and realize, was the use of technology to change how publishing of ideas took place.  And it really drove the exchange of ideas.  And it drove the research because you could write a paper and even somebody, you know, in an institution somewhere in the world that can't afford to subscribe to the journal where your paper will eventually end up, they can still read your paper because it's free on the archive, the day after you wrote it, and so they can contribute to the conversation.  So the whole world got some, somewhat democratized, at least in our theoretical world, in our theoretical physics world, by this way of using technology to exchange ideas and cut out the whole journal, waiting for the journal business.  So that's a key aspect.  I also use technology a lot because computers allow us to do incredibly complicated calculations that we were not able to do--a lot of the things we work with have, now, calculations that have so many pieces to them that if you wrote them out by hand, it would take you a lifetime.  And so you use computers to help with some of the algebra, crunching through some of that stuff.  It doesn't mean we're any smarter than the people who were playing with ideas a hundred years ago.  But we can manipulate more complicated calculations which is sometimes useful.  And then finally, I use computers a lot in doing other kinds of calculations where you don't solve the equations exactly, but you solve them by what's called numerical techniques.  You essentially model the equations with numbers, if you like, in order to find solutions to them.  And sometimes, that's the only way to make progress.  So technology, particularly, communications technology and number crunching and things like that, has become extremely important in areas of theoretical physics.
Story_ID: 31146
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2004, you were the co-creator of the African Summer Theory Institute, now tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.  So, I basically dreamed that up one day in my kitchen in Durham [England] a year or two before.  And so, kind of a long story behind it.  The sort of short, or the medium short version is as follows:  I was invited as I mentioned before I get invited to give lectures and participate in conferences and workshops as is, you know, routine in academic life.  And I was invited to take part in a conference in Stellenbosch, South Africa.  So Stellenbosch is on the Western Cape.  It's a very beautiful area, you know, nice wine country, etc., etc.  And so I was at this workshop, and it was good.  And there were some good physics, and some good people came, etc., etc.  But I have to admit, I was somewhat dismayed by the demographic makeup of the conference, workshop, and moreover, it wasn't just the demographic in terms of the obvious thing which is that, you know, there weren't very many local people of color at the conference, despite the fact that it was in South Africa.  But it was also the fact that certain universities felt like second-class compared to other universities, etc.  And they certainly--there was certainly, and if you looked at it, it matched certain historical patterns to do with South Africa's race history.  And I found that a little bit disturbing, and, you know, to some extent it's inevitable, you're gonna have echoes of that previous era which will take a while to go away.  But it seemed that some of the attitudes and structures that were in place were, perhaps, helping some of those older structure to say a little bit longer than they should.  And for me, it's, it felt a little bit odd, especially given that I'm a person of color visiting, etc.  Anyway, so I enjoyed myself and went back, and then began to think about that whole issue.  And it's something I think about a lot, just generally, not just in the context of Africa, but in the context of America and in the context of England as well and other places, the fact that there aren't many people of color involved in the kinds of things that I do, for no really good reason in terms--I mean it's certainly not to do with ability or potential ability.  So what are the issues?  And so what I thought would be interesting to do would be to try and use a model I'd seen work somewhere else in a different context, in the South African context to see whether I could maybe help make a change.  And so rather than just run another workshop in my field and then, you know, try and, you know, make sure some people of color come, which I think would be kind of tokenism, I tried to try and think of, well, what, you know, where is the pipeline broken?  Why are we not, you know, making it in numbers, etc.  And in the context, in the local context, it became clear that there are certain things that could be done in terms of getting people from different, these different classes of university to work together, but also try and connect up those different stages at which people fall out of the system, you know, connect schools to univer--to undergraduate institutions.  Connect undergraduate institutions to graduate institutions, connection graduate institutions to, right, connect them all together.  So have a workshop school where people from all of those different areas, stages in their career, are all in the same place, sometimes doing things together and networking and learning physics together and talking and what have you.  So that was the idea.  And so I particularly wanted it not to be this thing where I come from outside and say, oh, this is what's good for you.  You're gonna do it this way.  What I wanted to do was make it a local thing.  So I tried to find local funding which, sadly, didn't work.  So I found some external funding, but I found some enthusiastic, young, local people to help me make it happen.  And it was a great success.  People loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you just have--was it just one meeting?
Speaker 2: I wanted it to be every year.  The original model was every year, but unfortunately, you've got to find money.  And that was very difficult to do and remains difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we're gonna pause.
Story_ID: 31147
Speaker 1: All right, 2005, you received the Maxwell Medal and prize from the Institute of Physics [United Kingdom].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, what does this mean to us who don't know what the Maxwell Medal is?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so, well, the--so the Institute of Physics is sort of, if you like, the main physics professional organization in the U.K. [United Kingdom]  It's sort of the equivalent to the American Physical Society here.  And so the, they have a number of named prizes, named after famous British physicists.  And so, you know, [James Clerk] Maxwell, being one of them.  I think there's probably, I think there's also a [Paul] Dirac Medal and maybe others, I imagine.  But anyway, so the, what they did is they recognized me for some of the work I'd been doing, some of which I've described to you, as doing, you know, they recognized me as having contributed significantly to these things in some way that they felt warranted this award.  So it was a great honor because it really, you know, it comes from one's peers and certainly from what is a, you know, a very high standard of achievers who are making a decision about one of their peers.  And so it was nice to receive, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I guess I should ask you about lattice field theory too.  There's a couple of mentions of lattice field theory as a subject of lectures and such.  Is that something we--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure what the context is.  I'm not sure where you're reading.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, no, that's--
Speaker 2: I mean do you wanna know what it is or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's something I hadn't heard you mention in this interview before, but--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean what it is really, just briefly if I understand correctly what you're referring to is, is a set of techniques that use computational techniques to study some of the problems that I talked about previously.  So there are, there are methods for trying to put on a computer the difficult matter of understanding some of these kinds of theories of particles that interact with each other very strongly.  So it's very important to understand, for example, in the context of nuclear physics some of the phenomena that you get.  And so lattice techniques are a way of putting the theory of the strong interactions that describes nuclear interactions, called QCD, solving that, not just in the regime where things are weakly interacting, where our equations work nicely, but in this sort of strongly interacting regime.  And so the lattice techniques which I, which I have not worked on extensively--I've been using sort of alternative methods, lattice techniques are those.  And so one of the interesting things that has happened in recent times with these new classes of experiments that collide together, nuclei, that produce this new state of matter called the quad glowum (ph.) plasma which is nuclear material all squashed together behaving differently in an unexpected way.  You can get some of the physics of that using lattice techniques, but then there are other aspects of it, how it sloshes around as time goes by that lattice techniques are not set up to describe.  And so, you need new techniques to describe those kinds of experiments, especially since there were real surprises that were coming out.  And so some of the things that I mentioned before, coming from string theory, turned out to be a useful toolbox for describing that class of behavior.  It didn't get it exactly right and we've a lot to do in that area still.  But people are very excited about the fact that you can supplement lattice techniques with these kinds of techniques from string theory.  And that may lead us to a whole new language for describing these new kinds of phenomena, quad glowum plasmas.  It tells you things about the very early universe and maybe ultimately the core of exotic things called neutron stars and things like that.  So we're very excited that these techniques from string theory will supplement some of these lattice techniques.  And some of the people in those other physics communities have recognized this possibility and have gotten very excited and beginning to learn some of our language and we're beginning to learn some of their language.  So it's a very exciting time.
Story_ID: 31148
Speaker 1: Okay, now, one thing I was surprised to find out that you participated in the production of a play called 'Dark Matters'--
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.
Speaker 1: --which received an award from the Sloan Foundation for development, I guess.  Now, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm very interested, generally speaking, in how we communicate science and the role science plays in the larger society.  So this is kind of a backdrop to this and where this came from.  It relates, I mean it's an interesting issue just in general, but there's also the specific aspect of the issue which you could ask which is why are we, as a country not producing as many people trained in science as not only we should be, but we need to be for our future as a nation.  So why are people turning away from science?  Why are, the problem I mentioned before, why are there not many people of color doing a lot of the areas of science that, you know, we think of as the hard sciences.  What are the reasons why it is still the case that I can count the number of people doing what I do on the fingers of one hand?  And why, in general, do we have so many of these ridiculously fractured debates about science in our society, largely based, largely fueled by the fact that there's a misunderstanding of what science is.  There's a general lack of science education in the public, meaning that they're afraid of it at times, suspicious of it and what have you.
Speaker 1: Are you referring to things like the creationism--
Speaker 2: The creationism debates--
Speaker 1: --debates.
Speaker 2: --debates over things like stem cell research, misunderstandings of what exactly you should be afraid of or not afraid of in the discussion about nuclear power, global warming, all of these things.  So many of those debates are interesting debates that are usually, where usually the wrong thing is being debated because of lack of science literary.  And I happen to believe that science is no different from any other subject in terms of its difficulty.  It's perceived as this hard thing that a certain kind of egghead does and what have you.  And that, you know, if you're an egghead, you might feel that that makes you smarter than everyone else and what have you.  I think that's a mistake.  I think it's a problem more than it is a good thing because I think science really should be for everybody.  And so the phrase I usually use and I've been using for years is that, you know, science is part of our culture.  It's one of those things we produce like great art and great entertainment and what have you.  And it should be part of our language and our everyday experience.  And in places where science literacy is greater, we, there's a strong correlation with many other things that we consider to be of value in terms of quality of life and democracy and things like that.  And--
Speaker 1: So is the play about--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: Sorry, just giving you the backdrop.
Story_ID: 31149
Speaker 1: All right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And so, my, my--a lot of the things I do when I'm not doing science is trying to communicate science in general.  So, you know, I do things on TV shows and I help people write scripts and things like that and what have you.  But I also just try and put science in with the rest of culture.  So, you know, one of the discussions I try and have then generally is when filmmakers or playwrights or poets or people who are producing what we normally consider as culture, when they're doing that stuff, why don't they include some science?  Not as a gimmick, like, you know, the mad scientist comes along or there's a science thing in there.  But, you know, when someone's writing a TV show, right, and they have to write a bunch of characters, they give them careers, even though that might not be important, right?  There's doctors and lawyers and what have you.  There's hardly ever a scientist.  If there is a scientist, it's because it's gonna be part of the thing.  It isn't just a career they happen to have, you see.  Does that make sense?  And I think the more we see of that, the less weird science will be; the less unusual it will be; the more acceptance we'll have of it.  And it'll help filter in to all those other things that helps us embrace it as something we can do.  It'll help people in the projects or what have you, whatever the cliche is of where, you know, our lost youth is.  It'll help them recognize science as another viable career option just like anything else.  So that's the long spiel.  So how does one do that?  Well, one just has to have more things out there with science in it and scientists as characters and what have you.  And also to show that scientists are, there's a broad range of people who are scientists, not just, you know, the TV scientists or what have you, but a broad range of people, male, female, black, white or whatever.  So I talk a lot with writers and playwrights, etc. about characters, little bits of science here and there.  You've probably seen some of those things that are the result of some of those conversations that I've spoken with filmmakers and things like that.  Sometimes I advise on film scripts and TV scripts.  But one of the things I decided to do also is myself, get involved, for two reasons.  One, because I want to learn more, to learn more about how writers could do that.  I need to know better about how you actually do those things.  And furthermore, I think the best way to get people to include science and scientists in the things they write is if they actually know scientists.  So I have lots of collaborations of this kind.  And this one with my playwright colleague, Oliver Mayer, was an excuse, essentially for us to get to know each other's craft somewhat and collaborate on writing a play.  So it's a play which has scientist characters and also a non-scientist character.  And, you know, there are matters of the heart and, you know, love and hate and jealousy and all of those good things that make the world go round.  But the key characters are scientists.  There's some metaphors in there which are about aspects of science.  The "Dark Matter" is about unseen forms of matter that guide things that we can see somewhat so well known as special physics.  Not all matter in the universe needs to be the stuff that lights up that you can see.  So there's stuff out there that doesn't light up that's in a different form that we don't recognize.  But you can still see how it affects galaxies, etc., by its gravitational pull on them.  So you can imagine using that as a metaphor in a story about people's relationships and things like that.  So that's where that came from.  And so Oliver and I, Oliver Mayer and I, collaborated for some time on writing that play.  And people liked it.  We had it read a number of times.  We never performed it, you know, had it fully staged or anything.  In the end, our collaboration didn't work out.  We decided that, well, I decided in the end that it had run its course.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, cause I was looking forward to seeing it, thinking that the Sloan Foundation--
Speaker 2: Well, apparently, Oliver has taken it and continued with it and gone into a different direction with it.  And so something may still come of it, but it's, as far as I'm concerned, something different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we had, as I say, creative differences and so I thought the best thing to do was to, to--for me the experiment was done anyway.  The key thing was not the play so much as the collaboration cause now we've both been enriched.  He, in the future, hopefully will, when he writes his plays, will be less timid about incorporating a scientist as a character.  So everyone benefits in that sense, and I know a lot more about stage craft, things like that, dramaturgy, I guess is the term that people use in things like that.  So we both benefited in that sense.  And, yeah.
Story_ID: 31150
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, this is a question we always ask, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: So, from my professional perspective, I've really given you some of the hints about that, and it's something I work towards a lot in terms of the kinds of, sort of outreach things I do as it's called, sort of that other part of your, when you're not teaching and doing research and sitting on committees or what have you, people hope you're trying to communicate what you do to the wider world.  And it's called outreach.  And I do that in general to everyone who will listen but I also spend a bit of time keeping an eye on how I can help with getting people to realize their potential.  And I just feel when you shut down the number of career options you have, you shut down yourself as a person and ultimately, as a community.  And it just seems to me that there aren't enough parents out there, for example, or other mentors out there looking at their children or the people who are part of their sphere of influence.  There aren't enough of them out there who recognize that in addition to telling a kid that they can do certain careers, to, you know, improve their situation or go to--to use their talents, there aren't enough of them who realize that science is an option.  And it sounds sometimes really silly when I say it in the abstract, but, you know, I, again and again run into people who tell me that, you know, they just didn't think that this is something that a black kid can do, not necessarily because they are unable to, they--the culture has been telling them in some sense that they're, it's not for them.  This is, you know, that's for other people to do.  Your talents are elsewhere.  You're good at singing and dancing and entertaining, but, you know, just sitting around and thinking about stuff and changing the world by thinking, learning more about the world by thinking, supposedly isn't part of our line of, our right to do just like anyone else.  And I want to help change that and break that, that thing that's out there.  And, you know, no one says that anymore, right, but the culture still says it because if you look out there, there just aren't that many of us.  If you look at images that people produce of the typical scientist, it's still certainly not a black person.  It's, especially, if you talk about physics, etc.  The closest you get maybe are people in biology, there's, you know, there's a lot of great images of doctors and things out there of people of color.  So that's good and that's really been a major change, but, you know, we've still got a long way to go.  So that's something that I try and change.  Occasionally, I'm invited to go into the school and talk about career options and things like that, and I go and say, you know, talk about science, you know, is for you basically.  Take, you know, stand up and take it; it's yours; it's everybody's.  Science is not this sort of special thing for special people.  And we've come a long way in terms of some of the changes that we've all liked, all wanted to see, you know.  But we still, sometimes when you really look just at the individual level of what's going on, we've got a long way to go.  And so that's one of the reasons I do a lot of these outreach type things.  I try and find new ways of putting science out there because I think, not just people of color, but I think the whole society needs to fall in love with science again.  So I think generally, it needs to be out there as part of the culture and not this sort of arcane thing.  So I do that for that larger reason, but in addition, it is comforting to know that occasionally, I'm sitting on the bus or what have you and someone goes, hey, I watch you on that show with my kid every week.  And that's happened to me more than once.  It's happened to me on planes and buses and what have you.  And, you know, often it's people of color who actually step out and go, I know you--sometimes they call me by my name as though they know me.  And they say, hey, Professor Johnson or Clifford, you know.
Story_ID: 31151
Speaker 1: One of the programs is Universe produced by--
Speaker 2: 'The Universe' is a History Channel program.  But I'm also on, you know, things on Discovery [The Discovery Channel] and National Geographic and a whole bunch of--you know, there's a ton of those channels now, which is a great thing by the way.  There's been some really great science programming that's been coming out by some really great filmmakers, a lot of them based here in LA [Los Angeles].  And I've worked with a lot of them and they all move around between these different channels and make films.  And one of the things I try and do is get them to not just make your usual, your usual science program, but to show how it can be fun, to challenge the viewer with fun ways of demonstrating things that haven't been done before and things like that.  And so I do some stuff behind the scenes, and occasionally, I'm in front of the camera as well.  And people recognize me often.  I get email sometimes from people saying, hey, it's really great to see another person of color out there doing this kind of thing.  Keep it up.  And so that tells me that, two things:  It tells me, one, the demographic of people who watch these science shows is very different from what people assume it is.  So people assume there's a certain kind of sort of geeky person who likes science shows, who already--(unclear) right, who already have a certain predisposition towards it and what have you.  But the range of people I see watching these science shows does not fit with that cliche.  And so, there's a lot broader range of people.  They're certainly of a broader demographic than I think is assumed by a lot of filmmakers as well.  And it's changing rapidly as well.  I think things are really moving forward.  So I'm very excited, and sorry, it's such a long answer, but I think it's a really important issue.  And, hopefully, you know, you can't do everything in these shows.  You can't do everything in the kind of books that, the standard books that are out there.  I'm trying to do some different things also.  I'm gonna, I'm working on a graphic novel that I'm writing and drawing which will hopefully, invite people into science in a slightly different way from the standard science book that's out there as well.  And none of, no single one of these things is the magic bullet that's gonna change everything.  But we just need more of all of these different ways.  And, hopefully, you bring someone in, either through the TV show or the book or the graphic novel or the movie.  And then, hopefully, then with all these images of science just being part of the culture, they're encouraged to then just explore more to go read up on, more on this particular aspect that excited them.  And then, hopefully, ultimately, they'll start showing up in my classroom here at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] because they will have, the pipeline will not have broken.  They'll have actually stuck with the science, and they'll have gone to college to do science.  And then I'll get to teach them and help them move on to wherever they're going next.  So that's the master plan really (laughter).
Story_ID: 31152
Speaker 1: All right, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Ah, whew, differently?  So I already know that my answer is no, but that's partly because my philosophy fits with that.  I don't think any, I think everything has value to some extent, the twists and turns you make in your life all feed into who you are.  And so I am happy with who I am, and so I wouldn't wanna change any aspect of it.  So, in the large, my answer is no, there's nothing I would change.  If I think in details about things I might have done differently here and there, I can't really think of any right now.  I'm sure there's, you know, one or two things, you would say, oh, I wish I would have said so and so or what have you.  But in terms of career choices, directions I've chosen in terms of the kind of physics that I chose to study, things like that, no, I don't have any regrets.  There are other things I would have liked to done as well, but there're just not enough hours in the day so you have to make choices.  But I'm not unhappy with any of the choices I made.
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise, when you look back on life, what today, and you're still a young man--
Speaker 2: Well, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: --in a university, well, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Ooh, my legacy.  Ah, legacies, yeah, it does seem a little to be talking about legacies.  So I don't think anything, have anything that I would consider a legacy right now in some grand sense, capital "L".  I guess I am, you know, reasonably, I feel that, you know, if I did nothing else, right, if I stopped right now and just, you know, went to the beach for the rest of my career, I feel I've contributed some things that have lasted.  So if you wanna call that a legacy, then I think some of those strands I was talking about, three strands, particularly, in each area.  So in research, I think I've had some real impact.  I've put out some good ideas, I've put some good ideas out there in certain areas of string theory and particularly, this whole business of emphasizing that string theory is more than just a theory of strings.  It's all these other things all tangled up.  And this drive I've been making to talk about how string theory can be used as a powerful toolbox to really make connections with other fields.  I feel that I've been one of the people saying that quite loudly in recent times and even before it became fashionable.  And now there are a lot of people from many different fields talking to each other in string theory sort of language, and I'm not the only person responsible for that, but I certainly feel I've played a significant role in that and some of the writing I've done has really helped with that.  So there's a little bit of, I think a little piece of that's mine, and I'm very pleased about that.  People like my teaching.  I really love teaching and I've had a number of both graduate students and undergraduates go through my classes, and they've gone on to do wonderful things, and I'm proud of that.  I feel that teaching is often sort of played down as this thing, you know, just this thing you have to do and then you get back to the research.  And I think that's a mistake.  I think that that's really important.  And so some of, you know, some wonderful things will be done by those young people when they go off and do their careers.  And some of those things will be as a result of the things they learned from me.  And so that's kind of a nice, nice thing to have contributed to.  And so, being a teacher in any sphere, whether it be, you know, in high school or in university or what have you, where you're really helping shape, not just the abilities, but the character of people who will help build the future.  That may be among the most important legacies one can have.  And then the third thing, is the teaching I do in this broader sense, the outreach things, the stuff, the writing and the TV and all of those things, which is almost impossible to measure the effect of that, but it--because it's much broader and it reaches so many people.  You know, I get email from people in countries I didn't even realize had The History Channel, saying that they really got turned on by an idea that I explained.  So that's, that outreach aspect is very important to me too.  So I wouldn't call that a legacy yet, but it's certainly, you know, in the box of what we might call a legacy maybe later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause again.
Story_ID: 31153
Speaker 1: All right, I guess I have to ask you this.  Now, this is, what direction, I guess or what do you prognosticate, I guess, for the future of your field of research, the string theory?  What's your--
Speaker 2: That's a really good question, and I--so I don't, I mean obviously, I don't know the answer.  I have two or three things that I'm keeping my eye on in terms of, at least the shape of where it's gonna go.  And so overall, I think string, so string theory is something, and string theory and that collection of ideas of which it's a larger part, sometimes called "M" theory for various reasons.  It doesn't matter, but, yeah, that stuff, has given us some fantastic hints, I think, about how nature might be at the fundamental level, if you want to use those words.  But we haven't yet beaten them into shape as to, sort of exactly how it is.  But we've seen some remarkable sort of connections between things that we thought were not connected, etc.  And usually, just based on the history of how things work scientifically, historically in science, when you start seeing those kinds of connections showing up in certain ways, it's telling you that you've gotten an interesting thing.  It's valuable for something because it's sort of tight and consistent and everything, but you're kind of maybe not looking at it the right way.  So it's, you know, it's like I have a, you know, a big sort of object here, and you've found certain aspects of it, but we haven't kind of looked around the back yet, and go, oh, that's what we're doing; that's what we're looking at.  So I feel that we're getting all of these hints, and this is quite remarkable, and sooner or later, we're gonna figure out what it's good for and what the right aspect of it is to lead with is.  So that's kind of, sort of broad statement, but I feel that's true.  And so, how might that come about?  And I think it's gonna come about from using everything we possibly can to, as part of this program and two things are, of course--sorry, two of the, the two most important things I think are as follows.  One is, we keep needing to look to experiments for guidance.  And so there's the new experiments that are switched on, the Large Hadron Collider at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research] in Geneva [Switzerland] is gonna tell us a lot more about sort of the particle physics side of things.  That may give us a few more hints.  I don't think it's gonna give an answer, but it's gonna give us some strong hints and so over the next years, I think we're gonna get some hints, which may tell us a little bit about how to tilt this ball to see the right side.  But there's also information coming from cosmology, the Planck Satellite which I mentioned earlier is gonna tell us more and more about the early universe, that's gonna give us some hints as well.  So the experiments like that, that are gonna help us chip away at maybe what the shape of this thing might be, even if, with some hints.  But I don't think that's gonna be enough.  So what we also need is sort of breakthroughs in the kinds of techniques that we use to get the grips with thing.  So I keep mentioning the, there's this other strand which looks like it has nothing to do with it, which is that we found an application of some of the techniques we've been using in string theory in this other area, these other areas.  There's some issues in condensed matter and there's some issues in nuclear physics.  And we've kind of been, you know, just serendipitously using those tools.  And so people are doing that now, and it's now become fashionable, and a lot of people are doing that.  My secret view is that what's gonna happen is that that's eventually gonna feed back in the other direction.  So in trying to explain some of those seemingly unrelated areas of physics, we're gonna sharpen our tools in a way that will help us get new ideas and new techniques that will then, will run the arrow the other way.  And it'll help us shape string theory in ways we haven't thought of yet.  And in my opinion, there's kind of a philosophical reason for all of this.  There's also an eye on history.  In my opinion, it's because I think nature tends to recycle good ideas in places that are completely different from each other.  So we're using string theory for this original thing that we thought string theory was good for, and it may have something to say about that, but we're not, we don't have the right--we haven't done it yet because, we haven't developed string theory yet.  Then we found those tools from string theory useful in this completely other area of physics or actually, several other areas of physics.  And I feel that that's not accidental.  I feel somehow nature recycles ideas and so when we get better using this stuff there, it'll feed back into this problem.  And some of those phenomena that we'll be describing there will actually show up there in ways we haven't thought of yet.  So that's for me the hope of the field, first to be broadminded and explore it in as many ways as possible and go and look in interesting physics problems elsewhere as well, and it'll inform the other physics problem that we've been working on.  And then experiment will give us hints as well.  So how long it will take is a different issue though.  You know, will it be ten years?  Will it be one year?  Will it be a thousand years?  I don't know.  And, you know, that's one of the amazing things about science.  You don't know and sometimes good ideas do take a long time.  When presented with this kind of discussion, people often talk about the idea of the atom, right.  You know, the atomic idea, the idea that nature is made of, you know, matter is made of atoms, is over a thousand years old.  And we only figured it out a hundred years ago.  So, on the downside, it could be a long time before we get all of this to work.  But on the other hand, we make amazing leaps.  If you look at the history of science in the early twentieth century, the development of quantum mechanics and relativity and things like that, amazing stuff was done in a really short time.  So maybe that will happen with string theory and those ideas too.  I don't know, but there are just lots of things to do and lots of exciting things to work on.
Story_ID: 31154
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us a little bit about your family.  Do you have children now or?
Speaker 2: No, no.  So, I mentioned, you know, moving to the U.K. [United Kingdom] and getting married and what have you.  That didn't work out in the end.  I actually got divorced.  So I'm actually now single and I still want to start a family.  But I'm kind of back to square one on that, on that project (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you still have a brother and sister, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So my, both my brother [Robert Johnson] and my sister [Carol Johnson] have given me nephews (laughter).  So that's nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are your parents still alive?
Speaker 2: My father [Victor Reginald Johnson] actually passed away in February of this year and my mother's [Delia Margaret O'Garro Johnson] alive and well.  And we're, you know, in some ways, as we've all been growing older, we've been getting stronger and stronger ties to each other and learning more, learning to appreciate each other more.  And the passing of my father in a way helped, again, bring us even closer together.  We actually spent a week together, all of us, in the same house, during that period when my father passed and coming up to the funeral, etc. for the first time since we were, you know, very young.  And so that was an amazing time, and I think we're all stronger for it in a way.
Speaker 1: All right, well, is there anything I have not asked you that you want to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Maybe, but I can't think of it right now (laughter).  So go ahead.
Speaker 1: All right, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  Hum, how would I like to be remembered?  Well, I think some of the things that are part of my character that I think help me tick, help me do what I do is sometimes taking the path less traveled, the road less traveled, I think that's important sometimes.  I mean that metaphorically, not necessarily how I get home.  But I mean if I'm known for anything, it's usually because I'm willing to try something different, to think about something in a different way, to challenge people to think differently about something.  When someone runs into me and says, oh, you're a scientist.  I was never good at science.  I usually say, do you think that's because you don't have natural talent or is it because you maybe just didn't find your way in at that time?  And my view is usually that actually you can find a way into even the most difficult of subjects.  And most people subscribe to the natural talent idea which I don't believe in at all.  I think everyone has amazing ability.  So when I talk about the road less traveled, it's often because I'm trying to get people to think about their ability to do something in a different way, to challenge themselves to do greater things.  And so if I wanna be known for something, it's really to maybe, that I try and encourage people to find, to believe more in the kind of things they're able to do, their potential.  And I certainly feel that I did that with myself in that I, many times, you know, just set out to do something and then found ways of doing it, teach myself what techniques I need to achieve this thing either in research or some other endeavor just because I feel that it's possible.  And so that often means taking the difficult road, and not the easy one.  So somewhere in there is the answer.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: All right, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
