Story_ID: 8772
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm, I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  And the videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, please, can you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my name is Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, last name Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.  And my friends call me Gene, G-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your birth date?
Speaker 2: I was born April 22nd of 1933.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Here in Wichita [Kansas].  In fact, right--not too far from here at 1117 North Mathewson [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a mortician, mortician, being a funeral director and an embalmer.  They do draw the line on-- (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so they're two different occupations actually?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 30th of 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: Now, you're in our facility which is Jackson Mortuary at 1125 East 13th Street here in Wichita, Kansas.  And the area that we're in is an area, part of the building we use for a family room.
Story_ID: 8773
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They tried to stop me from eating too much chicken cause I had the heart attack.  But my favorite food probably would be green beans, as far as a vegetable.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think it would have to be brown or tan.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Usually during the seasonal change from fall to winter.  That would be in October or November, somewhere in that area, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a have to get used to going back to Dallas [Texas] now.  My daughter moved back to Dallas, but Oregon was very nice, weather wise and otherwise.  But we were out about in Salem [Oregon], in Keizer, Oregon for a little while visiting them.  And I liked that visit--I like visiting out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, do--now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) Yeah, "I'm putting up with what's left."  That's my favorite phrase.  "I'm still putting up with what's left", as I get older.
Story_ID: 8774
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family background.  Can you give me the name of your, the names of your parents and spell them for me, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad was Abner, A-B-N-E-R, B. for Bernard, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, Jackson, Jr.  My mother's name was--is Janet, and she spells it--well, they spelled it different ways, but we always spelled it J-A-N-E-T.  Lorraine was her middle name, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, and her maiden name was Jones and Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your mother's birth date and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Mother was, was born in Moberly, Missouri.  I'm sure it was Moberly.  You asked me that--March the 26th, 1914.  It's either Moberly or here in Wichita [Kansas], but they were back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your father?
Speaker 2: Dad was born January the 10th--I mean January the 7th, 1910, and he was born in Vinita, V-E-N-I-T-A [sic, V-I-N-I-T-A], Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did either one of them have a story--did they tell you a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, cause daddy and them came here in '26 [1926] from Kansas City, Kansas, and I think it was through high school.  You know, I never knew, I don't think, how they hooked up.  But there was only one high school at that time, and that was Wichita High School, which is now Wichita East [Wichita High School East, Wichita, Kansas].  And so they always had a corner down there--they called it 9th [Street] and Cleveland [Avenue] where everybody kind of met.  So I wouldn't be surprised if they met at 9th and Cleveland in Wichita High School (laughter).  I wouldn't be surprised.
Story_ID: 8775
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr. and Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] have stories about their ancestors or their grandparents and what their ancestors might have been doing during slavery and Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Dad, Daddy, Daddy didn't talk too much about it, and I didn't get to know my gramps, well enough that we'd sit down and had, had a porch-type chat.  But there was always talk of--Dad, Grandpa would always get on the Missouri Pacific Railroad and ride down to Marshall, Texas on the train, and then get off and go to Denton [Texas] to see his sister.  So some of the history is down there around Denton.  And then there was a Abner Jackson lake, or Abner Jackson plantation down somewhere in that, that area.  My niece, Kim, is doing research on that kind of a situation right now as far as pulling up historical things that--but as far as coming from my parents or Dad telling us or our grandfather telling us straight out, not really.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what do you, what do you know about it now that you've done some research?  Is there more information that you know now that you didn't?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very lightly in that we've always been a small family on the Jackson side and the Jones side.  And now we're knowing that we had cousins and other relatives, probably our age and still living somewhere, and we're trying to hook up, especially through nursing homes now or assisted care living units, some of the--some of those people are in.  And that's a connection my, my grand--my niece has already made about--on my mother's side, the JC Penney side of the family because Penneys was the-- was her mother's maiden name.  And so it's very interesting.  You probably notice that, some of the things that we've been collecting and some of the things that we need to, to maybe document it a little bit more, but I even asked Jesse, Jesse, [Reverend] Jesse Jackson one time when I introduced here in Wichita [Kansas] to be [U.S.] President, I asked him, I said, "Where'd your family come from, Jesse?" (Laughter)  And he said, Louisiana or somewhere in that area.  And I said, "Hey, we might be connected here somewhere or some kind of blood."  But there were a lot of Jackson's and there are.  Maynard Jackson, mayor of Atlanta [Georgia] and others.  So we've always asked each other the same question when we've met, hooked up or met up with each other.  I said, you find out anything more about the Jacksons?
Speaker 1: It's a very popular, it was a popular name, I guess, Jackson and Williams and Smith and--so many of them.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the Andrew Jackson situation with--there was a family here just recently.  I, I think I read--I can't, can't remember the name, but they were supposed to have been hooked up with Andrew Jackson.
Speaker 1: A black family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I guess as we go along--and I'm very interested in learning any, anything I can about--in fact, I like to put these things out for young people that come in our, to our facilities to be able to, to read and even say I didn't know black people made that (laughter), you know, cause they hear a name maybe, but they didn't how involved they were in the, in the traffic lights and other things of--Washington, D.C. wouldn't be where it was, laid out if it, if it's, L'Enfant hadn't remembered, [Benjamin Banneker, astronomer and mathematician] had a photographic memory cause the Frenchman [Pierre Charles L'Enfant] that laid it out, he took his plans and went on back to France.  So Washington, D.C. is one of the places that we had, as a race, a big part in setting things in place or setting some kind of order.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I see the--there's a lot of local history out in the lobby, you know, of local people here, the Hutchersons and, you know, and their involvement in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and other families, or course, Charlie [Charles McAfee, architect]--.
Speaker 2: The McAfees have been here.  They came here, I think, in covered wagons (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, they say the wheel came off out here.
Speaker 2: And that's why they, why they stopped here.  That sounds like Charlie, yeah.  The wheel came off, and they couldn't go no further so they just decided to stay.  Yeah, he's, he's not too far from here.
Story_ID: 8776
Speaker 1: When we were growing up as--it was only several--we were a community.  And when we talked about unity in the community now, we were real serious about unity in the community cause there was only about four streets and, east and west, and about eight or ten streets north and south that the black community encompassed.  And on the West Side of town [Wichita, Kansas], and all on the west side of town where we grew up too.  So everybody knew everybody, and, and I don't know if that was a good thing in some respects because your parents would know what you were doing because telegraph, tell a woman and all that other good stuff (laughter) got home before you got home, about our indiscretions or anything else (laughter).  But some of those folks, the mentors that we had, we very, very much appreciated it, the way they, they took us under their wing like mothers and father themselves.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, let's--what kind of community was it when you grew up here in Wichita?  I mean in terms of what did it look like and what did it smell like?  And what did, what are some of your memories of growing up in this community?
Speaker 1: Well, everybody--.
Speaker 2: And North, is it Northwest or Northeast?
Speaker 1: Northeast.
Speaker 2: Northeast, yeah.
Speaker 1: But see, there was a West side and East side and a North end.  You asked--I think we spoke earlier about Willie, but--Willie Washington--Willie Sanders, Barry, [professional football player] Barry Sanders's daddy, they lived in the North end.  And we lived on the West side, the Jacksons.  The McAfee's lived on the East side as, for references.  And I--growing up, everybody knew everybody.  And they kind of had a territory (laughter).  If you'd go to the North end, you had, almost had to ask for permission.  You'd go to the East side, you had to ask for permission.  But on the West side, we had the park show, with the big screen, with the bit screen and things outside.  And so the East and the North Enders, they came over and then--to the park shows to see the park shows.  And so we got together there, but if we wanted to go out to the North End, we almost had to have permission.  And on the East Side, they had the Dunbar Theater.  Of course, McKinley--McKinley Park at the time, which is now McAdams Park was the only swimming pool that, that we, as blacks, could go to, even though we could walk to another one within four or five blocks.  But we had to walk six, about to eight to ten blocks or maybe longer to get to the closest black pool, so to speak.  But growing up, and even today, we, we think about, we had Lynwood Sexton, who was the black athlete that ever left Wichita, WSU [Wichita State University, Wichita, Kansas] , and went to play for a professional team, football team, the Los Angeles Dons, which doesn't exist anymore.  And we're proud of the fact that one of my age persons is one of the twelve bishops in the Church of God in Christ, Bishop Joseph Gilkey (ph.).  We grew up together.  We were--we was discussing the fact that Val and I, my brother, we lived in the basement of the mortuary.  And so when, if we had to--we always were at other people's houses because (laughter) upstairs, upstairs was the chapel and, and the viewing rooms and things of that nature.  And we didn't--and none of our friends liked to come to the mortuary cause they was scared to come (laughter).  So we were always at other people's houses, but anyway, they--.
Speaker 2: Did it seem spooky to you sometimes when--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sometimes, sometimes because of the--had steam heat, and the radiators, you--we kind of got used to them.  But they would sizzle, they would sizzle, and then they would cool them down and whatever.
Speaker 2: They'd knock.
Speaker 1: And, and all that little knocking sound.  But I tell my kids now, my children now.  They wonder why Dad never took a tub bath.  I, when Val and I got old--large, too large for the, for the little tub that, that you set out for running water and hair water and stuff like that, we had to showers.  And we had--that's all we had down in the basement was a shower.  We didn't have a regular bathtub.  So, even now, today (laughter), I don't sit down in no tub at no sixty-nine years old.  I take a shower and every time--every day.  But as far as a tub bath, I could count on one hand, probably.  But those are good things to remember.  I have a thing that says, anybody born before 1945 had to be survivors.  I listened to 'The Shadow' on the radio and a bunch of other programs on the radio, 'Hit Parade' and other kinds of things that now you visually see all these things.  And it doesn't seem like that much fun because everybody kind of gathered around the radio and intently listened (laughter).  But it was a, it, a built character, I think.  And it's a trusting thing was brought along with it because everybody trusted each other.  We ate everybody's food, wasn't scared that nobody is gonna put something in it.  And we knew when the lady down the street was gonna fix cookies because she always fixed enough for her family and the rest of the kids in the neighborhood.  And that was kind of a, a thing that you remember, going next door.  And they always, and you hear about it, or you heard about going next door and borrowing a cup of sugar or (laughter), or an egg or two.  You wouldn't do that now I'm sure.  But it was the closeness of, of the neighborhood, a true neighborhood.  And, personally, I'm--I feel very blessed to have been raised in the, under that, that atmosphere or in that atmosphere.
Story_ID: 8777
Speaker 1: What kind of little fellow were you in the neighborhood?  What were you interested in?  And what kind of things attracted you and what did you get into?
Speaker 2: Okay, we were always builders.  There was a Chevrolet place down, and they always had ball bearings.  And, of course, ball bearings had the little holes in it.  And we would build skate scooters.  We would go down, go down and get two by fours off of orange crates and other kinds of things and, and make us a little axle and, and we would, we would ride them, sometimes even selling them (laughter), selling the scooters to other kids that didn't make it.  And out on the side of the mortuary, where there was a level cement form that would hold up the roof, that's where we built the skate scooter.  We always were, were taught and told that we can't give you any money as a, for an allowance.  So you got to earn your own.  And that's what we did.  We sold papers, sold pop bottles.  That's when you used to get a penny a bottle.  I've got some pop bottles now that, orange Crush and some of the older bottles I've, I've kept or mother had kept.  And I look at them now, I don't know if they're worth anything, the old Coke bottles and, and Pepsi bottles and things of that nature.  And we sold papers to get into the boxing matches, wrestling matches.  But it was always something going on.  I wanted to be a mechanic.  My uncle, Orville Jones, which was my mother's [Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] brother, had Orville Jones Garage.  And, of course, the sign is still on it--but uncle's been gone since '58 [1958], I think, on the building down here.  But I was, thought I was a grease monkey.  And I used to sell battery fluid (laughter)--I mean not battery, brake fluid and bleed brakes and stuff like that; make me, fifty or sixty cents a day, you know (laughter).  And, but I've always, always--and, and Dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] taught that, that you always have a backup when the real things goes out.  We, Dad and I and Val [brother] had different clean up jobs.  We cleaned up buildings after, after we came home from school, after 5:00, after 6:00, United Warehouse and Kansas Children's Service, Ladden and Burnham Products, I remember.  They only paid us as much as three hundred--three hundred and fifty dollars a month total; a hundred dollars from this one, two hundred dollars from that one, etc.  But we didn't need that much money because you could a funeral car for seven thousand dollars, okay.  And it could be a Cadillac or a Buick.  And, but--and then we would use that money to buy things that the mortuary, the business couldn't provide for us, and also have some change.  But the money stayed in the, in the pool.  We'd get some money for--necessary things, but the work ethics Dad and, and Mother instilled in us early on, and even now.  For the last six months, the guy that's been cutting my yard, and I find--I had problems with him, but my wife [Barbara C. Jackson] says, you're not getting out there in that heat.  And you're not doing that; said, (laughter) I'm a keep you around a little while.  But that's therapy, work is therapy.  And it's not that somebody can't do it, but we think we can do it better, I do.  I think I can do it better.  Maybe I can't.  But those things were instilled in us early.
Story_ID: 8778
Speaker 1: Your grandfather lived with you, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response, nods head yes)
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your grandmothers and other grandfather or just that one grandfather?
Speaker 2: The one--I, I never knew my--on my mother's [Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] side, I never knew my grandparents.  I was named after my mother's--Anderson is my mother's father's name, William Anderson Jones was his name.  And they gave me Anderson.  And then Val's was, my brother's was Abner.  And so they gave Val Abner, and that's where his, his, his [brother, Abner Val Jean Jackson] Abner come from.  But my grandmother--the only thing that I can recall is, on my dad's [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] side, my grandmother saved our life. Her name was Maude.  I think, I say saved our life, but the fact that she didn't let Daddy and, kill us (laughter) with the switch cause (laughter), the car was sitting there.  It was an old '37 [1937] LaSalle sitting up in the driveway over at the other mortuary.  And we put it in neutral, and it started (laughter) going out of the driveway.  And the, it rolled, it rolled right around, lucky there wasn't, lucky, in a sense, there wasn't any cars coming, and it just pulled over to the curb.  And Dad came out there, and she says, "That's all right.  That's all right, they're, they're not hurt.  They just (laughter), just pushed in on the clutch and put it in neutral.  They thought they were driving somewhere (laughter)."  And, but I remember that about her, but other than that--and then my grandfather, I knew for a long time.  Gramps, Gramps was a very quiet man; always knew where to find him.  He was down on, on Main Street where the pool halls and, and, and places were.  He liked to play dominos and checkers and, and so did my dad.  For not having a phone or answering service as they do today, somebody had to be there all the time to answer the phone, twenty-four hours, twenty-four-seven in a sense.  So Mother was either there, and as we got older, we, we could answer the phone.  But we would always be knocking on the window down at the pool hall or down at one of those places where they play dominos and checkers and shoot pool, and trying to get (laughter), get either my dad or my grandfather out and tell them they had some business to take care of (laughter).  But it wasn't that far away like, that--today you have to get in the car and drive.  We walked almost everywhere we went.  My uncle that I mentioned, Orville Jones, worked for Firestone.  And during the Christmas--I forget which Christmas or year it might have been, but we must--Val and I must have been seven or eight years old, right during the war, no bicycles were really--I mean bicycles were almost rationed like food was rationed.  And Dad, Dad was able to buy one bicycle.  And, of course, Val got that bicycle, and my uncle bought the other bicycle for me.  I had a ten speed, and Val had an eight speed (laughter).  And, of course, the eight speed was faster.  But Dad said I can't afford to buy two bicycles.  And so said, uncle said, that's all right.  I'll, I'll buy the other one, and he did.  But most succinctly, 1117 Mathewson [Street, Wichita, Kansas], which is where Val and I were born.  And I remember Dr. Farmer who has the house over here on 13th [Street] and, and Cleveland [Street] wanted to, since we came along as twins, wanted to offer to adopt me since I was the second one (laughter) and coming in '33 [1933], right after the [Great] Depression, and the Depression was still, still going on.  In a sense, for somebody making twelve dollars a week, which my dad was.  My mother wasn't employed or working, other than at the mortuary, Dr. Farmer thought that, that he and Aunt Gertie, which we called her Aunt Gertie, his wife, they would adopt me and give Dad and, and Mother a relief from that.  Dad says, that's all right.  We'll, we'll starve with both of 'em (laughter).
Story_ID: 8779
Speaker 1: Is there a story, any stories related to your birth and stuff.  You're a twin, and got a twin brother [Abner Val Jean Jackson].  I think he was born first, right.  He was, he's a little bit older by--?
Speaker 2: They say, twenty to thirty minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the two of you were hanging on his foot when he came out---?
Speaker 2: Well, no, he--and that's the story Val tells.  But I couldn't have been hanging on his foot in a sense because, in thirty minutes, cause I used to get after doctor, kid Dr. Farmer about the fact that, well, every house had a porch on it.  And it had a swing and maybe some of it was screened in and, and whatever.  But I used to kid Dr., Dr. Farmer after I got a little older, I said, you, births happen a little, a lot sooner than thirty minutes now doc.  What you do, go out and, and smoke a cigar and, and Mama called you back in and said you wasn't through?  (Laughter)  And he said, he, he used to laugh about that, but, but I--and, but Val always, my brother's always that he got--he's still got foot prints on his heels (laughter) from me holding on.  I said, I must have turned a loose when they, when they pulled you out cause they left me there for a little while (laughter).  But--.
Speaker 1: Are there stories in the neighborhood about, about your birth and was it a big deal?
Speaker 2: Ah, man, people came from all over, I understand, to see these two slick head twins.  And we didn't have a hair on our head.  And, and my grandfather, my grandfather Jones, in which I never knew him that well, but he worked at the post office.  And they told us that every evening that he would come home--I think he died in probably '35 [1935], somewhere in that neighborhood, 1935.  But every time--every evening when he came home from the post office, he would round our heads off to make 'em rounded instead of lob, long or whatever.  He would shape our head.  And so he would put all this Vaseline or grease on it or lard or whatever on our heads to, so his hands would be smooth, and he molded our heads.  And we do have pictures where they put Val and I in one rocking chair.  And we were just shining like a diamond (laughter).  Our little heads just (laughter), and then the other, the white family, they were always over to the house.  And, and one is still, still living here, Norma Jean Schooler.  But she lives, still lives here in Wichita [Kansas], and she can remember all the times that we had, when they were over t the house baby to--babysitting and giving mother and them a break.  But, nah, that's, that's some good memories, that's some good memories, Larry.
Story_ID: 8780
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what it's like to be a twin, you know?  Most of us don't have that experience.  And when did you figure out that you not only had a brother, but had a twin brother [Abner Val Jean Jackson]?  And how did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the thing that--if it bothered us at all about being a twin, was the fact that we, people expected us to wear identical clothing.  And sometimes we had a little problem with wearing--I need to wear this, and, and--because I can't wear that, those kinds of conversations went on.  But Val and I, as far as being a twin, it seemed like--and I don't know if you hear about it now, how people can intuitively predict things or, or even move--I'm, I'm fixing to do that now, without any utterance, and without any, even saying that.  And that's, sometimes I, I call up Val now, and he says--on one of his phones he's got the ID, but on his cell phone, unless he gets it right quick and looks at it, he won't, he doesn't know who's calling.  And he'll say, "Yep, I'm up."  And he knows it's me calling at a, at a particular time of the morning or, or checking on him in the evening.  Val has been going through some surgery and stuff in the last ten weeks and hasn't been able to help me here [Jackson Mortuary], along with Michael.  And so the, the work's kind of gathering up on us, but I think about him a lot and he thinks about us a lot down here, and sometimes he'll pick up the phone and almost, instead of saying Jackson's Mortuary, he'll say, "Okay, what do you want?"  And it's Val, those little, little premonitions and, and things that go to--but it was fun being a twin too because some of the girls when we knew growing up had, had a little difficulty.  And, they said, they had a little difficulty and didn't--determining which was Val and Gene, but I said, ya'll know better.  Ya'll know I'm the lover (laughs), I'm the--I'm the lover, and Val, Val, Val lays back and waits for me to feed  him.  And he's, but we, we've enjoyed, very much enjoyed--Val and I always had a thing, even when we were in the [U.S] Army, and I don't know whether he mentioned that back and forth, back and forth driving.  Also, he was sitting down--I was a computer operator, and he was a acquisition operation in--guided missile unit.  And, and the lieutenant said one day, he says, you know, ya'll can almost predict what's gonna happen.  Val a, pick it up on, on the screen, and you'll lock on into it before he even tells you to.  But some of those things, you can, can't hardly say why, but somewhere in the psychic, you pick up little things that, that are connected with being a twin, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's kind of mysterious to you even?
Speaker 2: It is.  It is.  In fact, it's, it's so mysterious sometimes it--we say, you programming me again, man?  And I'm supposed to be able to, to predict and pick up the little vibes, and, yeah, it is, Larry, it's very--it makes you a little uneasy sometimes, but then again, the source.  When Val was in the hospital, and when I was in the hospital, it seemed like that, that there was some kind of a bond going between us.  He didn't have to call me, and I didn't have to call him.  He knew the thought waves were going, being transmitted anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, do you all have similar things happen to you, you know?  I mean when you're not even together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and Val has, Val told me, has told me several times, and I guess I probably told him.  He said, you know, you should have been up there (laughs).  He said, it might have been different if you'd been up there, and, and took the brunt of all this.  I said, and I'd tell him, I'd say, yeah, and in some of the cases that he should have been out there instead of me because he could handle it better than I could or--and vise versa.  And so, it is similar things, and then people, people were always saying, "You're not Val."  I said, no, I'm not Val.  He says, cause I can tell your demeanor (laughs), and your, and your little, little--.
Speaker 1: There's a difference.  There's definitely a difference, you know--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah,
Speaker 1: --meeting you all today, I can tell there's definitely a difference.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I think he's lost some weight, but, there's still, I mean there's still some difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Val's a little laid back.  He's, he's--I get things done, but he's a little more factual and correct and can--he's got a, he's a got a cap--I don't know if he told you about the cap.  It says, "I don't get mad, I get even."  And he, he puts that on every once and a while, and walks around (laughs) if he's got something on his mind, rather than uttering it out and telling somebody.  He's--but Val's like that.  I, I, I do find some similarities to the extent that it's, it's scary some time.
Speaker 1: Now, what were things like when you were kids in school?  I mean did you--the fact that you look alike, could get away with stuff?  Or did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, the teachers, the teachers would usually try to separate us as far as seating, either one in the front or one in the middle or off to the side or something of that nature.  And we were fairly good students, and so, as far as him doing my work and I--me doing his work, nobody got away with that, that I know of or thought that, that we did.  He's--his, his work was such and mine was such, but we still made good grades.  The only thing that--and you'll probably get a picture of it, the only thing that we wore in school that was identical is when we took the pictures for the, for the graduation book, and that was them ties, the knit, knit ties we put on.  And when we got to high school and in other words, we tried to not dress alike.  We didn't want the girls getting confused (laughs).
Speaker 1: You had your own self interest in mind.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughs) we didn't want them getting confused.  But being a twin, being a twin in, in a sense has, has been not only gratifying in the sense that, that we could relate without verbal--verbally speaking it, but we could relate and, and almost figure out where we ought to be, our positioning, and it's, and that's, and that's weird too.  That is awful weird.
Speaker 1: So sometimes you act as a team on things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and don't really, and, and don't even have to say anything about it, just glance around, and, and move out or move over.
Speaker 1: When you played sports, did that happen when you played sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I was a pitcher and Val was the catcher and a left fielder.  He caught for me for a little while, but, but he was very supportive of me cause I figured if they hit the ball to left field, Val would catch it regardless of where, where it was.  And I didn't even--I had to turn around and look sometimes.  But Val and I enjoyed sports real well.  He was, he was a better basketball player than I was, at least shootin' wise.  But sports wise, we didn't get a chance to go as far as we would have liked to have gone because of the work.
Story_ID: 8781
Speaker 1: We'd [Anderson and his twin brother Abner Val Jean Jackson] get out of school at 2:30, sixth hour, and we'd have to come home and, and either work in the yard, clean up the cars, clean up this.  Dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] always had something for us to do in a sense because he, he and Mother [Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] bought the business [Jackson Mortuary] in '50 [1950] from, from my grandfather [Abner B. Jackson, Sr.].  And so they needed our help.  And so we didn't get a chance to participate in sports in our senior year at all, football, track, basketball, baseball, even though the coaches wanted Daddy, and, and spoke to Daddy and Mother about the fact that, well, let one of them play basketball or let one of them play , play baseball, and the other come.  And says, nah, we, we've always treated 'em exactly--if one, if one works, both of 'em work.  I find it very comforting now, Larry, that my dad would never finish a job, never intended to finish a job.  If he started cutting the grass, he, he never intended to finish cutting it.  You're supposed to have the instinct and the initiative to come out there (laughs) and finish it and send him back in the house or something--washing a car--and I find that today, you know, to the extent that, that I, I've never--well, my, my children especially, they, they always step to the forward cause I tell them the story about my dad.  I said, if I start washing these dishes, you know you gonna finish them, or if I start cutting this grass, you know you gonna finish it.  And I've taught them work ethics, and, and that's, that's what I gained from it too, the ability to work.  But sports wise and other wise, we were good, but we just wasn't able to participate in, in high school or even college sport.  We played during the summer because Dad was, allowed us to really--because he really wanted us to play, but work was a--at the business was, had its priority.
Story_ID: 8782
Speaker 1: When you were ready to graduate from high school [Wichita North High School, Wichita, Kansas], did you have any idea of what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I graduated from high school, and I was, I knew I was going to college, and I did.  I went for eighteen weeks.  Eighteen weeks was because I thought if, after the eighteen weeks, I wouldn't have to be in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 1: This is like 1945?
Speaker 2: This was, no, this was 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951], '52 [1952]--'51 and '52.  We got--yeah, '52  because at WSU, and Wichita State [University] now, you could go into the ROTC and not have to go into the army, if you had went through the ROTC program.  So we were in, in the ROTC program, had our uniforms and everything.  And so the first semester was fine.  And so we thought after the second, second semester, we wouldn't enroll in ROTC since we're supposed to be out of it, off the draft board list and all that stuff.  And our birthday came around, and it wasn't two day--it was either two days before or two days after, we get this letter that says, Uncle Sam has selected you--you remember that sign with Uncle Sam and his hat, we want you or something like that.  But--.
Speaker 1: Uncle Sam needs you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Uncle Sam needs you.  And so Val [brother, Abner Val Jean Jackson] and I went in the--they drafted us both at the same time.  And I, I came back to college after I got out of the service and spent a year, year and a half.  And then I went to embalming school, California College of Mortuary Science.  And it was in Los Angeles [California].  And I did that year's programs. And I've been back here in Wichita almost ever since, and that was in '67 [1967], '68 [1968] when, when I settled down here again.
Speaker 1: Now, you immediately went to mortuary school.  And your brother [Abner Val Jean Jackson] became a fireman.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't immediately go.  I didn't immediately go because Val, Val was on, on the fire department for twelve years.  And he came back to the mortuary so I could go to mortuary school.  See I was thirty five when I went to mortuary school.  There was only one or two guys that were older or about the same age out of a class of seventy-two or seventy-three at--in that class at, at--in California.  So all the rest of the youngsters were twenty-one, twenty-two years old.  It threw the curve up a little high, but I was fortunate enough to graduate thirteenth in the class, whatever that amounted to.  And they elected me president of the class, and they said, the old man knows how--knows the ropes.  He knows how to get this done and that done.  And, and I was, I was committed, and the, and I guess the young people saw, saw that in a sense that, that some of the things that we were--they were teaching, I, I had experienced it first hand.  And some of the instructors allowed me to, to mentor some of the other youngsters.  And I, I hear from 'em.  Every once in a while I run into them when I go to California.  Some of the them are still in the business, some of the students that were in the class when I was there.  But, but my brother quit, quit the fire department after twelve years and came back to work in the business so I could go.  And then he had the real estate, he and his wife had real estate.  But Dad--it was still lien then, and dad wasn't able to, to hire somebody full time.  And, and Dad always--and we always told Dad, we said, you get twenty-four hours and pay for eight (laughs).  And, and he said, it's payback time.  I bought you in here, I'll take you out too (laughs).
Story_ID: 8783
Speaker 1: Mom [Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] was the loving side of the family.  And she, she says (whispering) "Now that your daddy is gone to--" she would whisper to us, and "you don't need to do this or that."  And then here comes Daddy [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.], and said, "How come you did that?"  Your mama done told you that I was coming, didn't you" or something of that nature.  But he--they both loved us.  I, my dad, speaking about my dad, since I've gotten off on that, my dad had cancer.  He was laid up in eighty--'81 [1981] and '82 [1982], and he died in '83 [1983].  He tried to come down here and spend as much time, but he wasn't able to make arrangements and so, it was basically Val [brother, Abner Val Jean Jackson] and I that was running the place [Jackson Mortuary].  And so a friend of mine, Leon Harrison that has Harrison Funeral Home out in, in Los Angeles [California]--they still have Harrison-Ross Funeral Home out there, he was, he and his wife, Lucille, both are, are gone now.  But they were my mentors out there.  They took me on like their own in some respect, and I, I managed the place for them at thirty-five, in the evening.  I made arrangements of whatever needed to be done and passed it on to the manager because I went to school [California College of Mortuary Science, Los Angeles, California] from, from 9:00, 9:00 to 3:30.  But anyway, Dad was at home laying in the bed and he was under morphine and all that other heavy stuff cause he was in, in pain.  And to this day, I, I went in the room, and I told him, I said, "Daddy," and he kind of looked at me.  And he--I said, "I need to go to California, Harrison died."  And he said, "Yeah."  And I said, I won't be longer than a day or two or a couple of days or whatever. You know, in your--a lot of times in your heart, you know your parents love you.  Sometimes they don't verbalize it or feel uncomfortable telling you, "I love you" and stuff like that.  Well, Dad told me, he says, you can't go.  I said, I'll be back in a day or two.  I'll just go out for the funeral and turn around and come back.  And he says, "I need you."  To this day, it was the first time I've heard my dad verbalize the fact that he needed me or Val.  And I assumed and I was assured many times by Mother that he did, but he was just that kind of a gentleman.  He was unable to express his self in that kind of way.  So Mother was always the one that, that backed up things to the extent, and she says, have you got your ticket?  And I said, I can get it.  She says, you go on.  (whispering) I'll keep him busy for the next couple of days.  And I came out, and I went out to Los Angeles and, and Lucille and--his wife, Leon's wife was very happy to see me, and--because they knew, had I not this commitment here in Wichita, they wanted me to stay, stay there.  They treated me like a second son.  And they already had Billy Smith and Bill Smith is still out there, running the mortuary.  But those kinds of things, you know, that you lean back on, and you find--they didn't demean you or, or weaken you or anything.  They just gave you more strength, to go on and, and daddy always said, he said, failure is not found.  And I just heard--I hadn't heard it in a long time, but Bishop Long down there in Atlanta [Georgia], he uses that phrase all the time now, failure is not found.  Anytime you think that, that because of one indiscretion or one, one failure, that you think, and then you just wallow in it, then you'll go nowhere.  But you take failure along with you as a guide.  And it's worked.  Dad always said that, you're--it's always something up there, but if you keep looking over your shoulder, you'll never see it because you'll be distracted by things that, that really don't matter as far as progress.  When we do things around this mortuary and Michael is, Michael has seen us--my nephew has seen us, my brother and I, example that, to the extent that he, he's picking up a lot of things and, and going ahead and getting it done rather than said--rather than saying, should I do this or can I do that or whatever.  And these are mentoring things that, that my dad taught us, and we're trying to teach our other generation.  I'm third generation, you know.  And Michael's fourth.  Hopefully, we'll have a fifth coming along, but he's working here with us now, but he still need, he needs to kind of get a commitment level--reach a commitment level that, that if we called him at 2:00 in the morning, he just hangs up the phone, puts on his clothes and comes out, rather than saying I'm still sleepy or I just got in or, or whatever. That's just the way this business is, and this is the way we're--we've been raised, and, and my brother and I don't have any problem with it because we understood that that was what it was supposed to be--,
Speaker 2: Now, is--?
Speaker 1: --if you deliver service.
Speaker 2: Now, you're del--you all--there're only two black funeral homes in Wichita, correct?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 8784
Speaker 1: What I'd observed, I guess, around here that you all have a--I mean it's different from a lot of places.  It's just a very warm place, a really family-oriented place.  Well, what's your--can you talk about what your philosophy of running a funeral home is, you know--?
Speaker 2: We feel, we feel that anyone that calls us to take care of a service for their loved one has placed a tremendous trust in us to do the right thing, rather than doing it, like generalizing.  We try to, to equalize our thing because a lot of these people we know, Larry, we know their mothers or fathers or we knew their grandparents or--and they, in--vise versa, knew us.  And so when we, when we are visiting with them, a lot of times things will come up, and we'll close our eyes or, or say, yeah, twelve hundred block on Cleveland [Street, Wichita, Kansas], I remember that house.  It's not there anymore, but I remember that house.  And we approach it, and Dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] always said, "If you give the service, the money will come."  And service is, is what we're all about in this business.  But now--and, and some people don't intend to pay you in the first place, even though you've provided the service.  And over the years, sure I could probably go back in, in the box and, and find some that didn't, but some promised to, but the immediate family or the one that was responsible never knew if they paid it or not cause, frankly, we have never sent out too many duns or, or reminded families.  Some tell us some time, I know we owe you, and we're gonna pay it.  And I says, we're still waiting.  And sometimes people do.  But they--early on, too, and people come in, not only we're warm--and I, I'm, I appreciate you saying that, warm and friendly with them.  There's always some hugs and some handshakes and some kidding around.  We--a girl earlier called me, I thought it was today, but it was yesterday.  And I said--and, and she wanted to know about a girl named Janice that we have in the mortuary that, that kind of grew up with us too.  She wanted to know, and so I had to kid around to, kid around with Alma about her weight and stuff; said, you're getting streamline, you're out there to, trying to catch something (laughs).  And she's about sixty-five years old (laughs).  But, but those kinds of--and it's not just--we can talk back and forth like that.  People have told us in some respect, they says I, I, I'm sitting there waiting on the funeral procession to go by, and ya'll--I see your hands waving and smile and everything, and I wonder what's going on in that car.  Well, somebody is bringing up some stuff (laughs), and we just, and we're all enjoying.  The bishop, the bishop yesterday, for example, Bishop Gilkey (ph.), which I mentioned earlier, Bishop did a service, and he was riding in the front seat, and we were talking about the different things when we were growing up.  So we were--he says, people said we were poor, and we didn't even know it.  How can you be poor and not know it?  (Laughter) He said, he said, the kids today say, they, they know when they're poor.  They ain't got no money in their pockets.  I said, we didn't have no money in our pocket, but we went out and tried to earn some money.  I mean we--but, and the, and the bishop, bishop was talking about, grass?  Wow, he says, we never had any grass in our front yard because all the kids came down and played in the front yard, and mother always had something for 'em.  But those were--so I guess the warmth and the friendliness and how people have accepted us, it's easy to accept them in the same way, in a lighthearted and, and, and all the foolishness that goes on some times because some people just don't, don't believe that, that these people are so reserved and laid back now, relationships are not that friendly.  They don't trust the neighbor next door, don't even say, hi, to the neighbor next door because they haven't taken the, the opportunity to go next door and say, hi, to them.  And then, of course, the neighbor sometimes is not receptive either.  But, no, this is a business, this business is run almost like when you talk about doctors losing their bedside manner now.  Now, they look at a scope, and you in the other room and (laughs), instead of coming in holding your hand and telling you about some things.  This business has lost that bedside manner approach to it, and unfortunately, to the industry because so many that are in this business now operate under big corporations.  Some own three or four hundred funeral homes around the country.
Story_ID: 8785
Speaker 1: Most of the family-owned businesses, that have mortuary businesses now, just not there.  They can get past the first, second and third generation, then--and the fourth generation and fifth generation doesn't want to have anything to do with it.  It's almost like the corporations are taking over and setting up chains of funeral homes, mortuaries or funeral homes and cemetery complexes, to the extent that the owner might be, for example, in Houston, Texas or the corporation, the main headquarters might be in Houston, Texas.  But they got funeral homes in Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and Wichita, Kansas and Los Angeles [California], all over, to the extent that you're sitting, you're sit and you talk to a counselor in some respects, and he'll say well, that's not our policy.  He might very well want to do it or might want to do something different and maybe to allow the family to find closure sooner, but he says, well, it's gonna cost you if we keep, keep the remains over three or four days.  We have to charge storage and those kind of little asinine things that, that would come up.  But there've only been, there's only two funeral homes here in Wichita.  As long as I can remember, and as long as I've been told, we've [Jackson Mortuary] been in it since 1926.  The Crawfords used to be here, Bowser used to be here.  Bowser went up to Kansas City and opened up a funeral home, and Crawford passed.  There is a van service now when--Citizens Funeral Home, which was run by Mrs. Howard--she just retired.  She got a little older and getting good people to work for her--in fact, the young man that worked for us for ten or fifteen years bought her out.  And he's down there running, running a nice shop.  We have no--he's--see, people that work for you attract business for you because people come to your business because of that person or that employee being there.  And one most understand that, that Jackson's the name up there, but there's some Harrises here, some Edwards here and other folks that, that lend to the whole and make it so.  And, but when you get into these large, large chains, these guys are moving or girls are moving from one, one funeral home to another around the country.  They might be assistant manager at one, and they move to another one and become a manager.  When people look for 'em six months or two years from the time they talked to 'em before, they're in another location and somebody is trying to figure out what they did and what they didn't do.  But we have been able to, and hopefully, we will stay that way, is if there's anything that's not down there with a price list on it that we can do, no reservations about doing it.  The policy is, is not in stone to the point that, if it is in stone at any place, it's because of federal and state guidelines deem it so, not because the heart and the head deem it so.
Speaker 2: So people can negotiate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and also, also feel comfortable about knowing the, that all of us need certain things to find closure.  We have, we have people--in fact, we had a guy not too long ago, was leaving town.  The remained hadn't been dressed or anything, and, and he says, I need to see, Gene, him before I leave because I won't be back for the funeral.  And I said, no problem.  I'm sure it's all right with the, with, with his wife or whoever the next of kin was.  And he said, yeah, it's okay.  So I let him see his friend of many, many years.  And he left, and he said, he says, I, I'm all right now.  When I come back, I'll, I'll come by and pick up a funeral program or something from you.  But he says, I needed to know that John Doe or Jim Smith was, was my friend, and, and that he was actually dead.  Maybe it didn't occur to anyone else or, or affect anyone else, but it did affect him psychically, mentally and everything else.  And, and some cases, funeral homes will tell you, we can't let you see him until he's dressed and in the casket and all that kind of stuff.  See, you have to bend sometimes in order to--and, and not for your own satisfaction, but for the satisfaction of somebody that needs that.
Story_ID: 8786
Speaker 1: Do you have any strict rule about what people can do at a funeral or what kind of funeral somebody can have?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  I--.
Speaker 1: Do you have different kinds of cultural expressions here in terms of a funeral?
Speaker 2: We try, we try to work within whatever parameters that--I, I also say, I'm not gonna do anything illegal (laughter), nah, I'm not gonna do that.  In fact, you wouldn't want me to.  And so, but that, and laughingly, that's where we get to, you know, can you do this?  Can you stand him over there or can you put him on--nah, you know I can't do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you people actually ask you to stand a person up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, they've seen these movies.  And they're seeing mummies and things of that nature standing up. They know it can't be done, but that was his joke, and they trying to check Gene out.  (Laughter)  But those kinds of things.  And, and, yeah, Larry, sometimes when, when people have been out in the foyer and I've been back or Val [brother, Abner Val Jean Jackson] or Michael's [nephew] been back making arrangements with the family, and they hear 'em laughing and, and like they're having a good time back there, and they come out, and they say, "what are yawl doing back there?"  I say, well, we're making arrangements and, and having fun with, while we were making them.  And people go out and they say, ooh, that's a lot easier than I thought it was, a lot easier than I thought it was because it wasn't no humdrum this and humdrum that; that they, they felt very comfortable about it and, and, for 'em to give you a hug and, or a kiss or shake your hands and say, "Appreciate it, man, I can make it from here, and thanks to you."  I had a lady, lady that I let out the side door today instead of her walking around the foyer and coming out.  She said, how come you didn't let me out that door before (laughter)?  I said, I, I thought you needed the exercise, and she just cracked up.  But it's, I--unusual is not usual.  And we don't limit anything to the extent of ministers, as long as they speak, songs, as long as they are or tell them that we've got another service, to the extent that yawl better (throat cutting sound) cut and hurry up, and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had an African funeral here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have--pure African you mean.
Speaker 1: No, African American African or either one, either--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, some--and even Muslims.  We've had some Muslims and had a gypsy too, gypsies like to have parties and stay longer and, and so it wasn't that--it wasn't one of the muckedy muck gypsies in the sense that they, they did everything and put money in, in the hands and stuff like that.  But we've tried to serve all the faiths, all the faiths.  And, and I guess, more than anything else, we don't even consider what faith they are.  If they call us, we'll adjust to whatever, to provide them a service.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had--I know in Chicago have gang members killed and the gang wants to do a ritual at the funeral, and they wear the t-shirts and stuff to match, and do other things.  Have you had that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but what happens so many times is, we don't have to say anything.  The family member or the family of the gang member that might have been shot, stabbed or whatever, will tell them, you will not make a mockery of this, of the service.  And then even when the police or sheriff's department or, or whatever would bring, bring young people to the funerals, even thought they're shackled and in chains, they would rather come here, they say, because there is a certain of amount of respect that they give to you Jack.  And they, I've, I've had, I've had 'em--if they came with rags on or something, I'd say, "Can't wear it, not here. Take it off, and then when you get outside, you can put it back on."  And they kind of laugh, ah, okay, Mr., okay.  But I will not allow, and we will allow anybody to be disrespectful to the person that's, that's deceased by making those kind of things.  They had, at some of the graveside services, the kids want to throw, throw their little wine bottles and, and sneaky peak stuff, they called it, into the grave.  And that stopped.  They cannot stay there and do that because the family doesn't want them to do it, the next of kin whether it's the wife or the, or whatever, mother or father, doesn't want it to happen, and we controlled that.  And I think in, in many respects, you don't need the police or you don't need some authority figure to the ex--to that extent because the kids respect us, that they won't do it anyway.  And I had a, I had a kid that came in there, and he had this--I call them do-do rags (laughter), it was all, all over his head.  I said, man, you gonna take that do-do rag off before, before you go in here.  He said, "Oh, Mr. Jackson."  I said, take the rag off.  So he takes the rag off, and then I said, "What's wrong with your hair?  You got nice-looking hair."  And he just went to smiling and walked on in, put it in his pocket. That's all the words that, that transpired .But he, but you treat the kids like--and I say, kids or young adults or whatever, with respect, you'll get it.
Speaker 1: Firm but positive.
Speaker 2: That's right, exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 8787
Speaker 1: Tell me now, you're the mortician here [Jackson Mortuary], and is that a difficult job?  I mean we--you know, I rarely get a chance to ask a mortician if it's difficult being a mortician and actually embalming a body and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, embalming, embalming and then the funeral directing.  And I don't do very much embalming now.  Michael, my nephew does most of it.  When my dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] was living, I did most of it, and he did the funeral arrangements.  But embalming is a creative thing in some cases with some of the people who've had cancer or, or loss--insurmountable amount of weight loss around their faces and things.  And when you, you suggest to the family that maybe they have a picture or something that maybe you can use, even after you do the embalming, you can high pull the different areas and bring up the cheeks and, and things of that nature to make them, give 'em a little fullness that's more recognizable than what they were, how they looked when they passed.  We've been complimented a lot of times--some, some--and I'm, I'm sorry to say, but some, some funeral homes and some embalmers say, well, that's the best I can do, and it's only because he don't want to do no more because tissue building and restorative art and those kinds of things involve maybe an hour, two hours, maybe three hours.  It depends on how you feel about what's happening.  But we've always, we've always figured that families need to see, friends need to see this deceased in order to, for them to accept closure or, or to be able to have closure.  It was a, and, and story wise, Larry, there was a young man, a school teacher died.  And he was a first or second-grade teacher.  And as the story goes, he was not, even in this city or in this state, but he got word that she passed before they buried her.  And he said that he'd like to know when the funeral was cause he, he wanted to see her for the, for the last time.  And they told him over the phone, which was very disheartening because he had--she'd always been a part of his early life and even at forty, fifty or sixty--whatever he might have been at the time she passed, he wanted to have that last look.  And at whatever expense it was, took him to get here, it didn't matter.  And they told him that she had been cremated and that--that's a story where they just broke his heart to the point that here's a lady that every time I think about where I was at the time and where I am now, has been a lot, was because of her nurturing and guiding him.  And even after he left her room, she was almost like a mentor to him, I guess.  And so the, those kinds of things, maybe they're--have to, or work with every case, but it, death is not something--it, it's just here today, gone tomorrow.  Death is something that, that we all think about.  And you asked about my dad, and I think about him, and it--I get a little welled up, and my mother [Janet Lorraine Jones Jackson] and my uncles and other relatives.  And so I know how other people feel too in regard to the loss of a loved one.  And so I've tried to, through example, for the people who work for us and also our family members, our younger family members know that empathy is nothing to be ashamed of.  And being sensitive to things like this or like death or sickness or things is not something you say that you got macho going for you.  I'd rather, I'd rather see 'em cry and, or tears running down--and the lady that was in there with me today, her brother, her brother is who we're having the service for, and he--and she was sitting there talking and, and tears started going down her face.  And I reached over and got the Kleenex and gave it to her, and she says, I really didn't need it, son, but thanks.  She says, I needed to cry, and even though we were talking about business and arrangements and stuff, tears will, will come with, with no, thing of saying, I'll cry when I want to.  I only cry when I have to; I laugh when I want to and only laugh when I have to--nah.  Emotions are something that, that is prevalent in everybody, and I have them and the other people know it too.  But this business is a business that I think is losing a little of that.
Story_ID: 8788
Speaker 1: I served on the state board here in Kansas for ten years.
Speaker 2: This is the state board of--?
Speaker 1: [Kansas] State Board of Mortuary Arts now.  And I served on the--I was a-appointed by three governors, different governors, some Republican and Democrat.  And I was president of the state board three times.  First anybody that had been ever elected to the state board for three years as president.  I hear kids now that I've licensed, and my name's on their, on their licenses and I run into 'em around the state some time, and they say, "Hey, Mr. Jackson, your name's on my license."  I say, you (laughter), you mean I've been around that long?  He said, yeah, I remember.  He said, you was a tough cookie, but I learned a lot from you.  And especially, most of the communications that came to us as consumer complaints was about insensitivity and the, and the communications that professionals quote, quote related to families.  And, and some couldn't, couldn't stand to be around this person because he said, like--acted like he was in a hurry or he, he had something else to do and we were inconveniencing him and, and those kinds of things.  You, you know, you can give people like that, attitude wise feeling too, but they always--well, not always, I guess, but they tell me, they says, I'm glad you stayed there that long because I, I, I--when I did go off, Governor [Bill] Graves who's there now, he says, I would have appointed you again, Mr. Jackson, but he says, it was a funeral director over there in my old hometown of Salina [Kansas], that, that wanted to be on the board.  And I said, that's fine.  So I calls up--I, I knew him, and I called up [Stephen C.] Ryan, and I said, Ryan, I want to congratulate you on being appointed to the state board.  Now, do a good job.  And he says, is this you Gene?  I said, yeah.  He said, man, I thought maybe you might be upset about it.  I've done my time.  It's time for somebody else, but if it was necessary for me to be there another term, I would have been there.  And I wouldn't have to apologize to nobody else for being there three more years.
Story_ID: 8789
Speaker 1: With the National Business League, being president of it, I've always brought something or tried to bring something to the table; not sitting at the table waiting on somebody to bring it to me.
Speaker 2: Now, tell me something about the National Business League.  I think it has an origin that goes way back, right?
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington started the, the National [Negro] Business League in 1905 [sic, 1900], I believe it was.  And it was about twelve years before the chamber of commerce was even set up.  And it was organized for the reason, for blacks to come together, business wise and otherwise, as a unit.  The barbers, the doctors, lawyers, professional whatever, even school teachers and others were in it, so that we could share information back and forth, what was happening in your particular field that might be helpful to me and vice versa.  There was almost three-right at three hundred members at one time in the national.  And then they had chapters all around the country.  We had the Wichita [Kansas] chapter here, Charlie [Charles] McAfee and Dale Diggs and, and I are on the national board of directors or NBL [National Business League].  But what has waned off, I think even with the, the chapter here which is not as active as--well, it's not active at all really, is that nobody wants to be an entrepreneur anymore or take the risk of going into business.  We don't have businesses.  We had people who run--blacks that run grocery stores, blacks that, that sell products.  We have Koreans and Vietnamese  and others that come into the neighborhood, (unclear) and others that come into the neighborhood, and they set up shop and make a ton of money.  And the same products that we--and that's what we tried to do with our chapter here.  And at one time, we had almost--right at a hundred and some members.  But it waned off to the extent where, mentioned earlier, everybody came looking for something instead of bringing something or even going together with somebody else and making it on a teammate effort, and you put up ten thousand and put up five, you put up this, and let's open up that shoe shop or let's open up that grocery store or let's open up things that even Wal-Mart and, and Kmart and other are selling in the neighborhood instead of having our folk that live in the community, especially the seniors, having to wait on the Red Cross van to take them to the grocery store, having to wait on other kinds of things to take them shopping for this.  They only got so much time to spend at these different places.  They feel rushed to, to get things done, and, and because the seniors don't drive, they don't have cars, but wouldn't it be nice--when we were growing up, you could walk to every, everything you needed to, to shop at.  Downtown, whether it was the clothing store, whether it was the grocery store or whatever, but it was within walking distance.  Now, you--if you don't have car or access to transportation, some of these people--and I'm getting there--seventy, eighty years old, ninety years old, sitting there looking out the window at TV or waiting for their nephews or nieces or somebody when they get time to take them, and they feel uncomfortable even asking them.  All these years, you become, you, you, you waited all these years to be independent and then find yourself being dependent.  It's, it's, it's not easy; it's not easy.  But it's because there's no--and National Business League was set up for that reason that all blacks could join together as a unit and keep businesses together, whether one owned it or ten owned it.  At least it'd be a--they could have joint ventures and things of that nature.
Speaker 2: Is there any progress being made here in Wichita around that?
Speaker 1: Nah, McAfee, McAfee and, and George Johnson that runs Datamac and Dale Diggs, and I, we can't--they, they can't even hardly find work in Wichita.  You almost have to go out of Wichita.  And it's, it's, it's because in a sense, they don't want you to be in business.  They don't want--the financial institutions won't loan you enough money other than to get in trouble, not enough money to succeed in nothing.  And, and so, and the churches in some respect, they talk economics, but economics is not coming out of the pews.  And the guys who are sitting out there are computer literate and, and all these other things, but they got a nine to five job; and got Keogh [retirement] plans and all this other benefits, and they--straight line to work and straight back home.  But as far as mentoring the youngsters that are coming up in high school or in college, it's very little of it.
Story_ID: 8790
Speaker 1: Your family seems to be--at least you've got, you've a nephew [Michael] that's stepping up, right.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --to being, to take over this business.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And are there others coming behind him?
Speaker 2: Hopefully, there will be.  Michael's son is here now, and Michael--and he wants to go to school.  He a biology major.  In fact, he graduated from, from Clark College in Atlanta [sic, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And, but I don't know if--hopefully, he'll be the fifth generation.  Hopefully, he will be.  He's twenty--he's not--I think twenty-five, twenty-six years old, I think Torrance is, but it's a matter of commitment.  And he's not married, and so he goes--he, he's free to leave any time.  I tell him some times, I say, I said, "Every time I write you a check, I don't know if you're gonna be here the next day." (Laughter)
Story_ID: 8791
Speaker 1: This business has placed you in the public lime--I mean a, a light, in a public light, and the public arena, which, it means that you are now drafted to, to serve on different boards and things.  I mean what's that like and how many different organizations and volunteer activities are you involved with?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, I'm--and it's very, it's been very limited.  In fact, the American Red Cross, two weeks ago asked me if I would, had time to serve on their board, board, and they, they were--I had to turn them down Larry.  My wife [Barbara C. Jackson] now is, had a stroke and she's not well to the extent that I can't be traveling like I used to.  And, but I was on the KG&E [Kansas Gas and Electric Company] board for, for several years.  That's the utility board.  And I was also on a, in the merger when it went to Kansas City with Westar, is the energy board, but they met in Kansas City.  When I was on the KG&E board here in Wichita, we met downtown.  And so if I had to leave the meetings or if I had to do something here at the place and at work, I could do it.  But it's been gratifying.  I've been on the Urban League board, years ago, the Minority Business Council.  Let's see, I, I almost volunteered for everything because on every board, I learned something and, and on every board, I met people who was willing to share some things, and, and I was willing to share things.  And so we had a homogeneous thing going.  But at sixty-nine [years old] and other things, I, I don't serve on any boards any more.  I can't hardly go out of town for any period of time for the reasons that--unless I can take my wife with me cause I do take care of home, and even staying here sometimes till seven or eight o'clock at night from nine in the morning, and if I have to stay late, later, I, I will, but I keep calling her to make sure she's all right.  My wife was an x-ray technician and for years, and she retired and, and I had the heart attack, and then she had a stroke. But we, we've been able to maintain things.  So being on boards now, I kind of pass on.  I, regretfully, I pass on them, but there are people out there thinking that I'm still useful, and I appreciate that too.  And I, if I find some things that I can, can share with them or contribute to them, I try to do that.  But it, locked in to serving on boards now, at, at this time in my life, I'm not able to give a hundred percent.  And I, and that's, that's what I'd have to do, a hundred percent of my skills and things, not necessarily a hundred percent of my time.  But I'd want to sit up in the, in the board room and be able to contribute and just pick up my check (laughs).  You know, serving on boards, they pay you, boy (laughs).  Yeah, I, yeah, I used to walk off with a little piece of change from KG&E after every meeting. And I wouldn't even stay through lunch (laughs).  I'd go, I'd leave there and go straight to the bank.  I had money in my pocket.  I took it home to my wife.  I'd say, well, I'm waiting on the next meeting now (laughs) because I was having fun with it.  But I, I was, I was learning something, and also contributing something.  So the money was secondary in a sense, but I always joked and when I'd sit down at the, at the table with all the others, and I see that envelope sticking out the side (laughs).  And I'd say, well, it's payday.  But I, I've been offered, I've been offered, and I feel gratified in, in that people think that I can make a contribution.  But I've, I've had to in the last couple of years, have to turn down and even relinquish some of the things that I was doing.
Story_ID: 8792
Speaker 1: You've alluded to a lot of this, but what are your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Wichita [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: They're building houses in the community, new homes.  Young people are being able to qualify for them.  Most of our young people, if they live here in Wichita, they live out.  The houses that are here in, in the so-called core area, maybe because of building codes and other kinds of things, it would be better to tear 'em down and, and put up new construction rather than go through the codes of taking off asbestos, taking off this and taking off that because years ago, it was put on because it was a natural thing.  Now, with the environmental regulations and stuff of that nature, some of this is, doesn't meet code.  So we're working out here now because--and we've got all the glasses we had on the front, sitting out in the garage because that glass didn't meet code.  It did in, in '65 [1965] and '70 [1970], but it doesn't meet code in 2000 (laughs), and so, so things have changed to the extent that new homes are being built.  Hopefully, new businesses will, will follow suit.  And more, more and more, I think youngsters have to understand that there's no Lone Ranger thing out here in this world any more.  People who, who are now with Boeing and others talking about seniority, they want seniority, there's no seniority any more.  Twenty-five, thirty years, you don't work at no place hardly that long any more.  You might be there five years and, and all the time, you're there looking for some place else to go because, if they don't spin down and get rid of you, they'll turn out the lights.  I, I always say, they turn out the lights and everybody in the shop goes.  And then maybe they'll open it back out.  But there's more subcontracting out of these larger corporations now instead of in house.  And some of the young people that are in there or people that are in that have the skill, should be looking at--and some are, is being a part of the outsourcing of some of those corporations now because corporations don't want to do everything in house any more.  Health benefits and other kinds of things are horrendous as far as premiums and things that they'd rather job it out to some subcontractor than to do it in house.  But I think this community of Wichita has basically--and especially for blacks and other minorities, has relied on the aircraft industry.  We got Boeing, Raytheon, which was, used to be Beech, Cessna, Bombardier and Learjet, those aircraft manufacturers.  And they build planes here.  Some of the stuff they ship in, and they hook 'em up, but basically, you could probably say, if not more, maybe 55 to 60 percent of the, the employees here either work for one of those, those corporations.  And when they sneeze, the whole town sneezes, because of, nothing economically stable is going on and, and for us, as a race, we contribute so much and have contributed so much.  I don't know why we, we don't like to be in business, own our own business.  My dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.], my dad--and I go back to him a lot of times, my dad would never buy a car and make payments.  He grew up with that thing.  And the, and the, the salesman that he had for years up until, probably '78 [1978], '79 [1979], was always saying, "How come you don't let us finance it, Mr. Jackson?"  He says, "I buy a car when I can own it; whatever the difference in the one I'm trading in and the one I'm getting, whatever the difference is, if I can't pay that difference, you keep it for a while until I get enough money, and I'll pay cash."  The guy, this--and Dad told me this story one time, he said, a guy was in there buying a car, in the automobile agency, and another guy was standing outside.  And he waited till, till the gentleman left.  The salesman said, went in and asked the salesman, he says, "I want to buy a car just the way that guy you just got through talking to bought it."  And the salesman said, "Well, he paid cash (laughs)."  And when--but that was how we grew up in a sense, ownership, ownership.  You own your house, you own your car, you own the suit on your back, if that came down to it.  Don't put nothing in layaway.  He says, layaway is not the place.  He said if you keep laying away and laying away, and, and you could get larger or something else could happen to whatever layaway is.  And so, we grew up with ownership.  And this was, this was what we have to try to teach those that are coming along.  If you own something, you've got an equity and not a rent receipt, not a lease receipt, not, not--whatever, cause the guy was telling me the other week, he says, we got more cars setting on the lot that people just drove 'em and, and put the keys under the floor mat and walked off.  But they were leased.  And now we're trying to find them because they need to pay up--since they've cancelled the lease too early, they still supposed to pay the money. But they just got the cars sitting there.  So the, the community and, and the black community in Wichita, if we can get these young people with all their skills and all their talents--when I sit back there now and, and talk to some of 'em about computer programming, I mean they said this is what they're doing, scanning pictures and things.  I say, how come you're not making our programs.  Oh, I'm just having fun with it.  I said you're working with somebody.  You're working for somebody doing the same thing that you could go into a side business after work, two or three hours a night or something and make wedding, wedding announcements or, or funeral programs or a whole lot of things you could make with that, with that talent.  But you'll have--you don't want to invest in, into getting the computer of your own or a scanner of your own or anything.  You don't want to take that home with you.  That's what you're telling me.  "I'm on this thang all day long, I ain't wanting to--."  But see, we had a young man, Larry, we had a young man that worked with McAfee Manufacturing.  I met him about four or five months ago.  We was up at Popeye's and he came up to me, and he said, Mr. Jackson, said, McAfee has been closed almost four years.  He said, Mr. Jackson, how you doing?  I said, I'm doing fine, son.  What are you doing now?  And he says, I'm out at Coke Engineering.  And I said, what are you doing?  He says, I'm a welder.  He says, I was up--I knew he was up at McAfee's when he was open, but I didn't know what he was exactly doing, but he learned how to weld.  In fact, he could a certificate in welding, like a journeyman plumber or journeyman electrician.  He's a journeyman welder.  So when McAfee closed down, and he says, I wasn't worried about nothing.  I went out to, I think it was Raytheon, showed 'em my credentials, that I was certified to do that, got a job just like that.  I'd been two years or more with no hitch, and they started to sizing down here and sizing down there, and I got the pink slip.  But he said, I took that same certificate, and went out to Coke Engineering and showed them that, that I was journeyman welder, and that I, I can do the job, whatever it was in welding, and they gave me a job.  And he says, I'm still out there.  And that's been about a year or so.  But the crux of the matter is, I tell the young people, and you probably do too, Larry, that you got to have something to sell.  If you don't make any business or any, any corporation that you work for a profit, they don't need you.  I mean they, they can stand--and they got cameras all around the place checking on you standing by the water fountain or, or staying in the restroom too long.  You ain't making no money.  And then when, when they start rolling them film back and when it comes time to get rid of you, if you the best maintenance man or whatever, you gone.  They say, Joe Schmo oh, yeah, he, we pay him for eight, and he gives us four and a half or something like that.  And so, if you don't have anything to sell in this day and time, you're out of luck.  My daughter, right now, has been with the post office twenty-three, almost twenty-four years.  And when she had the--when she went to Oregon, they found a job for her.  They made a job for her really.  When she came back to Dallas [Texas], they made another job, but my daughter was marketing director down in, in that area out at Dallas for three--for three states.  But when her husband moved because of his job thing, because she went with him, but she had something to sell.  And see, the, the young people--and my daughter talks about it, Debbie, she talks about it a lot, especially when now, those fellows that, when she first hired in at the post office, and she's gonna be a mail handler or something on the line, those fellows who were pushing the broom or washing the windows and, or walking through the places, the older fellow, and says, said, you don't want to be here.  He says they put something up on the boards, all these classes that you can attend, they'll pay for it.  They'll give you time to even go if it's during working time, you take 'em.  And whether you get the job or not, it goes on your resume.  And here's Debbie Jackson Jones has taken this course, and there's an opening in it, and she moved up.  But she had encouragement from the older fellows that were at the post office, that they didn't have the skills or, or the academic ability to apply for 'em, but any young person that, that hired on, they would guide you to and tell you that these things were open for you.  And even, even in some respect, recommend you to this guy they knew that was up there.  And so we--these are, those are some of the things that we have to do for our young people too as others do for theirs.
Story_ID: 8793
Speaker 1: What do you consider as--now, your, your brother [Abner Val Jean Jackson] said that he and Charles McAfee call you the spiritual friend.  Of the three of you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're the spiritual one.  And I guess they, and they see you like that, but like, what do you consider as your legacy, at this point in (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well, at this point, I think there's something else that the Lord wants me to do, and I've got to stay focused and be receptive to hearing or, or identifying with something positive that's out there, that I can either guide somebody else to or have somebody follow me into it.  Charlie and Val, as I mentioned earlier, Val said, they call Charlie 'the gorilla', 'the big gorilla', and they call Val whatever.  I don't get mad, I get even (laughs), and I'm always the, the one that tries to be the conciliatory person that--and they look, and then I appreciate them looking after me.  That's why the three of us are all friends.  And regardless if one gets in, in kind of a, a rut, the other one is there to, if possible, to, to get him out.  But I think spiritually, I believe that there's higher being, and I believe that, that, in some respect, the Lord's not gonna come out and tell you, but he will put it on your mind to the extent that, that if you're going the wrong way, the devil's there. If you go the right, he's there.  So there's choices.  And I always try to make the choice to the extent that it's not the money that I'm looking at.  I figure the money will come, and I know it will if I need it.  If I don't--if it doesn't come, I don't need it, and I accept it on that basis.  And, and when Charlie and Val some times talking about these people keeping us from making this and making that, I consider it a test that the Lord, and my spiritual thing is always testing to see how strong I can maintain, not only my integrity, but also my ability to put, be pos--stay positive as I can, cause too many people think in negative.  I, I don't need to be one of them.  I don't need to be one of them.
Story_ID: 8794
Speaker 1: How would like to be remembered, or have people thought about you?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always thought that, that--and sometimes now I even think that, that putting your hand on a young person's shoulder or patting them on booty to go get 'em or something, now they think that's a negative thing to the point that, that--people have been sued for that.  And, and I think kids need some kind of little, a hands on thing, rather than a, a hands-off to the extent that they stand back and, and think they're direct.  I like to think that when I walk into a room, that regardless of what's going on, that a certain amount of respect is also present for me walking into the room.  And I always quote my dad.  My dad [Abner Bernard Jackson, Jr.] said, "Even if you're late, even if you're late, walk in with our head up high like everybody else was early and you're on time."  And he used to tell us that.  He told us that.  He said, you're gonna be late to some things.  But if you walk in with your head down, bemoaning the fact that you were late, you don't get into whatever you went into for ten, fifteen, twenty because you're still feeling sorry for yourself.  And so I walk in and I move in such a way that I demand and, and I extend respect.  I, I mentioned Bishop Long the morning, and he'd come--and he, and he said, said that there was a lot going on up in the children's bedroom, and he--he and his wife was in the bed watching TV.  And so she turned over to him and said you better see what the kids are doing.  And they were having a field day up in the room, throwing things and--but as soon as he opened the door, they stood at attention; everything stopped.  And he says, that's his authority.  They knew that I meant business, and whatever they were doing, they needed to stop it.  And so, young people, as well as others, need to understand that, that your presence is not to be somebody in the corner or somebody just, just there.  It should do something for the whole room or present something for the whole room.  And you make comments about anything to the extent that, that it's positive to the whole.  I went out to a school board meeting when my daughter [Debbie Jackson Jones] was in junior high, for example.  And they wanted the blacks, since they were being bussed, bussed in too, cause they had some disturbances in the halls between the whites and the blacks.  And they wanted the, the blacks to stay on the bus till the whites got into the classroom and seated.  And then they let them off the bus, and then they walked--wouldn't nobody else be in the all but them, they'd walk in, walk in and go to class.  And, of course, you know, kids being kids, those that were in it, and those that were coming in it, they're jeering each other, you know, yeah, ya'll had to stay on the bus or vice versa.  So they had a big meeting out at Curtis Intermediate. And I went out there, and I signed up to speak.  They had a table.  And I got me a, a seat right by the exit, it was in a little auditorium there, but I, I could see the exit light, and I told--I laugh about it now because I say, what I had to say, I probably needed an easy exit, and I wanted to know where it was (laughs).  And it turns out the next day in the newspaper, here's Gene Jackson with this folder or pamphlet that they had given all rolled up, expounding (laughs), my daughter, I pay taxes for my daughter to go, go to class the same time anybody else, and she's not gonna be kept on the bus and, and be deprived of, of being on time or, or whatever.  And they put all that in the paper there.  But I, I've always said, your presence means a whole lot.  The mayor, the mayor, [Wichita, Kansas] Mayor [Bob] Knight told me one time, he says, he says, whenever I see you and McAfee and your brother coming into the, the council chambers, I say, oh, my God what's up?  But see, if you don't have anything to contribute, if you don't have anything to contribute, you can't be a positive influence in anything.  And so we, we keep on, and I do, keep on working on things that, that are positive, and, and with contributions.  The things I put out, out here for folk, for people to come in and see. I put them out there for, not only others, but for myself too.  I don't--I could not laminate all this stuff, not do all this to other kinds of things, running off the--on the Xerox machine, these different things.  But I want people to be able to share some of the interests and some of the motivating things that motivate me and see if they help them get to the next, next wrung in the ladder.
Speaker 1: Well, I think you, I think you're succeeding.
Speaker 2: Well, I appreciate your saying so.  And my wife [Barbara C. Jackson], my wife tells me, she said, she said, you spend as much time with me as you spend with others.  I said, I have spend a lot of time with you.  The fourth of September we would have been--we will be married forty-seven years.  And I said, I'm not ready--I'm not, I'm not necessarily wanting to leave because nobody else can spoil me like you do (laughs).  And you're probably not going nowhere cause I can't spoil--I wouldn't be able to spoil anybody else either (laughs).  But no, it's been, it's been good, Larry.  It's been darn good.  It's been darn good.
