Story_ID: 521589
Speaker 1: I am [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm your interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is videographer.  Allen, what's your--
Speaker 2: (ALLEN P. HAINES):  Allen Haines [Allen P. Haines].
Speaker 1: Allen Haines?
Speaker 2: (ALLEN P. HAINES):  Haines.
Speaker 1: Allen Haines is observing.  I'm here interviewing [HistoryMaker] Bonnie St. John.  Today is August 11th?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Eleventh, 2016.  We're at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] law offices, 4 Times Square [New York, New York], and I would like for you to begin by saying and spelling your name.
Speaker 2: Bonnie St. John, B-O-N-N-I-E, S-T, period, space, J-O-H-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your--what do you do?  What would be a title for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, you want a title.  Okay.  That's easier, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not a job description.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I am president of Blue Circle Leadership Institute, should we say Blue Circle Leadership Institute?  Okay.  So I'm president of Blue Circle Leadership Institute.
Story_ID: 521590
Speaker 1: Let's start with some People magazine type questions.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.  I love to wear red, I have red on my leg.  I--it's a bright, strong, vibrant, positive color.
Speaker 1: Your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: I would have to say summer.  I love to be out on the lake kayaking, riding my bike, and I love the sunshine and the trees.  I love summer.  I love sitting on my porch swing.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate.  Anything chocolate.  Eating dessert that doesn't have chocolate in it, I don't understand the point (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love to go to Rancho La Puerta [Tecate, Mexico], and we go as a family once, or even twice a year.  And I do some speaking there, but I also get to relax and it's a wellness place.  It's actually the birth place of the wellness movement in North America.  It was started in 1938.  It's in Tecate, Mexico, and when I go there, for a whole week, I'm eating 90 percent vegetables that are organic, prepared in beautiful ways by a chef.  A little bit of seafood, exercising three times a day, and it's a rejuvenation for me.  So resilience has been a really important theme in my life, and so that's an important destination for me to support my wellness.
Speaker 1: And do--oh, what is your blood type?
Speaker 2: My blood type is B positive.  I found that out recently, and I was so excited.  I was like, that explains everything.  My blood is B positive.
Story_ID: 521591
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: Well, there are so many great sayings by wonderful people, but I'm gonna share with you something I'm known for saying, which is, "People fall down, but winners get up.  And sometimes, the gold medal winner is just the person who got up the fastest."  And Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation] immortalized that quote by putting it on millions of cups, and, you know, printing and sharing them all around the world.  So that was great.  But it comes from when I was at the Olympics [1984 Winter Paralympics, Innsbruck, Austria].  I was on the U.S. team, I was the third ranked one-legged woman in the U.S., and they only take three one-legged women on the team.  So I barely made it on.  And I was just so excited to be representing my country.  I had no thought of winning.  But when I got in the slalom race, I went down the first run, and when the times were posted, my time was number one in the world.  So it was an upset, you know.  Nobody thought I would beat my team members, never mind everyone else in the world.  But it takes two runs to win the medal.  So I went back up to the top, and I'm getting ready for the second run, and they radio up that women going down the second run are crashing on this dangerous spot.  You know, it's a new course, there was this icy spot, and so I'm thinking, I just have to stay standing, and I can win the gold medal.  So I get in the starting gate, and the race official is saying, "Five, four, three, two, one."  And I break the timing wand, and I'm hitting the poles.  I was actually sponsored by the National Brotherhood of Skiers, so thirty-three African Americans came to Innsbruck, Austria to cheer me on.  And they're screaming my name and my teammate said, "Bonnie [HistoryMaker Bonnie St. John], you have a big family, don't you?"  'Cause, thirty-five black people in Austria kind of stand out, is what I'm saying.  Anyway, I felt like I did have a really big family of support.  But I'm going down that run for the gold, I get to where I can see the finish line, and I think, "I've made it, I'm over the ice, I'm gonna win."  And that was when I hit the ice.  And I ski on one leg, I don't wear my other leg.  My foot started to wobble, I couldn't hold on and I fell on my rear end in the snow.  I was so disappointed.  I had been number one in the world, and now I'm sitting in the snow.  I want to, you know, in that moment, you kind of want to give up, and crawl away, not to face my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer], my sponsors, my teammates.  But my physical training, my instincts were to finish.  And I grab my equipment, I got over the finish line, and when the dust cleared, I was still in third place.  All the top women had taken the tightest line, fallen and gotten up.  So I won the bronze medal that I'm wearing, I got to stand on the podium, the U.S. flag, my mother crying in the snow.  But it wouldn't have happened if I hadn't gotten up and gotten over the finish line.  So the quote on the Starbucks cup is, "People fall down, winners get up.  But the person who won the gold medal was the person who got up the fastest."  It wasn't that she didn't fall, she just got up faster.  So I had the fastest time in the first run, but she was the quicker getter upper.  She won not by skiing faster than I did, she was the quicker getter upper.  So that story has been kind of my signature story.  The story that people know about me most because it sums up a lot of what my life is about.  That it's really about resilience.  It's really about not only getting up, but getting up a little faster, if you can.  You know, and we can't always do that in every situation, but so much of what I think I'm on this earth to do is to share that sense of how to find resilience.  How to overcome obstacles, whether it's one leg, whether it's the racial discrimination that we faced, my family wasn't rich, you know.  We got those issues.  There's--there are so many issues.  And so, as we talk about my life, for me, that's an important touchstone.  Is how am I sharing resilience from my story, but giving strength to others.  People--a lot of people think you either have resilience, or you don't.  Well, my belief, my life stands for the idea that, yeah, some people are inherent, a little more resilient than others, but we can all get stronger, and we need to.  As individuals, as a community, as a world, we need to find and strengthen our resilience.
Story_ID: 521592
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about your family now, and starting with your mother.  Can you tell me your mother's name, where she's from, and about her, when she was born?
Speaker 2: Let's see, my mother's name, that's it, you know, everything is complicated.  Like many black families, everything is complicated.  Ruby Lee Page I believe was the name she was born with.  And then she was married, so technically, her name should be Ruby Lee Page St. John Cremaschi Schwimmer [Ruby Page Schwimmer].  She was married three times.
Speaker 1: And where's she from?
Speaker 2: She was born in Gainesville, Florida, and spent a lot of her childhood in New York City [New York, New York] in Queens [New York].  And later moved to Detroit [Michigan], which is where I was born.  But then moved to San Diego [California] when I was two, roughly, and spent the rest of her life in San Diego.
Speaker 1: And do you know what's her birth date?
Speaker 2: December 27th, 1939.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939].  And did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: She had one sister, Rosalie [Rosalie Nero].
Speaker 1: And where are her parents from?  What do you know about her--
Speaker 2: About my mother's parents?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So much of all of my family is a mystery to me.  And so we can talk about it, but a lot of it's gossip, and gossip and rumors, and innuendo.  Again, like so many black families.  But she--her mother was Mary Lee, and her father was Arthur Page.  And her father left before she was born.  Her father--I, you know, this is one of those things again, mystery, shrouded.  I think he got her mother pregnant when she was fourteen with her sister Rosalie, and then I think they had a shotgun marriage.  Which again, in this day and age, would be statutory rape, you know.  And now it, and then, but it was a shotgun marriage.  And then, so, right after that, the next child came, Ruby, and he was from a family of sixteen kids.  And so, again, one of the legends I've heard is that he saw the writing on the wall.  We're gonna have a kid every year, I'm not sticking around for this.  This is not what I want to do.  And so he left before she was born.  And her mother struggled, lived with my mother's grandmother, my great-grandmother, in Gainesville, Florida, and it was very hard.  I remember vaguely later in life when we were living in San Diego.  Maybe I was four or five, or six.  He came to visit and tried to establish some connection with her, and she really didn't want to.  She was angry, and I think, even then, she felt he was, wanted to use her and wasn't interested.  So there was no connection with her father.  Her mother died when she--her mother was thirty-eight.  So my mother would have been thirty-eight plus fifteen, and, I mean, sorry.  My mother would have been thirty-eight minus fifteen, which is twenty-four [sic.].  Right.  So my mother would have been twenty-four when her mother died at thirty-eight.  Again, that was before I was born, and so I never knew my grandmother or my grandfather really at all, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Do you know what work they did?
Speaker 2: I had no idea what Arthur Page did.  Mary Lee, I don't know.  Oh, no.  Of course I do.  Silly.  Again, the legends, the family legends.  My mother, my mother's, my grandmother cleaned houses.  She was a live in housekeeper in New York City for a number of people.  So my mother had to stay in Florida with her grandmother because her mother couldn't take her with her.  Because it was a, she was a live in.
Story_ID: 521593
Speaker 1: And the story is that when my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Lee] got a job ironing shirts for forty dollars a week, she became independent.  She didn't have to live in somebody else's house.  This was a big step up for her, and she sent for her daughters to come and live with her in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: That's how they came.
Speaker 1: And that's how they came to New York.  So in elementary school, I think, at some point.  But that was very difficult.  Her husband--her boyfriends, I don't know if she remarried, were physically and sexually abusive of the girls.  It was not a--
Speaker 2: Your grandmother's, your grandmother's?
Speaker 1: My mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] was sexually abused by her mother's boyfriend.  And they--one of the things I have again about the insights I have on this is later in life, when my mother was in her sixties, she did a lot of writing.  And my mother was an English teacher.  So she joined writers groups and she wrote a little vignettes, and they were stories.  And they were very difficult to read.  There's a story about him pounding her head on the sidewalk and bleeding, and her running away and being in a bathtub with just blood all over her.  And somebody throwing things and bottles at her head, you know.  It's very difficult reading.  And I'm sure, much more difficult to live.  She had a very difficult childhood.  So even when her mother was able to send for her, and reunite the family, you know, it wasn't an easy comfortable thing.  At--I think at about thirteen, she ended up moving out and becoming a mother's helper for a Jewish family.  And that had a huge influence on my mother.  She later converted to Judaism when I was fifteen.  So the influence she had from spending time as a teenager in the Jewish family, gave her a lot of the emphasis she had, on learning and education, and she loved what she absorbed from the Jewish culture.
Speaker 2: So you're--at about what age did your mother move to New York?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I think sometime in mid-elementary school.  This would be my guess.
Speaker 2: And who was your mother's father?
Speaker 1: Arthur Page.
Speaker 2: Arthur Page was father, not grandfather?
Speaker 1: He's my grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your grandfather.  Got it.  Got it, and so the family moved when she--well, she moved to New York when she was a child.  And she and your mother, and whoever your mother was with, were living where in New York?
Speaker 1: Queens [New York], as far as I know.  I know my--I say my uncle [Melvin Lee], it was actually her uncle, lived in Queens for many years.  And I--the Jamaica, Queens area, and I think that's where various members of the family were.
Story_ID: 521594
Speaker 1: And when did they move from Queens [New York] to San Diego [California]?
Speaker 2: So my mother moved from Queens to Detroit [Michigan].  What, she met my father, Lee St. John, in Washington Square Park [New York, New York].  I was walking through Washington Square Park with my mother, and she pointed, and she said, "That's where I met your father.  He was playing guitar and I came up and talked to him."  And she was, she was, I don't know how old she was, nineteen, twenty or something.  And I looked at her and I said, you know, so I'm thinking about my daughter [Darcy Deane] who's nineteen.  And I'm thinking of her walking up to some guy playing guitar in Washington Park and, you know, getting married and they move to a commune in the '60s [1960s] or something, you know.  And I thought, "What were you thinking?  Mom, what were you doing?"  (Laughter) So Lee St. John is white, and he was a hippie, it was the '60s [1960s].  And they went and lived in some communes, and they ultimately moved to Detroit.  You know what, I don't even know why they moved to Detroit.  But that's where I was born, and my brother and sister.  We were all born in Detroit.  And then he left before I was born.  Which I didn't find out until many, many years later, but the irony of my mother's father [Arthur Page] left before she, you know, while she was, while her mother [Mary Lee] was pregnant.  And my father, after three kids, left my mom permanently while she was still pregnant with me.
Speaker 1: You're the baby?
Speaker 2: I'm the baby.  It's funny how you get those ripples across generations, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Who are your siblings?
Speaker 2: April St. John [April St. John Keenoy], and Wayne St. John.
Speaker 1: And is April the first?
Speaker 2: April's the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are they now?
Speaker 2: My sister is a doctor in Lansing, Michigan.  And my brother is--owns a photography business in Charlotte [North Carolina], and they're both doing very well.  My sister is actually now working at a methadone clinic, so she's helping addicts get better.  Which is wonderful 'cause my sister has struggled a lot over time with, I don't know, anxiety issues and a variety of things.  She's struggled a lot, I mean we were both sexually abused as children, and so she struggled a lot with that.  And so I think it's a wonderful place for her to be to help other people who are struggling.  Again, it's this resilience theme, right?  And my brother doing photography, he specializes in children; especially preschool kids.  And he loves kids.  He was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] counselor, he used to do magic shows for kids, and so he's fun, and he brings out their fun and their spirit.  He does, he doesn't do like the school mug shots that you see, he gets kids to play on the playground, and just does these wonderful portraits.  And he has a staff of like eight photographers and it's--he's very successful at what he does.
Speaker 1: Great.  So you, did you grow up in Detroit?
Speaker 2: No.  I was, I was born there, and we left before I turned two.  So by the time I was two, we were living in San Diego.  So I don't really remember much about Detroit.  Oh, but it, what happened is, so I was born in Detroit, which means my father was out of the picture.  So she met my stepfather [Paul Cremaschi] in Detroit, and they moved to San Diego.
Story_ID: 521595
Speaker 1: As you look back, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember things like, do you remember those old Fisher-Price telephones that you dragged and the eyes would go ding, ding, ding, ding, you know?  I had one of those and I remember pulling it around.  I remember seeing snow between my legs, like sitting on a sled.  'Cause see, that, it's like, some memories, you know where they were because they couldn't have been anywhere else.  So I was sitting, I had these orange snow pants, and seeing the snow, and so that had to be before we moved to San Diego [California].  So I also--it's funny, I'm processing like whether to give you the bad memories, or the good memories, right?  And I also remember fighting and shouting, and things like that in Detroit [Michigan].  So tough memories too.
Speaker 1: But you have both?
Speaker 2: You have both.  Everybody does, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 521596
Speaker 1: I don't know whether this would be Detroit [Michigan] or San Diego [California], you tell me.  But the house where you grew up--
Speaker 2: Just wait before you go there, I just, we were talking about ancestors.  And I just wanna kind of put a cap on that.  And it's--I know so little about my ancestors, and are we not gonna talk about the white side?
Speaker 1: Actually, we are, yes.
Speaker 2: We're gonna go back?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I didn't know if we were done with the whole ancestor piece.  And I just wanna say, it's so vague, what I know about the black side and it doesn't go back very far.  I remember that my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] and her uncle [Melvin Lee] used to say we were from the Geechee people [Gullah] that ate rice in North Carolina.  And that's why my mother liked rice, you know, and that we came from the Caribbean.  And then my mother would say, "Oh what he says isn't true."  And he says, "What she says isn't true."  So I never know what's true.  But--so mostly I don't think about extended family because my mother moved far away from her family, we had no family around.  And so it's like I grew up in a vacuum of family.  But when I do stop, like moments like this when you're asking me, it makes me go back and think about, what does it mean, and what must my grand- if my grandmother could see me, and meet me, what would she think?  And her mother [Mary Lee], and her mother.  My grandmother, my great-grandmother, my mother's grandmother, the stories I've heard about her.  Living in Gainesville, Florida, they had an outhouse.  And I went back to Gainesville, Florida with my mother, and then Mount Dora [Florida].  They were in, she was born in Gainesville, that's right, but she lived in Mount Dora with her grandmother.  And we went back.  And my mother said, "I, Mount Dora, you know, all these houses in Mount Dora."  She's like, "These weren't here."  I'm like, "Mom, these houses are a hundred years old.  They were here."  And she realized she wasn't allowed to be in the white part of Mount Dora.  So there was all this Mount Dora she'd never seen.  And she realized she was only allowed to walk to the Piggly Wiggly, and she never was even allowed to go to the lake front.  Mount Dora's on a lake front.  She'd never seen the lake.  And, but it released a lot of pain for my mother because it was like her memories were stuck in time.  And so it was like to un- you know, to free up the pain and everything that she went through there.  But her great-grandmother, you know, lived with an outhouse, wasn't allowed to walk through town, worked in other people's houses.  It was so tough.  If she could meet me now, and we could talk, I think she'd feel she could see answered prayer.  That her prayers, my great-grandmother and her grandmother, you know, must have prayed so hard that their children would have a better life.  And, though, I don't know them, and I don't know their stories, I wish I did.  I wish that I could share with them that their efforts paid off for me.  And for what I can pass forward.
Speaker 1: That's good.  When did you go back with your mother to Mount Dora?
Speaker 2: We went with my daughter [Darcy Deane], and she was probably four, so that would make me thirty-four.
Story_ID: 521597
Speaker 1: Your mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] and father [Lee St. John] met in Washington Square Park [New York, New York].  Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: So again, I know very little about my father because he left before I was born.  And I might have seen him once or twice before he died when I was twelve.  So really don't know much about him at all.
Speaker 1: Do you know about his family at all?
Speaker 2: His--okay, the St. Johns.  So my name is St. John after my father, Lee St. John.  And his father was Lloyd St. John, and I get the feeling that he was fairly racist.  And so when his son married a black woman, they were cut off.  And his siblings were fairly racist as well, so I had no exposure to them, really.  My grandmother, so my father's mother is Leah Barnhardt [Leah Barnhardt St. John], that's her maiden name.  And she--the Barnhardts were different than the St. Johns.  So Leah came and visited us, and sent us gifts every birthday.  She was a very active grandmother, and she looked like the classic little old lady, white grandma.  You know, she had the curly gray hair, and she was chubby, and she was very loving.  And not, you know, she wasn't there every day, but she was connected in a way that no one else was.  So when she died, I mean, this is just an indication to how racist the rest of the family was.  They didn't tell us until after the funeral was over because they didn't want us to come.  They didn't want us to meet our cousins, they didn't want us to show up at the white family event.  So my father's brother is Lynn St. John, and he has two daughters, Paige [Paige St. John] and Whitney St. John [Whitney St. John Fairchild].  And I spoke to Paige.  This was only about five years ago, I think, for the first time, I'd ever spoke to my first cousin on that side.  And she told me that the first time she heard she had white cousins [sic.] was when she applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and her father told her, "You can't go to Harvard.  You have a black cousin there."  And she said she thought that was supposed to mean, "Well, yeah, I guess I can't."  "You have a black cousin."  Oh, he didn't say, "You can't go to Harvard."  He said, "You have a black cousin there."  And it was supposed to imply, well, you can't go there.  She says, "Well, so?"  And he goes, "Well then I won't pay for it if you want to go."  And that's how she found out she had a black cousin.  And so--and we were never in touch.  Her sister married the heir to the Fairchild fortune [James Fairchild], and I've never met her and I don't know what their lives are like, so it's--that side of the family has been very difficult.
Story_ID: 521598
Speaker 1: I met with my [paternal] uncle [Lynn St. John], and he told me to my face that he wanted me to never get in touch with his daughters [Paige St. John and Whitney St. John Fairchild].  And he said, this is a great line.  He said, "Being--having black people in my family is like being gay, and I don't want to be outed."  And I think, and you know what, I think it's important to say these things, because I think people look at me and say, "You're an Olympic medalist.  You went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  You're very successful.  You worked in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  So see?  Discrimination is over."  But they don't see the side that I continue to live with in today's day and age.  And today, with first cousins and aunts and uncles who would tell me to my face, "I don't want you to be a part of my family simply because of the color of your skin.  I don't care how successful you are, I don't care, you know, that you've been named one of the five most inspiring women in the nation by 'NBC Nightly News.'  You're black, and I really don't want anyone to know you're related to me."  And I think it's too easy for a lot of people to forget that that's still going on.
Speaker 2: When did you meet your uncle?
Speaker 1: I moved to New York City [New York, New York] from California in, right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001] in 2001.  So I--yeah, I moved in, wait, I'm sorry.  I've got the year wrong.  I moved in 2002, which was after.  And I'd been here a few years, and then I thought, I should look up my uncle, you know?  I should--there had been awkward things that had happened over time where he had made it clear that he, you know, didn't want to be connected to us.  But I thought, that was years ago.  Things have changed.  You know, I've been, I've won medals, I've done all these things, you know.  And I thought I would reach out and it would be one of those things, which I've had happen to me a number of times.  Where people say, you know, "Well, you're the exception."  You know.  "You're black, but you're not really black, so I'll like you anyway."  You know, and I thought it would be like that.  And I'm like, okay.  Even if it's like that, let me just reach out, and let me be forgiving of the things that have happened in the past.  And I didn't expect to get the response of, "No, you're, you're not the exception.  You're still black."  (Laughter) Yeah, it's very sad.
Speaker 2: And your cousin, whom you met--
Speaker 1: I spoke to her on the phone.  I still haven't met her in person.
Speaker 2: Did she not want to?
Speaker 1: I think, she was very nice, but I think she's in an awkward position because she loves her father very much.  And she--and I'm saying this.  I don't, she didn't say this specifically.  But I think she was friendly, but she's not like calling me back and inviting me to her house.  I think it's a typical thing, that it would cause her father a lot of pain if I show, if I'm out going to, you know, holiday events.  So, it's, and I'm not pushing it either.  You know, I'm not calling her every day and saying, "Please come to my house," either.  So I don't know where we are.
Speaker 2: How does this make you feel?
Speaker 1: Honestly, I've spent most of my life so disconnected from family.  I think my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] left and reinvented herself.  And she had to make up who she was, and who she wanted to be.  And I've lived in that life of creating something better, and focusing on what's better, and not focusing on the past.  So I focus on the connections I can make and who I can be.
Story_ID: 521599
Speaker 1: Your father [Lee St. John], is he still living?
Speaker 2: No.  He died when I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we went to his, we did go to his funeral.  We didn't get to go to my [paternal] grandmother's [Leah Barnhardt St. John], my white grandmother's funeral, but we did go to my father's funeral when I was twelve.  And that side of the family, the Barnhardts, so my grandmother, her brother, his kids, they were very nice and very welcoming.  But we haven't been in touch a lot over the years.  But recently, it was only about four months ago, I met with one of my grandmother's brother's daughter.  And wonderful person, and we were talking about most of the family is in Oregon, and that I should go out and meet them.  And my daughter [Darcy Deane] would love to be more connected, and they are very open to that.  And so that's something that we should explore and work on.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  So is there anything else that you know about your father's family history before we move beyond family?
Speaker 2: Oh, well one of the things we heard was that the family goes way back to, you know, I got to check out my DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution] credibility.  Like, I might be able to join the DAR.  It's a--both the St. John family and the Barnhardt family go way back, and I think I had always assumed Barnhardt was German, because it sounds German.  But I think they're telling me it's Swedish, and that the St. John family is like, English and French, like Norman, Saxon, whatever that is.  But they, the St. John family goes like, all the way back to the king, you know.  And so I have this, I have this WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] white European family that goes way back in the United States.  And then I have this black family that, you know, presumably came over through slavery and struggled and there's very few records and I don't--I don't know.  But it's--both sides because we've been so cut off, it's all mystery and rumor for me.
Story_ID: 521600
Speaker 1: I want you to go now to the house where you grew up.  So take yourself back there and remember.  Share with me, you know, what did it look like, what did your neighborhood look like, what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember from the home where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Again, this is very double-edged for me.  So we'll start with some of the happier things, and then we can go to some of the darker things.   So, I lived on a dead-end street in a very, kind of country area that didn't have sidewalks, and you could play ball in the middle of the street 'cause it was a dead end road and it was quiet.  My mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] loved to garden.  She was so excited.  And it's, again, when I saw her writings that she wrote when she was in her sixties, it gave me so much perspective on what she was doing when I was three, four, five, you know.  When she was growing up, she talked about bringing some seeds home from school.  Like they were doing a planting thing, and she tried to plant seeds, and, you know, and it was, you could just imagine it was dirt, and she didn't have--there was no soil.  And she tried to scratch in the dirt and plant something and she couldn't.  And, you know, like neighbor's yards might have been pretty, but hers wasn't.  And she couldn't do anything about it.  But when we moved to San Diego [California], she planted fruit trees in the backyard.  I remember she planted a palm tree, and of course, she was so excited she had a palm tree.  And she had this little cactus garden she made.  And she learned--she had the Western Garden book ['Sunset Western Garden Book'], and she learned all about all the flora and fauna that would grow in San Diego.  She had a vegetable garden, and I hated it because we had to garden every weekend.  We had to cut, we'd pull weeds and cut things.  And, you know, so when you're a kid, you think, "Uh.  Why is she doing all this?"  But I could just see the perspective of that little girl who was in Mount Dora [Florida], struggling with her mom [Mary Lee] far away and nothing and being able to create this magical garden.  Our lives were full of contradiction.  So I grew up in National City [California] in San Diego [San Diego County, California], which is--I went back there recently.  It's the highest murder rate in San Diego.  It supports--there's gangs.  You know, it's fifteen minutes from the Mexican border.  It's a difficult place.  And even when I was little, there was drugs, you know, there was a lot going on.  But she created this oasis.  We had lawn, we had fruit trees, there was actually even a swimming pool.  People think, you know, you grew up with a swimming pool in your backyard you were rich, you know.  It's contradictions.  She managed to get this place, I mean, it was $25,000 when they bought the house.  It--we weren't rich, but she managed to make it like we were.
Speaker 1: What do you--
Speaker 2: Oh, smells, you said smells.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Holidays.  She would always get up at five in the morning and make cornbread 'cause she was going to make cornbread stuffing for the turkey.  And so when we would get up, we would smell cornbread cooking.  And she would bake the cornbread and take out the middle and turn it into stuffing.  So there would always be the edges, the crust.  And you would come and eat the crust, and put butter on it, and then, you know, that was the lead into the Thanksgiving feast, or the Christmas feast.  She also loved making spaghetti sauce, and she would cook it for hours, you know, and so the smell of spaghetti sauce cooking.  But she didn't cook much day to day.  So it was, it was more the holidays, like that--
Story_ID: 521601
Speaker 1: She [St. John's mother, Ruby Page Schwimmer] was married then?
Speaker 2: So she moved to San Diego [California] with my stepfather, who was Paul Cremaschi, and he was my evil stepfather.  You know, he was a--he sexually abused my sister [April St. John Keenoy] and I.  I, again, these are things you don't realize 'til you're older.  So she was in Detroit [Michigan], a single mom with three kids, struggling to make ends meet.  When she--I think she was still in school when my father [Lee St. John] first left and she had three babies and she was trying to finish her degree so she could be a teacher.  She--the story she told me was that she was told by welfare that if she wanted welfare, she had to quit school.  And I--those were the rules back then, I don't know.  And she didn't want to, and the only reason, the only way she was able to stay in school was she got a loan from the Jewish Free Loan Society [JFLA].  So again she had, you know, because she had had the connections with the Jewish family, she was able to make this connection and get that help and stay in school, and finish and then get her teaching degree, and she started teaching in Detroit.  So Paul Cremaschi came along and married her, and took her to San Diego.  And when you think about that, she was, she was twenty-seven, he was sixty-seven when they got married.  He was, he was preying on a vulnerable, poor black woman, far away from her family, with two young daughters.  He married her and took her further away from anyone she had ever known, and was able to prey.  He was able to prey on my sister and I for years without being caught, or stopped, or questioned, or anything.  I believe now that this was, you know, something he did to probably hundreds of kids over the--his career, and he targeted us because we were vulnerable.  And again, I think that's gotta to be the story of so many young black girls.  He was white, but he targeted a vulnerable, poor, single black mother with two daughters.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever know that this was happening?
Speaker 2: The hundred thousand dollar question everyone asks.  I used to say no.  Because you don't want to believe that.  I think, probably the best way to say it is she had been so abused, she was fighting so many demons, she was sexually abused in her own childhood, and she never got healing from that.  She struggled with so many demons about race, about that.  She had seen lynchings when she was younger.  She had a lot of difficult stuff going on in her head, and she tended to dissociate.  So I remember telling her when I was eighteen that I was abused.  And she basically said, "Well, so was I.  Get over it, move on."  There was not a lot of warmth or sympathy about that.  It was, "Move on.  I don't really wanna hear it."  And, and I think some of that is her guilt, right?  She had guilt around it so she just, is like, and her own pain, right?  It brings up all her own pain.  So she dissociates separate.  Years later when I wrote my first book, 'Succeeding Sane' ['Succeeding Sane: Making Room For Joy In A Crazy World,' Bonnie St. John], that was the first time I mentioned in a book that I had been abused.  And we were gonna go on 'The Montel Williams Show,' and they called her up and said, "We want you on the show."  And you know, they were doing the pre-interview, and they asked her, "When's the first time you heard that she was abused?"  And she said, "Well, this show."  So she would continually forget.  My sister tells a story that she was at an event, it was a community event with lots of people, and my sister said something about being abused.  And my mother turned to her and said, "You have abuse in your family?"  I mean, there was a dissociation that continuously went on.  But the most painful thing for me, when I started doing my own healing work around this, and I started being willing to focus on it honestly, and process some of what had happened.  There's a story that my sister tells.  I say it's a story, you know, it's, it's true.  She told my mother when she was nine or ten, that something--she got in trouble for doing something.  And she said, "This is because, this is what's going on."  She was doing something sexually inappropriate, and she said, "This is why."  And what she says is that mom said to her, "Well, has it stopped?  Is it not going on anymore?  Okay, well then, forget about it."  Basically, the same thing she said to me when I was eighteen, she said to April when she was nine.  And I had heard that story, and I thought it was horrible.  But I didn't really process it, and it wasn't until I was in my thirties, wasn't until I was in my thirties that I did the math.  If my sister was nine or ten, I was still being abused and nobody asked.  Nobody checked.  'Cause I was abused from the age of two to the age of seven.  And so this question of, did my mother know, is complex.  She had, she had issues.
Story_ID: 521602
Speaker 1: How did it stop?
Speaker 2: I went to therapy when my daughter [Darcy Deane] was young, and I had to.  I had, what I had done, okay.  I had literally forgotten about it.  I had forgotten, erased the memories from the time that it happened until I was eighteen.  And what happened when I was eighteen is my stepfather [Paul Cremaschi] died.  And I've come to understand, if you read about it, that this is a common thing.  That when the perpetrator dies, you feel safe enough to bring the memories back.  And so, it's the weirdest thing, because it's not like one day you wake up and go, "Ah.  I was abused.  Ah!"  You know, it's like the best way I can explain of what it occurs, how it occurs in your brain is it's like a path.  Imagine that you live in a neighborhood and you walk around the neighborhood, and there's this road, dirt road that kind of goes off.  And you just haven't walked down that path in a long time.  You know it's there, you know you were down there years ago, you know it's there, you just never think about it.  And so you walk past every day and you never go.  And then all of a sudden, when you're eighteen and you walk down that path, and you go, "Oh, yeah.  I always knew this was here, but I just never went."  And so it doesn't shock you.  It doesn't surprise you.  You just realize, "I remember this, and I haven't remembered it for ten years."  Anyway, it just, I know if people haven't experience that, it's just impossible to imagine.  But at eighteen, I remembered that I was sexually abused.  And I only remembered little snippets of it, but I talked to my mom [Ruby Page Schwimmer] about it.  But it wasn't until I had my own daughter that it started to become a real problem for me.  So I just shut it down, I just, my mom said, "Don't think about it."  I said, "Okay."  But once I had my own daughter, the pain started to bubble up in many ways, and I didn't realize that that was what was happening at first.  But things like, when she would come home after school, I would black out.  Because that's when I would be abused, is every day when I came home from school, and he was there and my mother was at work.  And so there were, there were things--and I say blackout.  Like, we'd be playing and I would just fall asleep.  And I didn't, this would repeatedly happen in the middle of the afternoon.  And it's, you know, it's crazy stuff is happening, and the anxiety was coming up, and it took me a while to put together what it was.  And that if I wanted to be a mother, I needed to treat it.  And I think that's one of the things when I look back, my mother never did the healing work.  And that's part of the reason why she missed all the signs and she couldn't, you know, and I realized, if I don't do my healing work, my daughter could be abused and I might fall asleep and miss it.  (Laughter) You know?  So I was motivated to do the work.  And some people, you know, I am a strong person of faith.  And I think for me, at that time, I was working on my prayer life a lot, and that gave me the strength to do the work.  But I don't believe, some people believe if you just forgive the past, and pray, you're done.  I had to do more than that.  Maybe that works for some people, but I had to go to therapy, I went to a hypnotist that took me back, so that's why I know that it ended when I was seven.  I'm sorry, you asked me, "How did it end?"  And I know this because I went into therapy and because I did the hypnosis.  Gosh, this is hard.  So he had been abusing me for years.  He had been playing little sex games with me after school, when I would come home from school.  And, and, especially when I was in kindergarten, you know, I'd get home earlier than my brothers and sisters.  You know, he was able to have time alone with me.  And I think one of the unwritten rules was that no one spoke.  That you didn't speak when these things, the unspeakable, right?  Because nobody spoke.  When I was seven, I said something and he immediately stopped his activities and left, and it never happened again.  Okay, this is the really hard part.  So in the hypnosis, I had to go back and relive some of these things.  And it was very judicious about the healing.  About--because what you're trying to do is go back and unpack what happened, and what you learned to believe because of the things that happened.  And you want to be able to undo that process of creating false beliefs about yourself and about the world.  And, which would be things like you don't matter, and you don't have any value, and your value is only as to pleasure somebody else, you know?  You have to undo all these beliefs.  I felt like it was a process of, like the Greek myth, when Hercules goes back into Hades and goes in to save someone and pull them out.  That I had to do these therapy sessions, to go back and find this child and bring them out of Hell.  It was a very difficult period.
Story_ID: 521603
Speaker 1: But reliving that memory of the last time he sexually abused me (crying), the most horrible part about it is that the child became very depressed.  Because as a child, I was sad that the abuse stopped.  Because it was a feeling of affection and warmth and love and it was, I don't know, it was normal.  It was what was there.  And so I thought I had done something wrong.  That was the third grade, and I got all Cs in third grade.  I was always a straight A student through my whole life, and I remember I got all Cs in third grade.  And I think, I never put it together, until much later, until I did this hypnosis and I understood.  I became a very depressed child because I had done something wrong and I was being punished by my stepfather [Paul Cremaschi].  And, any sane adult human who looks at that and says, "How can you twist a young child into somebody who would become depressed when it stops?"  It's horrible (crying).
Speaker 2: Did you find yourself angry with your mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer]?
Speaker 1: Not until after she died.  My mother was an amazing person.  It's so funny, given what I've shared with you.  It's gonna be hard to reconcile with that, with the fact that she was an educator.  She was looking after everyone's children.  She was the principal of many schools, and she made a very positive difference in not only the lives of the students who were there, but the teachers and the parents.  She died at age sixty-seven, and at her funeral, over three hundred people came and spent hours telling my brother [Wayne St. John] and my sister [April St. John Keenoy] and I what she had done for them.  And how much she had done for them.  That she had kept kids in school who, you know, gotten them off drugs and somebody said, "She helped me find a husband."  You know, or parents, "She helped me get back in school."  Or teachers, "She helped my further degree."  And, you know, she did so much for so many people.  But when you look back, she was a very, you know, her life, her childhood was so horrible, she was fighting with demons.  When I was growing up, she used to take us to motivational speakers, she used to spend hours writing affirmations.  Writing positive statements over and over again.  So what I learned from her was that her life was messy and painful, but she fought to try to stay more positive.  She didn't always win, but she fought for more positivity for herself, for her children, you know, even though, okay, she made this one really big mistake with marrying Paul Cremaschi, and not being able to see the signs.  But she filled our house with books.  She made us love education.  She supported our interests, whether it was skiing or my brother's photography.  He built a--he's a photographer now.  He built, she bought him his first enlarger to develop pictures, at a pawn shop.  You know, and helped him build a dark room in the garage, and she gave us so much.  It's--at her funeral, my brother's speech, he said, "She was the best of moms, and she was the worst of moms.  But she was never in between."  So I valued my relationship with her.  When she turned sixty, I took her to England for a week, we spent a week in England together.  Shortly before she died, I got to speak on a Disney cruise [Disney Cruise Line] and I took her with her.  She loved, me with her, she loved Disney [The Walt Disney Company], and Roy Disney [Roy E. Disney] was on the ship.  And Jennifer Hudson was singing on the ship, and it was an amazing trip.  I loved my mother and I wanted that relationship.  But after she died, I think I was willing, I was willing to admit more things to myself.  And it's like what I said about when my stepfather died.  You're willing to go down roads that you didn't go down for many years.  When my mother died, it felt like, you know if you took a beach ball, and you pushed it under the water, and then you took your hand away, it would shoot up?  That's what it felt like to me, is that there was all this stuff that had been pushed down for so long, and it shot up after she died, and I couldn't stop it.  So I was, I had a lot of anger after she died that I had to process.  But I didn't share that with her.
Story_ID: 521604
Speaker 1: Tell me about your leg?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry.  It's just so funny.  Yeah, there's so many layers that--I do a lot of speaking for conferences and events.  And when I speak, mainly what they see is that I'm missing a leg, and I don't tell these painful stories that we're talking about.  I talk about ski racing and having one leg, and those things.  And it's interesting to me because sometimes, I almost wish I could say, "You think the leg is a big deal."  And actually, sometimes I do say this, because I say to people, "We're all struggling with things.  And this is visible, but many of the things that we're dealing with are invisible and those are just as real or even harder."  And I know that more than anyone else.  But the leg.  I know, it's like you said, let's talk about the leg.  There's one more thing.  I was born with pre-femoral focal disorder [proximal femoral focal deficiency], which means I was missing a growth center in my femur.  So my thigh didn't grow.  My thigh is still only about four inches long.  And what they did was they fused the bones together.  So they fused all of my leg bones into one, and took off the front of my foot so that my heel is still there.  They sewed my heel over.  So that's what I walked, so my, I have a stump of a leg, but at the bottom is my heel, and then everything else is fused into one.  That allows me to walk really well, because it gives me a good surface to walk on with my stump.  But I had the surgery to amputate my leg when I was five, and then I had to go back later.  They wanted--they shortened it.  It grew more than they thought it would so they went back and cut some bone out, and then I had to have another surgery later to take the pins out.  So it was in and out of the hospital all the way from five to eighteen a number of times.
Speaker 1: And so before you had this surgery, I read that you had a brace and you wore orthopedic shoes.  Can you describe pre-surgery what your existence was like?
Speaker 2: Physically?  I, you just said it all.  You know, I had orthopedic high-top shoes.  I remember painting them, like I had to polish them white over and over again.  It meant that I couldn't run around and play like other kids.  You know, it's--the brace was rigid too.  So I was dragging like Quasimodo, this leg around.  And, you know, you can't run through sprinklers.  You can't, my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer], I remember, I have a memory of sitting on my mother's lap and her shoving me off and saying, "You're gonna run my nylons with the brace."  My--this is funny.  Again, it's a conflicting picture with my mother.  She was amazingly good at supporting people to follow their dreams, but she was not a soft, kind, fuzzy person, you know.  And that helped with my disability because she didn't make excuses.  She expected me to do my chores, she expected me to do everything.  And she would do subtle things.  Like when she bought bicycles, we all three had bicycles, all three of us kids.  But she--and I didn't find this out until later.  She paid more for my bicycle, and it was lighter.  She got me a better bicycle because she wanted me to be able to ride it.  She didn't say anything, you know.  And other people would try to coddle me and say, "Oh, she can't do that.  She's disabled."  She would stop them.  And say, "No.  She's gonna do this, she's gonna do that."  So the fact that she wasn't a kind, patronizing person is part of what made me strong.  And especially around my disability, that she didn't--she wasn't going to let me be coddled or make excuses.  She was gonna do things behind the scenes, to maybe make it easier for me, but she wasn't gonna accept excuses.
Speaker 1: And so as a little girl, with--well you were born with the disability.  Did you--can you tell the story of when you learned that you were going to have the surgery?
Speaker 2: I don't have a lot of clear memories of that.  I was very young.  My, my mother went and talked to some other people who had had the surgery.  She did some investigation.  But the only thing I remember is that she told me that I wouldn't have to wear the orthopedic shoes anymore.  That I could wear normal shoes, I'd have two feet even on the ground, instead of one-foot-high up, and I could wear any color shoes I wanted.  And I thought, "Sold."  (Laughter) So that's the only thing I remember.  That's what kids think about, right?
Story_ID: 521605
Speaker 1: I was in--the first time when I had my leg cut off, I was in the hospital for six months.  And I spent my birthday there, Christmas, Thanksgiving, Halloween.  I remember trick or treating in the hospital.  It was a Shriners Hospital [Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children; Shriners Hospital for Children] in Los Angeles [California].  And so they took care of everything.  There was, there were no bills, they give you state of the art care, and, and so that's why you were so long.  Because they not only did the surgery, they did the therapy, they made you a new leg, they got the whole thing done before you could go home again.
Speaker 2: And when is your birthday?
Speaker 1: November 7th.
Speaker 2: Of what year?
Speaker 1: It was 1964.
Speaker 2: November 7th, 1964.  So you were in the hospital for six months?  That's a long time.
Speaker 1: For a kid.  But, again, it meant I wasn't being abused.  And so I have clearer memories of my life in the hospital than I do of much of my childhood at that time.  I don't, I don't, it's all blocked out.  But in the hospital, I remember my teacher was Mrs. Russell [ph.], and you know, she let me take as many spelling tests as I wanted, and we used to race wheelchairs up and down the hallway.  And I could ride a wheelie, and I could walk on crutches with no feet, and you know, I remember the games and the crafts, Mrs. Cameron [ph.].  I could tell you so much more detail about my life in the hospital for that six months than I can about what my life was like at home at that time.
Speaker 2: And you've written about the time in the hospital, and I think it was around your birthday when your mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] wasn't allowed to come?
Speaker 1: I'd forgotten about that story.  In those days, their rules were very strict.  And children, I think, you know what my theory is?  Men were running hospitals.  And they, honestly, and they didn't think about children.  If mothers were running hospitals, well, and they are now, and it's very different.  Shriner's Hospital has apartments for parents.  They could come and stay when their child was having surgery, and they can be there for them year round.  In the days when I was in the hospital, parents were only allowed to visit once a week on Sundays.  And they would dress up all the kids, and the parents would all come and visit.  But my parents decided to come on a Saturday, that was my birthday, and bring a birthday cake.  And I remember like, seeing them appear and then disappear.  And they were thrown out.  And they didn't tell me why, they didn't tell me what happened, and then the next day they dressed up all the kids and got ready for parents to come, and my parents didn't come.  They weren't allowed to come.  And I just cried and cried and cried.  And, you know, no one explained.
Speaker 2: And it was because of the cake?
Speaker 1: It was because they came on the wrong day.  But then, again, I don't know everything that happened, but my--we lived in San Diego [California].  Los Angeles was a two, two-and-a-half hour drive away.  So if they came on Saturday, and were thrown out, I think, what I remember, maybe what I was told was they were not allowed to come back the next day.  But maybe they just went home and couldn't come back.  You know, I don't know.  But no one ever explained to me, and that's hard.  I don't want to make Shriner's Hospital look bad, though.  And the other part was Christmas.  And at Christmastime, the Shriner's would come through and ask all the kids what they wanted for Christmas.  And, again, most of us in the hospital were not from rich families.  And so we're talking about, it's like, are they serious?  They're asking us what we want for Christmas.  You know, can we say anything?  You know, and so it's like, "I'm gonna say a TV.  You know, they can't do that, right?"  So you, poor kids are smart, right?  So we hedge our bets.  Like, I'm gonna ask for a Kittle [ph.], and a Barbie, and then I'm gonna ask for something big.  See if I get that too.  You know, I'll probably get the Barbie.  So I asked for a Barbie, I said, but my big thing was a tricycle.  I'm gonna see if they can get me a tricycle.  And on Christmas day, I got a purple tricycle with tassels from the handles and everything.  But the amazing story, when I look back, is, I couldn't ride it.  I had an artificial leg that stuck out, there was a big piece that stuck out, and it would hit the handle bars.  So you couldn't, I couldn't sit on it and pedal it because it, my leg was too big and it wouldn't work.  I could, and if I stood on the back of it, I couldn't push with my fake foot.  I couldn't stand on my fake foot and push with it.  I couldn't do much of anything with the tricycle other than sit on it.  But they didn't take it away from me.  And nobody told me there was anything wrong with me having a tricycle.  And I think that is so powerful, that they gave me what I asked for, and they never made it a problem.  And I took it home and it was my tricycle.
Story_ID: 521606
Speaker 1: You come back from the hospital [Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children; Shriners Hospital for Children, Los Angeles, California], and where are you going to school at this point?
Speaker 2: I was at Palmer Way elementary [Palmer Way School] in National City [California].
Speaker 1: And how did you get to school?  How far away was school from your home?
Speaker 2: You really have thought this through, haven't you?  Because I was disabled, I was able to ride a special bus that would pick me up from my front door and take me to school every day.  And all the disabled kids were on the bus, and that's how I got to and from school.
Speaker 1: And your siblings [Wayne St. John and April St. John Keenoy] went to school separately?
Speaker 2: You know, that's funny.  They must have.  I don't remember them ever having riding the bus with me.  Maybe what it was too, in elementary school, if you were my brother, Wayne, and you could either ride your bike or walk to school, or you could ride with all the disabled kids, what would you do?  Let's think about that, you know.  So they must have gone to school, yeah.  'Cause we all went to Palmer Way, you're right, but they didn't ride the bus with me, no.
Speaker 1: You're on this bus every day with the disabled kids.  Now, your mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] has made it clear that she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She expects me to do whatever.
Speaker 1: She expects you to do things like able bodied kids.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Incidentally too.  In those days, it was before mainstreaming was a thing.   And so my mother had to fight to keep me in regular school.  So the bus, I remember was, you know, elementary school.  But in kindergarten, they wanted to put me in a different school.  And my mother said, "She's not, she doesn't have any mental disabilities.  She can keep up with the other kids."  And they said, "Well, she falls down a lot."  And she said, "Well, she gets up." So even before the Olympics, I was falling down and getting up.  And she made them let me go to regular school.
Speaker 1: How did you feel being on the bus with a group of disabled children?  Did you, you know, as someone who was disabled but not really treated like that way at home, what was your experience in the company of other disabled people?
Speaker 2: To be honest with you, I don't know that I reflected on it a lot.  Well, I think what you're trying to get at, I'm not sure I have memories of the bus.  But I didn't identify strongly with people with disabilities until later.  It was really when I started skiing, because I, in order to get the special equipment that I needed to go skiing, I found a group of amputees called Amputees in Motion.  So amputees that did sports.  And I started hanging out with them.  I mean, we even hosted a pool party at our pool at National City.  And a lot of people with disabilities came.  And that was the first time that I started to celebrate, going, "Oh, I'm part of this group.  This is great."  And, you know, everybody kicking off their legs, and going in the pool.  And it was like, "Wow, people like me."  And, and now if you, people say, "Well, you're not really disabled."  I'm like, "Yes I am.  If you say I was not disabled, that means you have stereotypes about what it means to be disabled.  But I identify strongly as I am disabled, question your assumptions.  And I also have people saying that to me about being black, you know, is, "Well you're not really black."  And I mean like, "Well, that means you have assumptions about what it means to be black 'cause I'm black, you know."  So when I was riding the bus to school every day in elementary school, I don't, I had not developed that sensibility.  But I don't remember feeling like, "Uh, I don't like those people."  It was more neutral.
Story_ID: 521607
Speaker 1: What age were you when skiing became part of your life?
Speaker 2: So that, I was about fifteen, and I was attending Mission Bay High School [Mission Bay Senior High School, San Diego, California].  So I grew up in National City [California], which is near the border, and it's the wrong side of the tracks, so to speak.  But I had gotten special dispensation to go to school all the way on the other side of town.  So again, my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] wanted us to have a better education, she wanted us to go to a better school.  And because in San Diego [California] they had integration rules.  So if you were black and you were going to go to a more white school, they would give you permission to go outside your neighborhood school.  So we were helping integration.  So I went to Mission Bay High School and met a friend, Barbara Warmath, who invited me to go skiing with her family over Christmas vacation.  She gave me a little coupon on my birthday in November saying, "Come skiing with our family over Christmas vacation."  So between November and December, I had to find the special equipment, I went to the Salvation Army and got an old pair of ski pants and got ready for this big adventure.
Speaker 1: And her parents were fine with a woman with one leg--a teenager with one leg going skiing, and your mother, and--
Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about Barbara first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I think it's amazing that Barbara Warmath invited her one-legged black friend from the wrong side of the tracks, and looked at me and said, skier.  When I was on 'The Montel Williams Show,' they brought her out as a surprise guest.  I hadn't seen her in years, and they kept her hidden, and she walks out on stage and he asked her.  He said, "Didn't you think it would ruin your Christmas vacation to drag your one-legged friend along?"  You know?  And she said, without hesitating, she said, "I knew she could do it.  I knew she could do it."  And to have a friend, who A, reaches out across differences and B, believes in you in that kind of a way and sees the greatness in you when other people don't see it.  I think, I do a lot of work with corporations on diversity.  And that is such a great story.  Because not only is it a diversity story, about what we experience when we don't limit ourselves to people who look like us, but it made the U.S. more competitive.  Because Barbara Warmath was recruiting skiers in the black neighborhood in San Diego, which I don't think the U.S. team was, we won more medals in 1984 because there was a black girl from San Diego from the team.  You know, if I had not been there, we wouldn't have won as many medals.  And so diversity does make us more competitive.  So, so Barbara's story, I think her perspective is just amazing on its own.  Barbara's mother, I ran into her in Salt Lake City, Utah in the ski area years and years later.  And she said, the first thing she said to me was, "I'm sorry."  And I said, "What?  You took me skiing.  You changed my life."  And she said, "I know.  But by the end of that first week that you went skiing with us, I tried to talk you out of ever skiing again."  She said, "You were bruised and bleeding and I said to you, 'Bonnie [HistoryMaker Bonnie St. John], swimming is a good sport.'"  And I don't even remember her saying that.  But I, but she was willing to take me along, but what she was telling me years later, was that it was very upsetting for her.  That she didn't think it had worked out very well at the time.  But I don't even remember that.  I remember.  By, it was a hard, it was a very tough week, the first week of skiing.  I was bruised and beat up.  But by the end of it, I was skiing.  So do you ski?
Speaker 1: No.  But I have.
Speaker 2: You have skied.
Speaker 1: I've tried.
Speaker 2: So you, you know when you start skiing, you snowplow.  They call it pizza pie now, it's when you put your skis like this.  Well, when you have one ski, there's no pizza pie, right?  Cause you're on one ski.  So I couldn't snowplow, I couldn't slow down.  And I stopped by running into people on the bunny hill, you know.  It was the only way I could stop.  So for the first three days, I couldn't stop without crashing.  It, you had to learn to turn and do the hockey stop in order to slow down or stop.  But what that meant, was after three days, I was perfect parallel skiing.  My tips never crossed, I could go on the intermediate slope.  So the first three days was horrible.  But once you get over that, you're like an intermediate skier, like that.  And I loved, so by the end of the week I was hooked.  I was like, this is great.  I went to the club where I had gotten the equipment from and I started skiing with them and got over it.  So it was a horrible start, but it, I was hooked.
Speaker 1: You write about being rescued, in a sense, by the National Brotherhood of Skiers.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: So, it's interesting these communities I was able to find.  So I found this community of disabled skiers, and I went to national championships with the disabled skiers.  But I was always the only black person there.  And it is this great vision.  Imagine this vignette of going to a ski area, and there's a ski lift, and right out on the edge of the ski lift, there's a pile of wheelchairs, and artificial legs, and crutches.  It's like Lourdes [France], right?  They've been healed, they've walked away.  And, and so I hung out with this group of disabled skiers, and for the first time--my mother had always hidden my disability.  "Wear pants, cover it up, put your leg on.  Don't hop around the house."  But with the disabled skiers, we were on the dance floor on one leg, you know, we were having a ball.  It unlocked me to say, "This is me.  This is fun.  This is my, you know, join the party."  So this helped me with my disabled identity a lot.  But I was always the only black person in the disabled ski group.
Story_ID: 521608
Speaker 1: I got a full scholarship to go to Burke Mountain Academy in Vermont [East Burke, Vermont].  So I had decided I wanted to become a ski racer, I wanted to try to make the U.S. team, and I had done, tried to do all this fundraising, but I ended up at Burke Mountain Academy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now tell me about Burke Mountain Academy, what is that?
Speaker 1: So it's a ski racing high school in Vermont.  It's the first of its kind.  It was founded by Warren Witherell, and it helped make the U.S. more competitive in alpine skiing.  Ever since it was founded, there's been a Burke alumni on the U.S. Team, competing, and usually winning medals ever since it was founded.  Now there are more high schools for ski racers like that.  But it was the first one, and it's a very special place.  So they gave me a full scholarship, and on the first day when I showed up, I had a physical test.  So I had to do pushups and sit ups and, and I knew it was coming so I had practiced for a lot of these tests.  But after the tests were all over, I was fooling around with some kids on a ski simulator, fell off, and broke my ankle.  On the first day of school at Burke Mountain Academy.  So I was in a cast, and it was so tough, you know, 'cause I only had one leg.  And now it's in a cast.  And I, all these, you know, all these super athletes, and I just felt like if I even had one leg, you know, I could keep up.  So I could still do weight lifting, you know, I, because they, you know, everybody's working out every day in addition to your classes, so I could still do weight lifting, I could still do abs routines.  But I couldn't run, I couldn't play on the soccer field, there was a lot I couldn't do.  The good news is, I took that time when I couldn't do what the other kids were doing, and I went in the development office and continued writing letters and fundraising.  So I was able to do that.  But--
Speaker 2: Writing letters and fundraising for?
Speaker 1: Well I, in addition, although I had a full scholarship at the school, I still needed to go to races, I still needed equipment, I still needed a lot of money to compete.  And my circuit that I competed on, with--for disability, was different.  So all those kids would go to the same races, but I went to a different races.  So I had to fly myself to other races.  I had to, I had to do other things.  It's interesting, I say that disabled sport is such a great preparation for competing in business in the world today.  Because if you were a basketball athlete, for example, there's a field, there's a farm system, right?  You don't have to make a lot of decisions.  Your talented, they pick you up, they tell you to go here, to go there, and go here.  I, when I was training, I had to book my own airline tickets, I hired coaches, I moved places.  I had to set it up, and that positioned me very well to be an entrepreneur in business, is, I knew how to take initiative, I knew how to make things happen.  And for disabled athletes, you gotta figure it out, you know?  You don't get given optimum circumstances.  And I think in the business world, nobody has optimal circumstances.  Things are changing, you can't wait 'til you have all the perfect equipment, you gotta find excellence with whatever you have.  And that's what disabled sport stand for.  Excellence, even if you don't have all the arms or legs.  Make it work.
Speaker 2: At, so you're a teenager basically, raising money in order to be able (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So I was fifteen when I first went skiing, and so at sixteen, I, you know, I had started skiing, and I realized I really wanted to race, so I started writing letters, I started raising money, I got myself to Burke Mountain Academy.  After that, I went to a glacier in Oregon [Mt. Hood] and got a job at the gift shop there.  I got a job in the gift shop on the mountain near the glacier.  And they basically gave me a special schedule so I could work on the weekends in the gift shop and train during the week, on the slope, with coaches.  And I had my own apartment, so I booked my own apartment, I got a job, and it was like, that job was like a scholarship.  I mean, every skier in the world would have wanted that job with that schedule.  And they gave it to me to support my bid for the Olympics.
Speaker 2: And glacier is a place where Olympic hopefuls go to train?
Speaker 1: Right.  So over the course of the summer, all of the U.S. team, the Canadian team, other teams would cycle through there for two or three weeks at a time.  But I spent the whole summer there because I had an apartment and a job and, and I trained with a coach.  I was with a coach that had people on the glacier training all summer.
Speaker 2: And this was at age fifteen?
Speaker 1: Well that was, no.  I started skiing when I was fifteen, and then I started racing and then I moved to Burke Mountain Academy in Vermont.  So that was my senior year in high school.  So the summer after senior year, I went to the glacier, and then I went to college, and then I spent another summer on the glacier.  And then I competed in the Olympics [1984 Winter Paralympics, Innsbruck, Austria].
Speaker 2: So you went one year to the high school?
Speaker 1: Right.  I was only one year at Burke Academy.  It was my senior year in high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you were at the high school where you were bussed in San Diego [California]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: For three years.  Is that right?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you really want to get into this much detail?
Speaker 2: No, we don't need to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  'Cause I went to four high schools in four years.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So we really don't want to do that.
Speaker 2: I was just a little confused.  So that, now I know why.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 521609
Speaker 1: Now you've graduated.  You're in college.  Where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And going to Harvard--as a child, you called yourself poor.  Not having the resources, necessarily.  What made you make that decision to even apply to Harvard?
Speaker 2: This is funny.  You make the point that we were poor, why would you go to Harvard?  And that's what I used to say to people.  Is, why do you rob banks?  That's where the money is.  I went to Harvard 'cause they had scholarships, you know?  They had the biggest scholarships.  My sister actually went to Harvard before I did, and she applied to the entire Ivy League.  It was kind of a joke among her senior class.  She got accepted to every single Ivy League college 'cause she applied to all of them.  And it's, when you don't have a lot of money, you--they waive the application fees.  So she could just apply to all of them.  But Harvard gave her the best scholarships.  And they even did things, coming from San Diego [California], they gave her extra scholarship money to buy a winter coat.  And they were very sensitive to everything you would need to make this work.  And so I saw that, and I thought, "Well, that makes a lot of sense.  I'm gonna go."  I had heard stories of other places where they wouldn't be that considerate, and they'd even give you one scholarship freshman year, and lower it over time, and people would get into difficulties.  And what I saw was Harvard, obviously a very good college, but also very good about the financial aid.  To be honest, I didn't think that deeply about it.  My, my daughter [Darcy Deane] goes to UPenn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I look at the way they teach the subjects I was interested in, and I think, "Gosh, I probably would have been happier there."  But I was in San Diego.  I wasn't that sophisticated about communicating.  It's not like everything was on the Internet like it is now.  I was like, "I can get into Harvard and get money to go?  Good!"  That was about as much as I thought about it.  It's a great school and I'm very glad.  Oh, okay.  I've got to tell you this one funny story.  Is, I was speaking at a conference for the financial advisors, the college financial advisors association of America.  And so I'm prepping to do this, and I'm thinking about, I had financial aid.  And you know, I wanted to say thank you to this group of people, and I learned about what they do and they, college financial aid advisors work to help a lot of underprivileged people get into college.  And if you think about this, you've got to fill out the financial aid form.  Suppose you don't know who your father is?  You gotta, you're not allowed to say, "I don't know who my father is."  Everybody would say that, yeah, you know.  They help kids to figure it out, how to do it.  And some kids, if your--my father's in jail, you know, or your mother's in jail, and you don't know who your father is.  They're scared to fill out the form, you know.  So they do a lot to bring kids into the system and help them get over their fear and show up and be there.  So I'm speaking to this group and I'm thinking, I wanna tell you thank you for all you do, and your passion and commitment to make the American dream a reality for so many kids like me.  I represent the American dream and what's good about America.  And you guys are out there fighting for it every day.  And I said, "I've listened to what you do, I've interviewed people.  This is so powerful.  This is so powerful; I want to be able to say thank you.  And it makes me realize it was a financial aid advisor out there fighting for me and I don't even know who it was, but I appreciate it."  After the speech, she comes up to me and says, "I was your financial aid advisor.  I know your sister, April St. John [April St. John Keenoy].  I was looking at your case every, you know, day at Harvard."  And, I know.  And it's, I've had some wonderful opportunities to say thank you to people who made a huge difference in my life.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Story_ID: 521610
Speaker 1: What did you study at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I studied government, which is called political science at most other colleges.  I was very interested in international relations, but I also loved political philosophy.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And I did a lot of economics too.  I really wanted to do government and economics.
Speaker 1: As a child, did you have that sense that you wanted to work in the government?
Speaker 2: I was always more interested in economics and business.  I think I decided to do government because it interested me, but I never thought I would actually go work in government.  I always wanted to go to business school.  Freshman year, I got a job at, in the cafeteria at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  And I rode my bike across the river [Charles River] 'cause their lawns were more, you know, their lawns were more manicured over at the business school than the undergrad, you know.  It's this pristine, expensive looking place, and I would ride my bike across the river and think, "Someday, I'm gonna be here."  And I wanted to be a corporate executive.  That was my dream.
Speaker 1: And so, what--as you were at Harvard, what were some of the highlights of your experience there?
Speaker 2: Some of the highlights or my experience at Harvard.  I skied at the Harvard ski team, which mainly meant I trained with them.  I went to my own races more.  I went to some of their races too.  It was a nice comradery to have.  I went through Harvard in three years instead of four.  And mainly I did that because I was worried that we wouldn't have enough money.  There was always that fear in the back of my mind.  Is that we would run out of money, and things would be a struggle, and so you can take--
Speaker 1: Even though you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A scholarship.
Speaker 1: A full scholarship?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a full scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was mostly, but not full.  And in fact, I worked extra jobs to pay my mother's [Ruby Page Schwimmer] portion of the tuition because I was worried that she wouldn't pay it.  It, I didn't have a feeling of security around money.  And so, you, lots of smart kids go to Harvard, and they've taken AP [advanced placement] classes.  And if you take enough AP classes, you can skip a year of college.  But that's not a smart thing to do.  Why would you trade three AP tests in high school for a year of a Harvard education with professors?  It's--they tell you that, don't do it.  Why would you do that?  I did it because I was afraid we wouldn't have enough money.  And so I thought I needed to hurry up and get through.  And so I went for--I signed up freshman year.  I started, and then halfway through, decided I should take time off to train for skiing.  So I took, I went for one semester, and then I took off a year and went to the Olympics [1984 Winter Paralympics, Innsbruck, Austria], and then came back and finished in two and a half years.  And I worked the whole time I was there.  So when you say, "What were your highlights of Harvard?"  It went fast and I worked hard.  I remember when you turned in your senior thesis, so you have to do this, you know, 150-page research paper.  I did mine on Japanese financial deregulation markets, and I turned it in.  And they gave you a beer.  I don't know why.  You turned in your paper, and we had to physically turn in the paper.  I'm sure now you just push a button, but we had to go somewhere and physically turn your thesis, and they gave you a beer.  And I remember drinking that beer and thinking, "This is the first time I've relaxed since I was fifteen."  You know, I had just been pushing myself so hard.  And you know, doing it, never knowing how things were going to work.  You know, just flying by the seat of my pants.  And, it just, I don't know, I remember that beer was like a moment of, "I'm really gonna graduate from Harvard.  I really went to the Olympics.  I'm gonna take a breath."
Speaker 1: When you, you're at Harvard for a semester, and then you take a year off, what was that conversation like with the administration?  I'm leaving so I can pursue the Olympics.  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember.  I think I was really supportive, I think they were really supportive.  I can tell you when I was applying for Harvard, they called my mother over Christmas break.  And they said, "We just need to verify that she really exists.  Because MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] likes to put together certain applications as a joke, and we thought the one-legged black ski racer from San Diego [California] might be a prank."  So, I think they were very supportive of me being able to do that.  When I came back to school after the Olympics, and I was--I wanted to go compete in national championships again.  So I was at, I was in Boston [Massachusetts], and I needed to go to Colorado to compete.  Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the entity called Radcliffe back then, gave me the money to go and compete.
Story_ID: 521611
Speaker 1: And then, didn't the National Brotherhood of Skiers support you going, and your family to go to the Olympics [1984 Winter Paralympics, Innsbruck, Austria]?  Was that what I think I read (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They gave me a lot of money to help go to races and train, clothing, and places to stay in different towns.  You just reminded me of something I had completely forgotten.  What actually funded my family to go to watch me at the Olympics, was when my stepfather [Paul Cremaschi] died, and he left some money.  It was a very small amount.  Most of the money, he had saved up quite a sum of money.  And most of it he gave to colleges when he died.  He did not give it to us.  But there were small amounts of money that were enough to fly to Austria.  And that's how it got used.  One of life's weird ironies.
Speaker 1: Could you tell, just for the record, who the National Brotherhood of Skiers is?
Speaker 2: The National Brotherhood of Skiers is a national organization.  Its members are clubs, not people.  So they are black ski clubs all over the country, black ski, Boston [Massachusetts], actually it's called now, the Boston Tea--the Boston Ski Party.  I'm trying to think of all their names.  Winter Fox [Winter Fox Ski Association] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Four Seasons [Four Seasons West Ski and Snowboard Club, Los Angeles, California], the clubs in Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois].  Chicago Snow Burners [sic. Sno-Gophers Ski Club, Chicago, Illinois] and there are some, these are clubs that go back forty, fifty years of black skiers skiing together.  So the clubs all banded together under this umbrella of the National Brotherhood of Skiers.  And they organize a national get together every two years and you know, I was there in Utah when they had it there in Park City [Utah], and for a week, the entire ski area turns black.  You know, ten thousand black skiers take over the ski area.  And it's wonderful.  You know, you'll be standing in line at the chair lift, and the gondola and you can just talk to everybody, like, 'cause you know they're at the same conference that you're at, and it's--the camaraderie's amazing, the parties are great, and again, it was like I described with the disabled skiing.  It's that I came into a world where I celebrate who I am and learn to honor my identity from other people in a way that I had never gotten before.  With the National Brotherhood of Skiers, I think it's an amazing organization because it's black people who generally who are very successful, because they can afford to go skiing, they're not afraid of doing something unusual.  They're able to think outside the box, right?  Because they're not doing things that are typical of black people.  So it's not just that they're skiers, it's that they're courageous and they're open minded and they're interested in excellence and most of them don't spend all their time in black communities, right?  Because when you're not at that event, you're probably skiing with a lot of other people who aren't black.  You're, if you're successful in a job, you may very well be in a world that's not black.  So these are people able to navigate multiple worlds, find their identity, and still feel strong.  So there were a lot of role models for me, in particular, Gertrude Cowan, who's been a friend of mine ever since I met her when I was seventeen, and she would take care of me at these events.  She would be like my parent at these events, and she was my maid of honor at my wedding.  And I visit her when I'm in Boston.  And she was such a huge role model in terms of my black identity.  And not fixing my black identity in stereotypes, but in this courageous idea of what it means for me, and who I am, and finding a community that I could resonate with.
Story_ID: 521612
Speaker 1: Identity is always an interesting topic, and you've talked about the disabled identity.  As a black woman in the Olympics [1984 Winter Paralympics, Innsbruck, Austria], you are also the only black, one-legged skier, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Ever, right?  Was there anyone before you?
Speaker 2: Ralph Green is skiing now.  He's a black, he's black and has one leg, and is on the U.S. team now and he's a friend of mine.  He's from the Bronx [New York].  He lost his leg in a drive by shooting.  He was shot and is fine.  But, I'm trying to think.  There was a woman who was a blind cross-country skier named Barbara [ph.], I think.  But I was the first African American to win medals in Winter Olympics.
Speaker 1: As you're standing on that block, getting, you know, the--receiving your awards that you're wearing, what's going through your head?
Speaker 2: I get asked that and it's--I actually had an issue with awards ceremonies.  I was never good with award ceremonies.  And the best, my theory is that when you're a little kid growing up, and everybody's staring at you, and pointing at your leg, it's not comfortable.  I didn't like being singled out, I didn't like being pointed at.  As a disabled kid, I spent my whole life trying to fit in and be just as good as everybody else.  And so skiing, I would compete to be just as good as everybody else, but when you win, then you get singled out.  I didn't like it when--at my wedding either.  When everybody was staring at me.  It's just, if you've been stared at as a kid, it's not a comfortable feeling.  I wasn't, I, everybody wants me to say, "Oh, I felt so good at the award ceremony and it was the culmination of all my work."  But I was always uncomfortable being stared at and singled out.  I didn't, I didn't like it.  But I actually missed the award ceremony for the silver medal.  I was with my sister [April St. John Keenoy] on the hill in Austria, and she was struggling, she couldn't ski very well, and she couldn't get down.  And she was saying, "Go, you need to be at the award ceremony, go.  Leave me."  And I didn't.  And I think part of it was I wanted to take care of my sister, but part of it was, I wanted to avoid the attention.
Speaker 1: You didn't show up?
Speaker 2: So, actually, they were really mad at me because a white girl stood up and had to receive my medal.  And that was, if I could go back and do something over, I would do that.  Because I didn't understand it wasn't about me.  And I needed to do it for the thirty-three, if, for everybody, but especially for the thirty-three African Americans from the National Brotherhood of Skiers that came to watch.  So I'm, my apologies.  I wish we could do that over again.  But I did win the medal and I did do the work.  So I did everybody proud.
Story_ID: 521613
Speaker 1: You graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986].  Magna cum laude?
Speaker 2: Magna cum laude.
Speaker 1: And your degree was?
Speaker 2: In government.  And I did--I like minored in economics, but it was not official.
Speaker 1: Got it.  And what happened next?
Speaker 2: So I graduated from Harvard, I won the Rhodes Scholarship, so I was able to go to Oxford University [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] and study there.  And that was an amazing opportunity.  It was the first time that I felt financially secure, because I not only had all my tuition paid, but they gave you a salary, and so I was independent.  It was like, ah.  I could relax a little bit.  And I made a lot of friends that I still have today.  Interestingly, there was a community of African American women there that I connected with.  I used to have lunch every Wednesday with, there were four of us, who had lunch every Wednesday while we were there.  And it included Susan Rice, who is now the national security advisor, and Lisa Cook [Lisa D. Cook], who is a tenured economics professor.  And Terri Sewell who is a representative in [U.S.] Congress, so I'm the slacker (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Good company.
Speaker 2: I'm the slacker in that group, you know?  You know, and so that did a lot for my identity as a black woman, too.  And they schooled me.
Speaker 1: Having that group.
Speaker 2: And they schooled me on history I didn't know, and having a strong sense of identity.  They did a lot to strengthen me in that area.
Speaker 1: Do you mean because when you were growing up, that was--was it not emphasized, your African American heritage?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We didn't really talk about that.  I mentioned that my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] had a lot of demons, and, and complexity.  And I think the best way to say it is she had absorbed--she had swallowed a lot of poison in terms of her racial identity.  So, on the one hand, she did a lot to turn around an inner city school in San Diego [California], Lincoln High School [Abraham Lincoln High School].  She was passionate about being the principal of that school and making sure those kids got opportunities and more scholarships to go to college.  And it was like she was fighting for the poor black schools she had to go to when she was little.  But at the same time, she married three white men, and she--there were a lot of contradictions.  And she sent us to white schools and white churches and we didn't--we had a black vacuum growing up.  And so getting to be with the National Brotherhood of Skiers, and being in this community of black women in Oxford, I was making up for lost time to learn about black history and talk about black history, and do that.  I think to be fair to my mother, again, I hate for you to get the wrong idea about my mother.  Part of it was, I think she wanted us to have advantages.  And she felt that if she made us go on scholarship to a school in La Jolla [San Diego, California], we would associate with wealthy, well to do, white people.  And learn to walk like them and learn to talk like them, and learn to go to their schools, and succeed.  And it was--it's almost like being the disabled kid, and saying you will do your chores, and you will get up, and you will do this.  She wanted to make sure that we could win.  It's not, it's not kind (laughter).  And it's not what I did with my daughter, but it's what she felt she had to do.
Speaker 1: At Oxford, what were you studying?
Speaker 2: I studied economics and did my research on subcontracting of services in England.  I was going to study Japan as well, but I did research on economics and business in England.
Speaker 1: With what goal in mind?
Speaker 2: I had always been interested in, in business and so I, I loved learning more about it.  I wanted, when I was in England, to maybe relax a little bit more.  I was aware that I had been so driven and not really enjoyed life very much, and I wanted to be able to do it.  I'm not sure that I succeeded.  In fact, I'm pretty sure I didn't (laughter).  No, I shouldn't say that.  'Cause I made more friends and raised my awareness about a lot of things.  I think I did some healing, but I still was pretty driven.  And it was that thing of I was conscious enough to say, "I'd like to dial this back, and I'd like to have the college experience I didn't have."  You know, join the debate team, or you know, do--I did play squash for my college.  So I did some fun things, but it was not that easy to flip the switch and shut it off.  So I was still pretty driven, but a little better.
Speaker 1: And did you get married while you were there?
Speaker 2: I did.  I got married to Grant Deane, who is the father of my daughter, Darcy Deane.  He's a New Zealander, and he was studying applied mathematics, physics.  He was doing mathematics and physics.  And we got married, and then stayed another year there as a married couple before coming back to the U.S.
Speaker 1: He had come from New Zealand to Oxford?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 521614
Speaker 1: And then you moved--
Speaker 2: And we got married and we moved back to San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: To San Diego.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And he [St. John's ex-husband, Grant Deane] was, he had a job at UCSD [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California] as a researcher.
Speaker 1: And what were you doing?  What was your work?
Speaker 2: So I got a job at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  So we moved back for his job.  It was, my family was there and his job, and so we chose to move there and then I looked for a job and found a job with IBM, which worked out really well for me, I got a lot of training.  They had a great training program in terms of sales as well as technology.  And at that time, hard for people to imagine today, but when I first got out of college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1986, it was sort of the beginning of the computer revolution.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so I was very excited about going to IBM and learning about computers, and I knew that this would be a really important leg up in the world.  To use the expression (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how long was your stay at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England]?
Speaker 2: I was there for four years.
Speaker 1: And so this is now, what, 1990 when you're--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: When you've come back.  And IBM, was it the biggest--
Speaker 2: They were the biggest.  They were the biggest.  But also, if you remember, right at that time was when they started to experience a lot more competition, and the market started to fragment, and by '91 [1991], I think, their stock price was at its all-time low.  So they had been the king of the mountain for decades, and now, all of a sudden, it was starting to crumble.  And the PC [personal computer] was coming in.  When the PC first came out, inside IBM, they were kind of uncomfortable with it, because they were used to the big computers, you know, and they were like, what's this little thing.  And it was an interesting time at IBM.  But I learned a lot because what I saw was they had voluntary, you know, take an incentive to leave programs.  And then they had early retirement options, and finally, they had pink slips.  And that was the first time, and it was such a shock.  IBM was lifetime employment, you know, to be able to do that.  And so, at that time, there was a lot of confusion, a lot of pain, and the org [organizational] chart kept changing.  The goals kept changing, but there were some people who stayed strong and stayed clear and kept going, and those people were my role models.  And what I saw was that they had a strong personal vision.  So in the midst of a lot of change and turmoil, when people don't, people are looking for leaders to tell them what to do, I saw people who were able to be the vision, and to help other people create the vision.  And I thought, that's who I want to be.  So that was a very formative experience for me at IBM.  Is to see that in times of change, you need to be generating the vision.  Not trying to see who has it.
Speaker 1: How long did you work there?
Speaker 2: I was only there about two years before I got offered the job in the White House [Washington, D.C.] in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.
Story_ID: 521615
Speaker 1: And so I wouldn't have left, I really loved working at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], but this incredible opportunity came along to work at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: And what was that opportunity?
Speaker 1: So it was the National Economic Council [NEC], which was formed for the first time under the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  And the goal was to have a policy-making body on domestic policies, so, on domestic economic policy.  So prior to that, there was the NSC, the National Security Council [NSC], which mainly focused on international issues.  And then there was the Domestic Policy Council [DPC], which worked on domestic issues.  But if something came up like, should we give most favored nation status to China?  The foreign security people would look at it as a foreign security issue.  But they wouldn't look at, how is that gonna affect jobs in America?  So they wanted a body that would be able to create collaboration across the administration, but focus on domestic economic issues in the international context.  So I was part of that team.  And it was a very small team, but the idea was to be able to create connections and collaboration with the [U.S.] Department of Defense, or trade [Federal Trade Commission], or Health and Human Services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], or the Office of Management and Budget [OMB].  You know, you could bring together staff from different areas to come up with recommendations for the president.
Speaker 2: So this is under the Clinton administration.  What was the makeup of your team, and just, you know, while you were in the White House, how many women were there?  How many black women were there?
Speaker 1: I think the Clinton team had done a better job than previous administrations of creating diversity.  I think it was in the early days of people actually being conscious of, of that.  And really focusing on it.  And I think that's part of how I got in, is they were doing an outreach to say, "We need to look at not just the same old people who always come and work at the White House, but let's throw the net wider and look for talent elsewhere."  More women, more minorities, different, different talent.  And so I was able to put my resume in, and apply for the job, and be considered.  So I think there was more diversity than there had been in the past.  But there still wasn't a lot.  And I remember, there were--the woman who was the secretary of labor [HistoryMaker Alexis Herman].  I'll come back to it, I can't remember her name.  There were some very prominent black women, but among the younger, so I was about thirty, and among the younger ones, there was only about four of us on the policy staff side.  And we knew each other, and we would get mistaken for each other (laughter).  And it was us and the cleaning ladies.  You know, were the only black women around.  And I remember thinking that if I put on sneakers and a smock, you know, no one would recognize me in the hallway.
Speaker 2: Did you interact with President Clinton?
Speaker 1: Mainly at big events and affairs.  I wasn't, I wrote briefings that went to the president on a regular basis, but I wasn't always in the meetings presenting those briefings.
Speaker 2: But you didn't stay there very long?
Speaker 1: I didn't.  I was living in San Diego [California] with my husband [Grant Deane], and the job offer came.  So I moved to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and he stayed in San Diego and continued to work.  So I was away from my husband.  So the agreement we made was, "Let's try this.  Let's see."  And he was willing if I said, you know, "I want a career in politics.  I want to spend the rest of my life in D.C.," he was looking at options for--could he work in doing research in a lab there, you know.  What could he do?  And he even came out and did a stint, I think, for about three or four months in a lab in D.C. while I was working there.  And so at the end of--I don't know if it was a year and a half or two years, we made the decision.  And I just decided that rather than saying, "This is what I want to do for the rest of my life," I went back to San Diego and started my own business.  So I took that chance to do that.  And the way I would explain it is I--my temperament is what I do now.  I'm a motivator.  I want to be positive.  I want to impact people in a positive way.  You can do that in politics, but it's a dogfight, you know, and it's very negative a lot of the time.  And then people are twisting your words and shoving your words down your throat.  You know, it's a rough dog fight every day.  And that's not my temperament.  And I am very glad that there are good people willing to be in that dog fight 'cause that's what we need, but it's just, it's not my temperament.  And so, being able to go back to San Diego and start my own business was something I had always dreamed of, and wanted to do.  And to be able to work with business in Corporate America.  I also wanted to start a family, and so that was another reason to do that.  I mean, I was working ninety-hour weeks in Washington and the White House, so, I said, "I'm gonna go back to San Diego, I'm going to start my own business, work from home and start a family."
Speaker 2: And I read that you also looked at the role in the White House and said, "This is great, but other people could potentially do that."  But no one else has your story.
Speaker 1: I felt that.  That on the economic team, I loved what I was doing, but that somebody else could do economics and present the economic papers and do the briefings.  But if I didn't go out and share my story of being the one-legged African American skier and use that to help motivate people, to really find resilience in themselves and to overcome their obstacles and perform better at work, or be a better leader, and all of the things that I do now, that's something unique.
Story_ID: 521616
Speaker 1: I wanted to do what God put me on this earth to do.
Speaker 2: Let's talk about God.  I know that God is very important in your life.  Was that always true?  When did you, your faith really kick in and become important?
Speaker 1: I went to Sunday school when I was little, and practiced Bible verses, and did that, and I think as I was in elementary school [Palmer Way School, National City, California], it was very important for me.  I remember I asked for a cross.  I wanted to wear a cross, and I read the Bible, and it was a little bit like when I first started skiing.  I had outriggers, so they're the little poles with the little ski tips on the end, and I had one ski, and I would lean over on the outriggers, and they call it three tracking.  So you're making three tracks in the snow as you've got the outriggers.  And they're really crutches with skis on the end and then a ski.  That's the way I was with God when I was younger.  Is I leaned on God, I read the Bible, it was like, "Help me, God."  And when I turned about thirteen, well that was actually when my stepfather Paul [Paul Cremaschi] left, and my mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] changed the locks.  And so from the time I was thirteen to when he died when I was eighteen, he was not in my life.  So at thirteen, he left, and I think it was sort of like, the lid was off the pressure cooker, and I said, "You know what?  I wanna be strong, I wanna be independent, I wanna do things in the world and God's not working fast enough.  So I'm gonna do this on my own."  And so I had been very religious and then I sort of threw it out and said, "I'm gonna do it on my own for a number of years."  And back to the skiing, so when you first learn, you're leaning on the outriggers really hard.  I wanted to learn how to ski on--with poles, with regular ski poles.  But I couldn't do it, I would fall over and I would balance, so I went on the bunny hill and I would practice skiing with nothing in my hands at all.  So I learned how to ski on one leg with nothing.  It looks--your expression is funny.  I wish everybody could see your expression.  It's like, "Wow."  And when I do that, if I go out on a hill and I ski with nothing in my hands, you know, people stop and stare, because it looks really cool.  So I learned how to do that so that I had really good balance.  Then I could ski with regular ski poles, 'cause then I could do the plane, I didn't need them.  I could just use them, right?  And I loved it, 'cause I looked cool.  Right?  I looked like other skiers.  I wasn't wearing these clunky crutches and leaning over, you know.  And I was like--you know, I looked cute, you know, this is fun, and it's just an interesting analogy with what I was saying about my relationship with God.  So I leaned, and then I said, "I don't want nothing.  I can do this on my own.  I'm gonna look cool.  I'm gonna be cool.  I'm gonna be like everybody else," you know.  And when I had my daughter [Darcy Deane], and then the pain of the sexual abuse started coming up, I couldn't do it on my own anymore, and the pain was so intense.  I was going through that process of going back over the memories, and doing the healing, and I was still a mom.  And I would have to come back and be a mom, dry my tears, and come back and be a mom, or go and give a motivational speech for everybody.  And because I had to hold it together for my daughter, sometimes when I would fly to another city to give a speech, that was when I could break down and cry, and just let the pain out.  And I remember I was in a hotel room, and I was supposed to give a speech, and I was laying on the bed and just sobbing.  And just--the pain was just coming over me so much, I couldn't get off the bed.  I couldn't get up.  And I remember, I just said, "Help me, God."  And it was like it lifted and I could get off the bed.  And that was a moment for me that I thought, this is real.  This isn't talking to your invisible friend, God is real, and I want to know more about that.  And so, having to go through that difficult healing process really brought me back to God and really helped me, inspired me to explore my relationship with prayer.  And so it was because of that that I ended up writing the book, 'How Strong Women Pray' [Bonnie St. John].  Because I developed my prayer life, I'd started to get more of a relationship with God.  So back to the ski analogy.  So you lean on your skis, and then you say, I'm gonna ski with nothing in my hands at all.  And, but when I wanted to train for the Olympics, the coaches said, "You can't race with regular poles.  You have to go back to outriggers.  Because if you're in a ski race in the Olympics, and you hit a little tiny bump in the road, you're gonna fall over, and you can't win medals in races you don't finish."  So we want the U.S. one-legged skiers to ski with outriggers.  So I was like, "Oh man, that's not cute."  But I went back to the outriggers, and what I realized, was I could do so much more with the outriggers.  Because I was strong, because I had balance, I could, I didn't lean on them, I could hold them up.  I could ski.  I could put them on either side, I could use them as a counterweight to create more edge.  Because if you can counter balance, you can lean deeper into the turn.  Oh, this is cool.  So with--I went back to outriggers in a new way, in the same way I went back to God in a new way.  I wasn't just saying, "God, do everything for me."  I had gotten stronger, but I learned I couldn't do it on my own.  So I went back to God in partnership, instead of, you know, saying, "You fix it for me, God."  You know, "Please give me everything.  Please, please solve all my problems."
Story_ID: 521617
Speaker 1: I went in partnership in prayer, and I learned that, what I learned writing the book, 'How Strong Women Pray' [Bonnie St. John], is that we pray not to tell God what we need.  You know, like we really think we need to give God a to-do list?  You really think God needs your to-do list to know what He's going to do in the morning?  We pray to open ourselves up to be improved by God.  We pray to let God give us a to-do list, not the other way around.  And that when I let God strengthen me as a leader, when I let God strengthen me as a parent, I'm a better parent.  So I pray to have more God in me every day.  Not the other way around.  And with that partnership, I can be a better--I can do what God put me on this earth to do.
Speaker 2: That book is interesting in many ways.  But in particular, I was surprised at the type of storytelling.  I didn't expect--I expected, "Here's how I pray," because of the title.  But the--it's interesting how you were able to get people to give scenarios of what leads them to--
Speaker 1: To pray.
Speaker 2: To pray.
Speaker 1: Well, well, the way, the reason, how I started writing that book, is I was praying.  I had a very strong prayer life.  I was praying every morning, and I would just feel the strength come into me, you know, in the morning as I prayed.  I could feel it.  You're making space for God.  And He fills it.  What a great thing to be able to do.  And I thought, if this is invigorating me so much, what is it doing for other people?  And I was doing a lot of corporate speaking, so I was going out and speaking about inspiration and life, and I, in a corporate setting, you can't sit and talk about God.  So God was strengthening me and motivating me so much, but I never talked about it.  I talked about other things about inspiring you.  And I thought, you know, this is interesting.  If I'm a public figure that is so powered by God, but I never say it, there must be a lot of other women out there too that are doing that.  And I would like to interview them to find out, because I call it like professional prayers, you know.  If you're a pastor, or a nun, you know, you're paid to pray, right?  Which is great, which is great.  But if you're not paid to pray, how do you make time for it?  How--why do you bother, you know?  What is it doing for you?  So I was really interested in what other women had learned about that.  That if you're a public figure and you're out there leading and doing a lot of things in the world, but you're not known for prayer, tell us about what you're learning.  Tell us about what you're doing.  So I asked people, when was prayer most important in your life?  And they're going to tell you a very difficult story, like I did about, I couldn't get off the bed.  How do you pray?  So we did do, "How do you pray?"  Which is fascinating, because we don't talk about that.  You can sit in church side by side with somebody for five years, ten years, and never say, do you close your eyes, or open them?  You know, we don't ask that.  That's weird.  So I asked all the weird questions.  Where do you pray, how do you pray, you know, what's it like?  And then the--so when was prayer most important to you, how do you pray, but the third question was, what have you learned?  How has prayer changed for you?  One way I asked it was, how did you teach your grandchildren about prayer differently than you taught your children?  You know like, so what was that progression?  And that was fascinating to me too.  And so, yeah, you got really interesting stories from people that aren't things they normally talk about.
Speaker 2: It's a very good read.
Speaker 1: But I'm telling you, God--I was praying one day.  And the idea to write the book came to me, but it was so whole, because I would go into things, like things about, like people would say, "Interview this pastor."  And be, and I'm like, nope, that wasn't part of the assignment.  You see, I didn't know, like if you asked me day one, are you going to interview, I wouldn't have told you what the parameters were, but it was like it was planted in me, and I just knew.  "Oh, no, that's not right.  Okay, you want, no, no we've got to do it this way."  It was a funny process, because I was so excited about writing the book, and I'm gonna write a book on prayer, oh my gosh, this is gonna be great.  But it became so clear to me that it was not my book.  It's like, you have those big Chinese dragons, you know?  And there's somebody under, you know, there's a lot of people holding the poles.  I was just one of the people holding the poles.  And it was an honor to be part of the process, but so many things happened in the process of that book that were God.  And I'm like, "Okay.  I'm right here."  I'm, and I learned so much, I grew so much.  Every time I reread the book, too, the stories of the twenty-seven women in that book, they minister to you about whatever's happening in your life.  So, you know, if I haven't read it for a few years, and I go read it again, different things are happening in my life, and those stories minister to me in a new way in whatever's going on in my life (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which year was that book published?
Speaker 1: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Story_ID: 521618
Speaker 1: Authoring books is part of the business that you created.  Tell me about your business that--and when you started it, how it has developed?
Speaker 2: So I left the White House [Washington, D.C.], and went home, and I got pregnant and had Darcy [Darcy Deane] and started a business.  So I thought this was a good idea.  To quit my job, get pregnant, and start a business, all at the same time.  It was very difficult.  It was kind of like that first week of skiing.  It was very, very challenging.  I was exhausted, I only had like twenty hours of babysitting, and was, you know, so starting a business was really slow.  I quickly realized, most entrepreneurs were working sixty hours a week, you know.  And I was working, maybe fifteen, you know, hours a week.  And so things that would take an entrepreneur a week, it would take me a month.  And so it was slow going, and it was exhausting, and I was a new mother, which we know is hard.  Plus, I was starting to have a lot of the anxiety issues about the sexual abuse, and so it was hard getting started, but I wouldn't trade it for anything, because I was able, I had always--when I was in fourth grade, I was writing my first book ['Succeeding Sane: Making Room For Joy In A Crazy World,' Bonnie St. John].  I had always wanted to write books.  And reading books had been my solace.  I read books on the playground when other girls were playing double Dutch jump rope and hopscotch, and I couldn't do what they were doing, I would sit and read a book.  And I would travel on adventure.  I would be a superhero in the book 'cause I couldn't do it on the playground.  And I would read a Nancy Drew book in one night.  I would go in the bathroom and turn the light on and stay up and read a book, you know, at night.  They were my escape venue.  My, where I could dream, where I could be someone bigger or better.  I could explore a mental world.  And so I always wanted to write because books had given me so much.  I wanted to do that.  So getting to start my own business, get my first book contract with Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], write a book and then be at home, you know, in the afternoons and I could teach my daughter to swim in the pool and take her for walks in the park, and I was able to create a life for myself that I wanted.
Speaker 1: What is the name of your business?
Speaker 2: Blue Circle Leadership Institute.
Speaker 1: How did you come to that name?
Speaker 2: I was interested in--we work with businesses and we work with a lot of leadership development, and we love that.  It was just sort of blue sky, like the creativity of blue sky.  And also being very global, and so to me, Blue Circle is very global and very creative and innovative.  So, Blue Circle Leadership Institute.
Speaker 1: And as you were developing a business, what was the focus of the business from the start?
Speaker 2: Very early on, when Darcy was born, I was writing books and doing motivational speaking.  So a lot of it was focused on that.  I had a mentor, Susan Rowan [ph.], who pulled me aside.  She heard me speak, and she pulled me aside and she said, "Bonnie [HistoryMaker Bonnie St. John], you need to be a keynote speaker.  You need to be the star.  And you have a baby you want to get home to, so you should be doing the big events, and then you'll have more time for your child.  And it was interesting because if you do workshops and all-day seminars, you often don't get paid as much as when you're the keynoter and it's a big conference.  So she was telling me, "You need to understand how this industry works.  And you need to position yourself to be the star so that you can get paid more and go home and spend more time with your child.  And don't be doing day after day after day.  But it's more comfortable, it's easier to do workshops.  It's fun, you know, you talk to thirty women and you do some--it's a lot of pressure be on the big stage and do that.  But I heard her advice, and so now, I often tell other people, there's this expression, do what you love and the money will follow.  I don't agree.  What Susan Rowan was telling me is, do what you love and follow the money.  And I think that's so important, is to understand the economics.  My training's economics, understand the economics of the industry you're in.  Understand how value is created.  So do what you love, but understand the business.  I've seen too many people that do what they love, and they're still waiting for the money to follow.  You know, you need to follow the trail of how the money flows, and be empowered.
Story_ID: 521619
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your business and how it evolved?
Speaker 2: And it was interesting for me because part of the reason I was willing to take a risk and start my own business instead of going to get another job was that I wanted to start a family, and I got pregnant, and I was going to give birth to Darcy [Darcy Deane], my first child, my only child.  And the idea that if I went home and started working on a business, if I failed, I would have been at home with my daughter for a couple of years, and then I could go get a job, you know.  And so for me it became, sort of a no lose situation.  It was, I can follow my dream and write a book and be a speaker and see if that works, but I'll be at home.  What I didn't count on was how hard it was gonna be to juggle all those things, and to suddenly, you know, you don't have an IT [information technology] department to fix your computer when it breaks.  You don't have an accounting department to cut your paycheck.  You know, you--everything was my responsibility.  Does the printer not work?  You have to get a new one, you know.  You have to be jack of all trades, plus being a mother, was complicated.  But it did work out in terms of feeling like, "Well, I'm gonna try this experiment, and start my own business, and if it fails, then, you know, that's what happened.  But it didn't fail, you know, so here I am.  She's twenty-one years old and I'm loving what I'm able to do with Blue Circle Leadership Institute and make a big difference.  But it evolved over the years.  So early on, I was mainly doing keynote speaking, and Susan Rowan [ph.] was dead right about that.  It allowed me to make a living.  I homeschooled Darcy and took her on the road with me from first grade through fifth grade.  And again, because I was gonna go and give an hour's speech and come back, I could travel with her and we had a ball.  I would get sitters to watch her while I was doing my speech, but she could, you know, the sitter would follow me around and be with me.  And she had a ball, you know, just being a kid and getting to go through airports with mom and see different cities and, you know, order room service or a movie, you know.  She thought it was great or go in the hotel pool, and we did home schooling, so we did her school work and we had great adventures.  Often, there would be a serendipity of something that augmented her schooling.  When she was reading 'Mississippi Burning' [Kirk Mitchell] in school, I got a speech in Mississippi.  And one of the ladies picked us up in a pink Cadillac.  I was gonna speak for a reading teachers' convention.  And we're driving through and she says, "Darcy, have you ever picked cotton?"  She says, "No."  And she pulls the Cadillac over and we go into the field, you know.  So she's reading 'Mississippi Burning,' and we're picking cotton in the field.  And there was another, she was reading 'A Shard of Glass' ['A Single Shard,' Linda Sue Park], I think, is a book about Korea, and I was at a conference where they were doing a pottery thing.  And the teach- the leader of the pottery workshop heard that Darcy was doing that book and said, "Oh, I know all about the Korean pottery that they're talking about," and she showed her the techniques, you know.  So we created this experience of learning that was very organic.  Where you're meeting people and augmenting the curriculum, and we have the books with us and we're studying.  And I loved it.  It was challenging, but it was a very organic way to live.
Story_ID: 521620
Speaker 1: You did not stay in San Diego [California], correct?
Speaker 2: So when Darcy [Darcy Deane] was five, I--we got divorced.  And that was very difficult.  I talk about that in the book, 'How Strong Women Pray' [Bonnie St. John]. The--all of the pain of having to heal with, and deal with the sexual abuse in my childhood really changed who I was.  And Darcy's father [Grant Deane] is a wonderful person, but in the end, we decided that it--we needed to get a divorce, and it was a very painful decision as it always is.  But we worked through it we, we did a lot of therapy.  We did a lot of trying to do it in a good way and still to be able to jointly parent Darcy, which we do.  We do, in fact, with the home schooling, he did half of the homeschooling.  So she would go back and forth.  We eventually ended up in an arrangement where I moved to the East Coast.  And she would be with me for a month, and then she would be with him for a month.  And so we would hand off, you know, here's what she learned this month, and now it's your turn to teach her for a month, and that was the way she could go back and forth that way.  If she had been in a regular school, she couldn't have done that.  And, and so when she was with me, she was travelling around the world, and when she was with her father, she was at UCSD [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California] in his science lab doing her homework.
Speaker 1: And did you use a special home schooling curriculum?
Speaker 2: We were lucky to have the support of a school in San Diego that was a public school that did homeschooling.  So it was a special school in the district, and it wasn't a charter school, it was a public school.  And the teachers, right?  She had the same teacher for five years, and the teacher would give us the books and the curriculum and she, we would turn in the work every month, and she would check it and test Darcy periodically.  And so she was our support and it was the California state school system.  So it was a very official curriculum.
Speaker 1: When you moved to the East Coast, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I came to Manhattan [New York, New York].  I came to New York City, I was on the Upper West Side [New York, New York] in a little teeny, teeny, tiny closet of an apartment, about 450 square feet.  And it was quite an adventure, Darcy and I.  So we, neither one of us had to go to work or school.  So we would get up in the morning.  PE [physical education] was going to the gym, and we would alternate between her work, and if I had a conference call, and then if we would go on the road, and go to a speech, but I loved it.
Story_ID: 521621
Speaker 1: While you're primarily, at this point, still writing books and doing keynotes, did you have any staff?
Speaker 2: I did.  I had a virtual assistant who would work with me in San Diego [California], and then she continued to work with me virtually.  She stayed in California supporting me.  And over the years, I've had different virtual assistants.  We now have a larger virtual team.  But we'll move forward, so the business evolved.  And I started doing more executive coaching because I was speaking at conferences, I would meet a lot of businesses and do interviews, and research them and understand what they were doing and what some of their challenges were.  So it naturally evolved into doing more consulting.  If they had a problem that I could solve or they wanted me to come in and do a training program, I could do that.  And so I wrote 'Succeeding Sane' ['Succeeding Sane: Making Room For Joy In A Crazy World,' Bonnie St. John], and then I self-published 'Getting Ahead At Work Without Leaving Your Family Behind' [Bonnie St. John].  And then another book called, 'Money: Fall Down? Get Up!' [Bonnie St. John].  But, 'How Strong Women Pray' [Bonnie St. John], which came out in '07 [2007], was not too long after I got to New York.  Maybe, no, no, I moved to New York in 2002, so it came out five years after I moved to New York [New York], that's right.  And it was around that time that I met Allen Haines [Allen P. Haines], and we met through work.  He was producing and directing a pilot for a new TV show, and the guests on the pilot, every fifteen minutes was a different guest, so it was Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], P. Diddy [Sean Combs], Jeff Gordon, the NASCAR [National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing] driver, and me.  And the pilot didn't get picked up for being a show, but I got picked up.  So Allen and I started dating, and he actually helped me finish the editing on, 'How Strong Women Pray.'  And then the next book that I did was, 'Live Your Joy' [Bonnie St. John].  And we were talking about the book and what was going to be in it, and he had such great ideas.  My editor said to me, "You need to write this book more visually," that we have--readers are now TV watchers, you know.  TV has influenced the way people read, and so you want to make it like they're present.  Make it like they're seeing it.  Make it like they're in the moment.  And so I was talking to Allen about that, and he helped me write a couple of chapters, and it was great.  And so I presented it to my editor, and we made him the official ghostwriter on the book because his background was in television and storytelling, and entertainment.  And so he was the ghostwriter on 'Live Your Joy,' and we loved writing that together.  We would pass chapters back and forth, and we really--our brains really worked well together.  So we worked on that, and the next book ['How Great Women Lead: A Mother-Daughter Adventure into the Lives of Women Shaping the World,' Bonnie St. John and Darcy Deane] that I did, I wrote about women's leadership with my daughter, Darcy [Darcy Deane].  So she was in high school at that point.  I think I approached her to write the book when she was fourteen, we did the research when she was fifteen and sixteen, and the book came out when she was seventeen.  So she was a junior in high school.  Now, Allen also worked on that book, and was a ghostwriter for that.  So we--with that book, we travelled around and met women, and then wrote about their stories and interviewed them.  And so he went on many of the trips with us, he supported the book.  So he was again, he was the ghost writer.  His name's not on the cover, and, but we enjoyed working together and as a family.  And Allen also has two daughters, Ella [ph.] and Katherine [ph.].  And so I get two bonus daughters, and it's been wonderful getting to know them and, and watching them grow up as well.  So we'd been working together.  So then Allen was doing other things.  He had his own company, he was consulting, working in the entertainment industry.  And it, at a certain point we decided that we wanted to work together.  Because it was actually similar to the decision that I made about working for myself because I wanted to be a present mother, and I wanted to have more creative control, and we were--he and I were doing such different things, we would be ships passing in the night.  He was commuting to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], to do things with Hollywood, we would have gate dates.  Literally, we'd say, you know, "Oh, we're both on American Airlines.  You're at gate sixty-nine, I'm at gate seventy-two.  Let's meet, you know, in the middle."  And we thought this is a crazy life.  And so, by working together, he joined Blue Circle Leadership [Blue Circle Leadership Institute] and was--brought his leadership expertise that he's been a CEO of a couple of mid-sized high growth companies doing marketing for film and television.  Very creative work.  And so he brought his leadership sensibility into the business and helping to do the leadership development for others.  So since he joined the business, we've expanded, doing even more leadership development.  We have recently developed a digital platform for virtual learning that we're doing some very exciting things with.
Speaker 1: And you and he are now married?
Speaker 2: We are now married.  So in the--somewhere along that process in there of working together and raising kids, we finally made it official (laughter).
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: She said, looking over at Allen.
Speaker 1: (ALLEN P. HAINES):  Best day of my life.
Speaker 2: Mine too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Excellent.
Story_ID: 521622
Speaker 1: Writing a book ['How Great Women Lead: A Mother-Daughter Adventure into the Lives of Women Shaping the World,' Bonnie St. John and Darcy Deane] with your daughter [Darcy Deane], a teenager.
Speaker 2: What--you know, I have a habit of leaping into things without always thinking them through.  I once decided to take a scuba diving class, and I went in, and it starts in the classroom and they do chalkboard, you know?  Here's some things you should know about scuba diving, and then you go in the pool, and they practice in the pool.  Well, by the end of the week in the class, we got to, let's go into the ocean to go scuba diving.  They didn't have a boat.  They expected everybody to put on their scuba diving gear in San Diego [California] and walk into the ocean.  That's how we were gonna go scuba diving.  I had never asked, "Do you have a boat?"  Now, for an amputee, it's much easier to go out in a boat and fall off the side and go scuba diving.  To put on all that gear and tanks and walk in, well, I'd have to hop into the ocean, 'cause I can't wear my leg.  So it's a question I should have asked before the end, but I didn't think to ask.  We made it work.  They were great.  They helped carry my tanks, I hopped into the ocean, I got certified.  It was all good.  One of the funniest moments is we were coming out of the water and the guides would help me in and out of the water.  And I pulled off my flipper and I gave it to him, my fin, and gave it to him, and he goes, "Where's your other one?  Oh!"  You know (laughter). But, I often leap into things thinking, "I'll just do this."  Right?  So, I leapt into writing the book with my teenage daughter, and we had a good relationship, but fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, those were challenging mother/daughter years.  I jokingly say that I figured if she wasn't listening to me, maybe she'd listen to Condoleezza Rice.  You know, so we went out and interviewed Condoleezza Rice, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], the orchestra conductor [Marin Alsop], the president of Liberia [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf], an [U.S.] Air Force pilot [Nicole Malachowski], the first woman Thunderbird pilot, amazing, amazing women.  And it was very powerful because it was a period where girls are differentiating themselves from their mother, right?  So there's a certain amount of rebellion, a certain amount of hormones, and a certain amount of not listening to you.  But the interviews had a profound effect on how she saw herself, and how she saw her possibilities for the future.  And really, she really is a natural leader.  But to channel that, and to focus that, and to give her some scaffolding for, how do you define yourself as a woman and retain your uniqueness?  And not think you have to emulate, you know, guys in ties?  And she really, you know, and for the younger generation of women, that's so important.  To be able to retain their identity and still aspire to great things, and so she made a lot of progress in terms of doing that.  And it was, even though I had all the normal challenges that mothers and daughters have in the teen years, it gave us something to work on together.  It kept us together and kept us focused on something positive even if we were having fights and things otherwise.
Story_ID: 521623
Speaker 1: You moved to New York [New York] right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?
Speaker 2: That's true.  What had, what had basically happened is, I made the decision that I wanted to move to New York, and then 9/11 happened.  And so I waited a little while to see, you know, to let things settle down and to make that transition.  So, you know, 9/11 happened in September, the Olympics in Utah, the 2002 Olympics [2002 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City, Utah], were in February, I think?  And I basically made the transition.  I went to the Olympics, I was in opening ceremonies, I did volunteering, I did a lot of work with those Olympics, and then made the transition to move into New York after that.
Speaker 1: So, I remember New York at that time.  When you arrived, which is a few months later, but New York was still kind of frozen?
Speaker 2: I think in a way it was kind of warm because people were pulling together.  It's like, we're not gonna let them take our city.  We're not gonna let them terrorize us and just freeze up.  We are New Yorkers.  We're gonna be strong.  And there was almost a friendliness and a solidarity in New York that I don't think you had before that.  You know, there was just, "Ah, I'm a New Yorker," you know.  But now it's like, you know.  It's kind of what happened in Boston [Massachusetts] after the marathon [Boston Marathon bombing].  It's Boston Strong, you know.  There was that, "We will overcome this together."
Speaker 1: So you--how--you felt welcomed when you came?
Speaker 2: I did.  I made so many friends.  New York is such a powerful place.
Story_ID: 521624
Speaker 1: When I first moved to New York [New York], it was after 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  But I felt that there was a coming together, a solidarity, almost a warmth.  You know, before 9/11, it's like, "I'm a New Yorker, get out of my way," you know.  "I'm not talking to the people in the street."  And afterwards, it was almost like, "We're gonna stick together.  We're gonna overcome this together.  They can't terrorize us and keep us off the streets.  We're bigger than that."  It's like what happened in Boston [Massachusetts] after the marathon bomb [Boston Marathon bombing].  You know, Boston Strong, and we're gonna band together.  So I made so many wonderful friends when I first came to New York City.  New York City was working on getting the Olympics.  They were trying to bring the Olympics to New York, and I was recruited for that team.  I met the mayor [Michael Bloomberg], I met a lot of dignitaries because I was on the presentation team to present our bid in the USOC [United States Olympic Committee], and I went to Singapore to present our bid in the world.  And so I was working on that team, and part of the reason I moved to New York, living in San Diego [California] as a writer and an Olympian, and a speaker, I was an unusual person.  And I often found myself trying to play small to make others comfortable.  When I came to New York, everybody's a writer, you know.  Everybody's doing something, and I didn't have to play small anymore.  And I loved that.  And my publisher's here, my editor's here, the publicists are here, my clients are here, and so it just--it felt like a good place to be.  My mother [Ruby Page Schwimmer] grew up here too, and so there was an element of that, of feeling like, this makes sense.  I was raised to be this driven, strong, powerful person.  And when I come here, it fits, and it works.  So I loved making the transition to New York.  And I, it's such a great networking city.  I got invited to work on different projects, I volunteered to help with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and just, it's a great community.  And I have made so many friends here, and I feel like I can be myself, and I can do my potential.
Story_ID: 521625
Speaker 1: You have talked about how you created your business [Blue Circle Leadership Institute] and how it has evolved.  It's interesting because you molded something that would work naturally with your child [Darcy Deane]?
Speaker 2: Right.  And that was a very important variable for me.  So I did more keynote speaking when she was young so that I wasn't working twelve-hour days.  Now that she's in college, and almost done, I do work a lot of twelve-hour days.  You know, it's funny and as you get older, you start to think more about legacy.  And I was saying earlier that we have created a digital platform for learning.  And one of the things that I saw over the years in the last decades, you know, more than two decades that I've been working with different companies, and going different places and hearing all the conversations.  It's over and over I would hear, "The multicultural women aren't getting ahead, you know.  What do I--Bonnie [HistoryMaker Bonnie St. John], what do I do?  How do I, you know, we recruit and then they leave and, or they're, you know.  What do we do?"  And I did different things over the years.  I did one breakfast where I brought all the leaders of different investment banking, human resources groups together and we talked about multicultural women.  And it just felt to me that over the last two decades, things weren't changing.  We were having the same conversation over and over again.  And I came out with the book, 'How Great Women Lead' ['How Great Women Lead: A Mother-Daughter Adventure into the Lives of Women Shaping the World,' Bonnie St. John and Darcy Deane].  And as a result of that, Blue Circle Leadership, Allen [Allen P. Haines] and I and our team were doing a lot of women's leadership development programs, and we would go out and deliver a three-day program, or we would have a program that lasted over six months and you had periodic deliveries and watched the women progress, and phenomenal programs.  But in most of these programs, it was all white women, and maybe two or three multicultural women in the back, you know.  And I was frustrated myself.  I thought, I'm a multicultural woman, we're doing a women's leadership program, and yet we never talk about ethnicity.  We only talk about gender issues.  And I thought, "What?  I got to do, why can't I do this?"  And anyway, so we, we came to the moment.  We said, "Let's really try to do something to change the dynamic.  What can we do?"  And when you thought about it, you realized these expensive programs for women's leadership, people say, the people who work at companies say, "We don't have more multicultural women in the programs because they don't qualify."  There are strict rules about who gets access to these programs, you have to be in the nine box in this certain place, and they're not qualifying for high potential.  And so they're, they're not.  I even had one woman who was black, who was head of human resources at a big tech company, and she said, "I create these programs and I can't get more multicultural women into the programs."  So, the conclusion I drew from that is that if you have gender issues and ethnicity issues wrapped together, it's harder.  It's like two speed bumps you have to drive over to get where you're going.  And so those women are not reaching escape velocity.  They're not getting to the high potential programs, you know, so we have to do something earlier.  But it's a catch-22, because companies don't spend money early on anybody.  They don't do it on white men.  They don't--so given the structure of the things always work, we fall through the cracks, because our problem isn't addressed.  So, we said if we can create a virtual learning program, we can have--we can make that impact that we make in those high-end programs.  We can do it earlier in our career at a price point that companies can live with.  So we specifically created this virtual, high touch, very interactive, community building program that spans nine months, because we wanted to solve the problem for multicultural women leaders.  And we've brought two cohorts through so far, and rave results, changing lives, and it's very scalable.  So we want to be able to grow it, so that we're not just getting one here, one there, ten here.  We really want to be putting hundreds or thousands of women through the program to help empower them to have the discussions they're not having elsewhere.  To be aware of the things that are happening to them.  It's different from men of color, and different from white women.  And to be able to be empowered around that, and reach their potential.  You know, so much of my life is about, how do I take my ability to overcome the odds and translate it back into helping other people overcome the odds.  So when I think about legacy, one of the things that I hope you can look back and say at my funeral is that she moved the needle for multicultural woman leaders in corporate America.  And I know that doesn't solve all the problems, it doesn't solve, you know, premature drug addicted babies in the hood.  No, but everybody's got to work on the piece of the puzzle that they get.  And if I can do this, there will be more wealthy, multicultural women that can donate to those causes or volunteer for those causes, or help their niece or nephew, or, you know, if I can pull this group of women forward, and maybe it will change more opportunities.  So that we hire more women, and we have more jobs, you know.  It's the piece, it's the lever that I can pull, and it's a lever that needs pulling.  And so, that's part of my legacy.
Story_ID: 521626
Speaker 1: The other part is this resilience.  So that's sort of one piece that I really care about.  But another piece is resilience as a whole.  And so the next book that we have coming out is called 'Micro-Resilience' ['Micro-Resilience: Minor Shifts for Major Boosts in Focus, Drive, and Energy,' Bonnie St. John and Allen P. Haines].  And Allen [Allen P. Haines] is co-authoring it with me.  He's actually gonna get his name on the cover this time.  Not just to do all the work, but actually get his name on the cover.  And it's taking many of the things I learned, coping with healing from sexual abuse, staying motivated, being an athlete.  There's a lot of science, there's a lot of things that I read along the way about that.  We went back and scoured the literature, the current literature, and found even more things.  And micro-resilience is a set of tools.  There is five frameworks and twenty-one tools that give you minor shifts you can make in your life each day that give you big boosts in energy and focus, and drive.  So it's, this is the culmination of my work in many ways.  Is to take the things I've learned, turn it into easy tools, and give it to people so that everybody can have more resilience.  Wherever you're starting, everybody can have more resilience.  And so our vision is really to take that book out, that teaching.  And we've been teaching that in corporations for years, but really packaging it as a book and taking it out.  We really want to create a community of people who are teaching these methods and sharing these methods and pulling other people along.  Because ultimately, what I realized it's about, as I went through writing the book and really digging into the science behind each of these frameworks.  A lot of it is about being less fear based.  And this even ties back to my biblical beliefs.  So many times in the Bible it says, "Fear not, have faith."  And what that means on a scientific level, in terms of my core resilience, is that when we tense up with fear, we can have an amygdala highjack.  I don't know if you've heard of that term before, but it's literally, fear highjacks your brain, sets off a bunch of adrenaline and emotional responses, literally narrows your field of vision, reduces your access to your advanced brain.  Because this is--when you're in a threat mode, you want to focus all your energy on dealing with that threat.  You don't want to be thinking complex thoughts, you know, deal with the threat.  But that response gets triggered when we're doing things in an office.  When you're worried about, "Why did that person get to go to lunch with the boss and I didn't," you know.  "Why did they get the corner office?"  We can get triggered and again start thinking small.  And so much about resilience is about refreshing ourselves, refreshing our energy, keeping our mental focus strong.  Helping the advanced portion of our brain have more endurance.  We're designed to spiral quickly to the negative because that was survival, so we need to dampen our responses to swing to the negative and support more of our swing to the positive.  It--there's just so many different tools, and there's a lot of good science behind how we can refresh ourselves and be more resilient.  But the bottom line is it keeps us using our advanced brain more and relying on our reptile brain less.  And if we can do that as individuals, we can accomplish so much more, we'll be less tired, we'll be smarter, we'll be happier, and we've seen that.  We took thirty people and put them through the program and then followed them for three months.  One woman was a workaholic and stared dating.  There was a doctor--'cause she got lighter and more positive and more open.  And she's still doing all her work, but she, you know, and she--it was life-changing for her.  There was a doctor who, we dealt with a bunch of little minor shifts in his life, and all of a sudden he wasn't behind in his charts anymore.  You know, how they pile up with all the paperwork, and he was doing it on the weekends, and we didn't focus on that.  But it was just like a side benefit.  "Oh, I'm staying up with my charts."  And it just--we can live better when we're doing it from a higher place, and as individuals that's powerful.  But as a company, if you're not managing by fear, and intimidating people, and, you know, infighting, people are gonna be smarter.  They're gonna solve problems better.  There's gonna be more innovation.  As a society, in this world with terrorism and interconnectedness, and so many unexpected changes, it's important that our leaders are not making their decisions all based on fear.  But on thinking, and envisioning a better future.  So at the risk of sounding like micro-resilience is everything, it's--I do think it is another really important lever that I want to pull and that I want to be part of my legacy is that I contributed to a less fear based world, less fear based people, and giving people very practical methods for "How do I live better?  How do I not only have more achievement at work, but to be a good person?"
Speaker 2: When does this book come out?
Speaker 1: This book comes out in February 2017.
Speaker 2: Soon, okay.
Speaker 1: Many people will be watching this after February 2017.  But it's available for preorder now.
Story_ID: 521627
Speaker 1: You told me legacy, as you look at your--back, at your life and your career, is there anything you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Stand on that podium for the silver medal.  We already covered that.
Speaker 1: We got that one.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know, when you get to a point in your life, if you feel good about where you are and what you're accomplishing, you realize, even some things you wish you hadn't done, they got you here.  Right?  So I'm not sure.  Although I will say, I reflect on my leg and I think, "Great.  That made me stronger."  I learned good things.  I can use it as an example.  I wouldn't trade it.  If I could go back and wave a magic wand and have two legs, I wouldn't, because this is who I am and I like my identity.  But I have to say, if you asked me that about being sexually abused, I would have to say no.  I would not do that if I could wave a magic wand and say that I wasn't, I would.  And here's why.  Is, if you see some child over there with a situation who is being abused, you have to wanna stop it.  You can never say, "That child's gonna to grow to be a great motivational speaker, so I guess it will all be okay."  No, you can't, you know.  It's wrong, and it should not happen.  And so, you know, if I look at myself as a child, I can't, I can't look back and say, "Well, it all turned out okay."  You know, no.  We should fight it, we should stop it.  You know, no child should be unprotected.  So if I could do that over, I would do that differently.  The, the other thing I feel now is I just look around and I love so many things.  I look at other people's jobs and think, "Ah, I wish I could work for the Gates Foundation [Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington] and take billions of dollars and save the world's problems."  You know, I have a friend who works at the Gates Foundation, and I look at some other things that people do, and I wish I was doing that.  But, you know, I'd have to have ten lifetimes to do, you know, if I had ten lifetimes, I'd do ten other things.  So I don't really regret things, but I love life.
Story_ID: 521628
Speaker 1: As we wrap, I'm thinking of children who may want to walk in your footsteps.  Whether it is someone who might be disabled, let's start there.  What advice would you give to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what comes to mind first is my own daughter [Darcy Deane] is following in my footsteps.  And I don't--she's not mini-me, she's not gonna become me, and I don't want her to become me.  She's gonna be her own self.  She's fascinated by languages, she's been studying Chinese for something like seven years now, and has gone to China, and worked with orphans in China, and then worked with businesses, and she's gonna play on a global stage, much more than I have.  I've played more of a role in the U.S., with business in the U.S., Corporate America.  She's very interested in collaboration across cultures and bringing people together across cultures to work better together.  And she's going to find ways to do that.  Now, the fact that she travelled with me, speaking all over the country and watched me give speeches, and she's given a lot of speeches herself, especially after writing the book.  She had to go out and give a lot of speeches and do that.  Her ability, you know, learning to write well, to speak well, to present well, those are tools that she'll put in a kit.  But she'll use them in service of her own passions and her own goals, and what she wants to achieve.  I want to give her resilience, you know?  I want to, I can't make sure she never falls down.  But I can teach her how to get up faster.  And that's--and it's hard as a parent to reconcile yourself with that.  Because we, your heart wants to make sure they never fall.  But you're not helping them if you, to the extent that you can accomplish that you've failed.  You need to let them make their mistakes, but show them how to recover.  Show them how to learn from their mistakes.  Show them how to move forward.  And I hope that if you interviewed my daughter, she would tell you that she learned a lot of that from me.  In fact, she travelled with me and heard me speak so much, that she's heard more motivational speeches from me than any other human on the planet.  So if I get down, which I do, and I get, you know, I can't do it, she'll turn around and she'll tell me, "You know, you really can do this."  She'll, I'll get a motivational speech in return.  So I've taught, I tried to teach her resilience and model resilience for her.  But what you're hearing me say is that she needs to find her own passions and harness those and do what God put her on this earth to do, which is different than what I got, the assignment I got.  And she needs to--it's funny, we actually had this conversation recently.  And I said, "You need to keep listening to what God is telling you.  Because it changes over time, and what you can do."  She was feeling guilty about not necessarily working in a food pantry in a bad neighborhood.  And I said, "You got given these skills which are so important in today's world, to keep peace.  To keep us from blowing each other up, and your passion for doing that.  You need to do the assignment, focus on the assignment you got given."  And if you can, you know, volunteer in a pantry, or donate some money, you know, if you can do other things on the side, but keep yourself focused on the assignment you got given.  And keep asking for guidance every day about what that is.  And if you get complacent, and you think, well, I'm doing this important government work, so I don't have to help anyone, you know.  Then you've lost it.  Right?  So you need to keep listening to what your assignment is, and don't think you know it all.  You know, keep praying, keep listening, keep understanding that your assignment changes.  And, you know, have some humility and some courage around what that is and find your contribution that you should make.  So your, when you say, "What should I tell the children?"  I don't care if you have a disability, I don't care what color you are.  I do, I mean, I love you.  But, you need to do that self searching process and push yourself so if God gave you a gift, you don't just unwrap it.  You have to develop it.  Skiing wasn't easy for me on the first day.  And school wasn't easy.  I had my ups and downs.  You have to study.  You have to prepare.  You have to hone your gifts, you have to work your craft.  You have to make progress and keep listening for where--what is the lever you're supposed to pull.  What is the problem you're supposed to solve.  What were the passions you were given, and make a difference.  Pay it forward, pay it--keep paying it forward.  Even if you don't think you've got very much (laughter), you can still pay it forward.  Absolutely.  So, did I explain that well enough, and so you say for children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, you did absolutely great.
Speaker 2: I feel bad that I said, "I don't care what color you are."  Because I don't believe in the whole colorblind thing.  I think we need to be aware, and we need to, what we do with the multicultural women's course is really celebrate.  Asian comes in a thousand varieties, you know.  Latina and Hispanic comes in a thousand varieties.  Black, you know, African versus Georgia, versus the Bronx, you know.  Very different cultures.  We need to celebrate all our cultures and mine that for strength to figure out what your contribution is in this world.  So, you know, when I say I don't care about your color, I don't want to leave it at that.  It's, it matters a lot, and we should celebrate it and we should use it as a strength.  Your disability, your pain, your emotional challenges, your poverty, your obstacles.  It's all--it all can be a strength.  And that's what my life means.
Story_ID: 521629
Speaker 1: As you look into your future, what do you see?
Speaker 2: Well, we have these big projects that I'm saying are my legacy projects that I'm working on.  And we're in a growth curve doing that.  So I see myself being very busy, continuing to expand, and really scaling up because we want to have a larger impact.  I look forward to being able to accomplish those things, maybe be on the other side of those accomplishments, be a grandmother, you know, maybe relax a little bit more too.  I am better now than I was when I was younger at mixing in more enjoyment along the way, and Allen [Allen P. Haines] is a fun loving person who helps me to experience more joy along the way.  And so doing that.  But I am looking forward to a different phase in my life too, where isn't all building, but it can be more slowing down too.  So I like all the phases in life.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to share that I have not asked you?
Speaker 2: I think it's funny.  One thing popped up a couple of minutes ago, is just this sense of home.  That when you first asked me the home you grew up in, that was such a difficult word for me for a long time.  I realized that I travelled in hotels and I kept moving.  I used to move every two or three years.  I had no sense of home because there was so much pain and emotional damage in my root home.  And Allen, being married to Allen, he has done so much to help--he has such a strong sense of home.  He couldn't believe, he couldn't, he couldn't understand for a little while why I didn't get it or why I couldn't create it.  And he's been so patient.  Asking questions and listening, and we've built a home together that I love.  And so part of the transition to working more virtually, is having a larger impact, but it also actually allows me to stay home more.  I'm still gonna travel, I love to travel, and just be.  But I have the option now to stay home, and I actually have a sense of home.  So maybe it's appropriate to end on that note because it's not all just about external achievements and winning medals.  It's wonderful and writing books is wonderful.  But being able to overcome all the pain and the heal--you know, find the healing and be able to heal myself enough to be a mom is one thing.  But to be enough to have a home, maybe that's one of my best achievements.  And I would wish that for others.  I know so many others are in pain as well.  And so maybe this gives others hope too, that it's worth it not only to do the work for the big things outside, but to own our joy and our sense of home and faith and family.
