Story_ID: 23452
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Raymond Lewis Johnson, R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, L-E-W-I-S, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 25th, 1943, Alice, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: So I'm a visiting professor of mathematics at Rice University [in Houston, Texas].  I retired from the University of Maryland [in College Park, Maryland] in 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August the 17th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office at Rice University, 410 Herman Brown Hall [Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 23453
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Tha, that's hard to say.  I like everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Europe.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Don't look back, somebody might be gaining on you", Satchel Paige.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay.
Story_ID: 23454
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get 'em mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: They'll be, let me simplify things.  I don't know my father, so I have no idea about my father or the father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was a single mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but is there a story there somewhere?
Speaker 2: No, I mean at least, I couldn't get her to tell me.  I mean I tried.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Johnnie Virginia Johnson, J-O-H-N-N-I-E, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 22nd, 1915 at, I believe she was born in Cuero, Texas.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-U-E-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, my mother's mother was named Ethel Belle Pleasant.  And she was married to a man named Willie Harrison Johnson.  So that's my mother's father.  And she grew up in Cuero, but her, Ethel's father, Tom Pleasant, had moved to Alice [Texas], I think in 1914.  And then in 1920, so Willie Harrison had abandoned the family, and Ethel moved back to Alice to be close to her father.  And so, okay, I know my mother's parents.  And then I know her mother's parents.  They were Tom Pleasant and Virginia Victoria Elzy, E-L-Z-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay, I'm sort of confused here.  So your grandmother was Ethel Belle Pleasant?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she was married to a fellow named Johnson?
Speaker 2: Willie Harrison Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, but Willie Harrison Johnson left?
Speaker 2: He had abandoned the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so at that time, she moved back to Alice to live with her father, who was Tom Pleasant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your great grandfather was Tom Pleasant.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, in Cuero.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, no, he--so Tom was in, so--see, Ethel was in Cuero, but Tom had moved from Cuero in 1914 to set up a farm, to buy--he bought a farm in Alice in 1914.  So she moved from Cuero to be with, you know, to have some support, she moved back to Alice.  That's how the family ended up in Alice.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is Alice close to Cuero?
Speaker 2: No, it's, you know, Alice is about 41 miles from Corpus [Corpus Christi, Texas] and Cuero is up near Victoria [Texas].  So it's quite a ways away.  Tom Pleasant, I mean I, I have an ancestry website where I have some of his, his information.  When he came to Alice, he founded the local church, and then he started the school for blacks which originally was called The Pleasant-Thompson School.  But eventually, they managed to get funding from the city to, you know, make it a regular school, have support from the city.  And it was called Carver Elementary.  So that's where I actually went to school, is Carver Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  So the school was named--
Speaker 2: Originally, Pleasant-Thompson.
Speaker 1: Pleasant-Thompson, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pleasant-Thompson.
Speaker 1: Was there a fellow named Thompson involved too?
Speaker 2: So Thompson was a preacher at the True Light Baptist Church and actually, he was my grandmother's second husband.  So after Willie Harrison Johnson had abandoned the family, and she moved back to Alice, later, at some point, which I don't know exactly, she, she married Benjamin Thompson.  And he was my step-grandfather.  He's the one who taught me how to read.
Speaker 1: Okay, George Washington, so the school became George Washington Carver--
Speaker 2: It became George Washington Carver Elementary.
Speaker 1: --when it was governed by the local--
Speaker 2: By the local student, authorities, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: On the website, I have a, there's a story about the school and how, you know, the, the school district paid a certain amount of money to take over running the school.  But then, in return, I think they, you know, they named it Carver Elementary.  And then they sort of put in some, some--they built a school.  They built a better building and things like that.  They were--it was a two-room schoolhouse.  I mean it had grades one through four in one room, grades four through eight in another room.  But at the time I was going to it, I don't know what it was like when it first started.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Cuero or--are either of these black towns?  I know because there were--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --some black towns in Texas?
Speaker 2: No, neither of those, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your great-grandfather is the one that built the school.  Now, these are always interesting stories.  There's always somebody in a town that takes that up it seems, and--
Speaker 2: Well, like they built the church and the school.  I mean he, you know, they, they started out with a small church, I think.  What happened was--this is the history of the church is 84 years later.  And they were talking about how they, you know, started with this small church and then gradually, it got bigger and bigger over the years as the pop--black population of Alice started to grow a little bit.  But it was never very big.  I mean Alice is about 28,000 people.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know what denomination the church or the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, now, which one?  Now, the one that my grandfather founded was actually True Light Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I went to, so I guess we had a split.  Somehow there's a schism.  But I went to the Church of God in Christ which was established some time later.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Reverend Thompson ever the pastor of True Life--
Speaker 2: He was pastor of True Light Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, for some period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did he switch to Church of God in Christ?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  He, he was a Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: See, Alice was such a small town that the Church of God in Christ, I think they were serviced by a minister from Corpus who would come over like once or twice a month to, to, to actually have a service.  The rest of the time, they would have services organized by the deacons or whatever, themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: So, like I said Tom Pleasant had a farm, and it was a, it was apparently a very big farm.  My uncle, who's the one who told me all about this, my uncle's name was R.L. Johnson.  That was my mother's brother.  He said that he was a very good farmer, and he, he said that Tom had been a house slave.  So that's how he learned how to read, and because he knew how to read, he could buy property.  So he bought this property in Alice and apparently, he was a successful farmer.  But, at least, R.L. said that, his father, Willie Harrison Johnson, wasn't a very good farmer.  So, you know, that's, they made, they stayed in Cuero, or whatever they did, he wasn't a successful farmer.  And eventually, he abandoned the family, and--, he said he was a preacher, you know, one of these circuit preachers type of, type of thing.  That was what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, and your, did your grandmother basically tend to the house and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. She took care of me also, you know, 'cause my mother was working.  My mother was a single mother.  So she was working.  And so I spent a lot of time with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, was your great grandfather alive when you--
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I never remember--actually, he died in 1937, and I was born in '43' [1943].
Speaker 1: Okay, he's part of the generation that was born in slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Are, are there any other stories about slavery that passed down in the family?
Speaker 2: That's, that's the only one.  That's the only one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was--do you know if he was, if he was a slave in Texas or moved--
Speaker 2: You know, now, that, I don't know.  I sort of assumed it because he, he was in Cuero when, I mean this was in the, this was in 1900s.  So I have no idea where he was.  I think in the ancestry, I mean on the census records, the earliest one I have, he said his father was from Virginia.  So I thought maybe the slavery was in Virginia, but I'm just, just not, you know, really don't know.  There's no family stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause there, there are migration stories about, you know, with whites even coming to Texas in the 19th Century--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause it was like a wide open place.  A lot of people would come out to--
Speaker 2: So I have no idea when he came, for example.  That's, you know, like I said, the earliest I know of him was that he moved from Cuero to Alice in 1914.
Story_ID: 23455
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother share any stories about growing up, with you?
Speaker 2: No, not, my mother was very, very quiet.  I mean she and her sister, Ruby, always lived together.  Ruby was also single, Ruby didn't have any children.  And so they, you know, they always stayed some place close to Ethel.  They had another sister, Lois, who lived in Alice also.  And then R.L., my, my uncle, he lived in Alice and Kingsville [Texas], and he helped support them, and, you know, if they needed anything extra, he would be the one who would--he used to come over from Kingsville once or twice a month and bring food and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she had a support network, but they, you know, she would work, and Ruby worked.  And Lois was actually married to Gus Lee, who was a preacher, who was one of the pastors of True Light Baptist Church.  But that, basically, I'm just saying it was a close-knit family sort of all around Alice, all the kids stayed in Alice mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother, so did she go to your grandfather's school, your great-grandfather's school?
Speaker 2: You know, what--so, I assume so, but she dropped out in eighth grade.  I mean that's, that was the typical in those days.  And, and same thing with my uncle, you know, most of 'em dropped out after--I mean probably that was all there was in terms of schooling was eight grades.  And then you start to work.  So she, she, she did say several times that she had had to stop school when she was in eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: Domestic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She and Aunt Ruby both were domestics.
Speaker 1: Any stories about who she worked for?
Speaker 2: Well, more about Aunt Ruby.  I mean, so my mother worked primarily for a family called the Goldthorns (ph.).  He was the mayor of Alice at one time, but, you know, he, he had a, like a farm dealer distributorship.  And so sometimes it was doing well, and sometimes it wasn't doing so well.  So then, that means sometimes she'd work, and sometimes she'd be working for somebody else.  Aunt Ruby worked most of her life for the Lloyds.  He was a lawyer in Alice.  And so he was a little bit more stable.  And she, she spent her whole life working for them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, did your mother ever share like a aspiration that she had, that, you know, that maybe, maybe she couldn't reach, but she was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I don't think so.  I mean I think, you know, their aspiration was the farm.  In terms of the family, it was more like Uncle R.L., who, who sort of shared in the sense that he had worked, you know, started out on the farm.  And then eventually he, you know, did a lot of reading on his own and he essentially became like a self-trained engineer.  And as I mentioned on my website, he was the go-to person in Alice if you had questions about math because he had read, you know, some science and some math.  And so in terms of encouragement from the family, it would probably more from him that I got encouragement to pursue education.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, but, but you know, I never heard the word "college" in my household, okay.  That was something that happened only to me after I went to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I was just talk--talking in terms of your mother, if she had, if she wanted to be a teacher, a nurse or something like that?
Speaker 2: No, she never, she never--
Speaker 1: Ever wanted to go to--
Speaker 2: --she never discussed any of that, you know.  I mean I think it was like, you know, the farm, and we're gonna, and she had to go, help on the family farm.  And so that sort of was her destiny, I guess, in a sense.  And she didn't really object to that so much.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, did she have any stories about growing up, about what race relations were in the cit-in the town or, or, or, or, you know, I don't know, the condition of black folks, in that, that place as opposed to some other place?
Speaker 2: She, she was not.  I mean my uncle, again, was the most political of the, of the group.  And he didn't talk that much about it.  Aunt Ruby was very religious, so, you know, I mean her, she's putting her faith in God.  So I think she would have been impervious to that type of stuff.  My grandmother was very religious also.  So, and, of course, with Aunt Lois' husband was a preacher.  So, you know, I mean there, there was probably this strong religious element, and they didn't really seem to talk very much about race relations.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 23456
Speaker 1: So, when you think about--do you think you take after your mother in terms of, you know, looks, personality, mannerisms or interests--
Speaker 2: I think personality, personality.  I mean I'm, she was very, very quiet, and I think, although there are times when I'm very loud, I mean most of the time I have the same personality that she has.
Speaker 1: Okay, how are you dislike her, you know--?
Speaker 2: So I think she had a little bit of a conflict about the fact that I went away.  I mean, you know, I think when she, she expected me to do the same thing she did, which is stay around Alice and help take care of her like she had stayed around Alice to help take care of her father, her mother and things like that.  So when I went off to college, I think that was a little bit of a conflict.  And then when I didn't come back to Alice, I think that was a little bit of a conflict.  But, you know, I think she was proud of what I accomplished, and she was very happy about it.  But she would have really liked if I had been there.  And I, I think I tried to support her, but not, you know, being there physically to support her would have been, sort of her idea of, the best way for a child to behave.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's probably a whole generation kind of felt like that around--
Speaker 2: Well, 'cause they had done it for their, you know, near their parents.  So,--
Speaker 1: And your generation is one of the, I mean is, is right at the breaking point, I think, when people started moving from the farm to the city.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and, you know, my son, you know, I certainly had no, I mean I want him to get a college degree.  I want him to get out of the house, to get on his own, but that's, I think it was a little bit different back in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, expected you to stay on the farm and work the land and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay--
Speaker 2: And, unfortunately, you know, the farm didn't get passed down.  So I mean, there was this huge piece of property, and I don't know what happened to it.  But, you know, it was all broken up, and there was nobody left who owned any land when I was coming along.
Story_ID: 23457
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Prob-yeah, I think, I was actually thinking about that.  My, my earliest childhood memory, I really don't have a lot.  But one of 'em is the first day of school.  I still remember the first day of school, and that's because I did something that I regret to this day.  But I did it.  I, I go to school, you know, this little four-room school.  And we put our lunches up in the, in the--there was a little cabinet for us put our lunches in.  And I put my lunch in there.  And this big kid came up to me and said, where's your lunch.  So I pointed to somebody else's lunch (laughter), and he took it, and I was very happy.  But (laughter), you know, it wasn't the right thing to do, but that's, that's my first recollection of school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, early signs of intelligence (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I didn't, I didn't think of it.  I was just trying to survive (laughter).
Story_ID: 23458
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe, now, what was the--did you live out on a farm, an isolated farm or in a town?
Speaker 2: No, no. So, yeah, Alice [Texas], I mean we lived in the town, and they had built Carver Elementary [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Alice, Texas], I mean, so I, I could actually visualize it very simply.  I mean there was this street, and Carver Elementary was on the street.  And I lived like six blocks down the street one way.  My uncle, Ishim (ph.) Pleasant, who was one of Tom Pleasant's sons, lived across the street from the school.  Sterling Pleasant lived right next to him, and then Aunt Lois lived like a block down.  And so, you know, there's Johnson's all--which is bad in the sense that if you do anything bad, the word gets back to your mother [Johnnie Virginia Johnson] pretty quickly.  But there were relatives sort of all around the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: And I was, it was in, in, in the city, sort of, you know, but the city is not that big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were, like the houses were, they were somewhat close together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the school had a whole block to itself, right.  I mean the school had a whole block to itself, and then across from it, there were like three or four houses.  And every block like would have three or four houses down the, down the street.
Speaker 1: Okay, so people had big yards and kind of like land around--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --their,--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --their houses.  Can you describe what kind of house you grew up in?
Speaker 2: So, so, yes and no.  I mean I spent most of my time with my grandmother [Ethel Belle Pleasant] 'cause my mother was at work.  So my grandmother was taking care of me, so I remember, you know, being in her house which was across the railroad tracks for a good part of the time when I was growing up.  And then we got a house which was a white house on West Hill.  And I remember living there for a year or two.  And then about the time I was getting ready to go off to college, so that would have been about 1960, a little bit before that, my uncle, R.L. [R.L. Johnson], built them a house.  So he had the property next to this little white house.  And he owned the property right next to it.  And he literally, I mean I think he must have gotten the foundation ordered from some place.  But then he put in the sheet rock, and he put in the plumbing.  He put in every, the gas, the electricity or whatever.  And he and Aunt Ruby paid for building this house.  So there was a house at West Hill, 306 West Hill, which as I sort of think about it, is where I grew up.  I actually grew up in 304, which is right next to it.  But, you know, my uncle built the house at 306 in about 1960.  And so, unfortunately, I left and went off to college and didn't the benefit of living in it, but the two houses together, the, most of what I remember about growing up.
Speaker 1: At 304 and 306?
Speaker 2: And 306.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was 304 like?  How many rooms did it have and what were--
Speaker 2: You know, it was a living room.  Aunt Ruby had her bedroom.  Mother had her bedroom, and I think I must have slept on the floor somewhere, you know, I--'cause I don't think it was that many rooms.  But in, in the house that Uncle R.L. built, there was--Aunt Ruby had a big room.  But actually, then Aunt Ruby died about six years later.  And then mother had her room, and I had--and I'm sorry, Mary Virginia, my sister and I, each had our, had our own rooms.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And these are like frame houses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't quite a shotgun house, I mean 'cause it was, it was, like I say, you come in, there'd be a living room.  There was a kitchen.  I mean a place to eat over here and the kitchen you cook in and refrigerator and stuff like.  And then there were the three bedrooms, two small bedrooms, and one big bedroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said the early days, it was, it was--you spent a lot of time at your grandmother's.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, and so, well, did, did she live near the school too?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That's, she lived, I mean so--and again, I can't remember whether, you know, I was with her before I started to school.  I remember primarily walking to school from 304 West Hill, from the white house.  My grandmother lived across the track.  It would have been a little bit longer walk to school.  And I don't remember very much walking from her house to school.  So I think she must have kept me before I started school.  After I started school, then my mother could send me off to school, and she didn't have to worry about me until, you know, she'd be home from work by the time I finished.
Story_ID: 23459
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: So the sights, it's hot.  It's Texas, and it's extremely hot.  Alice [Texas] is very flat, I mean, and it's not particularly green, you know.  So, I, I just remember walking to school and, you know, it being hot, flat and dusty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're growing up during the '40's [1940s] and early '50's [1950s].
Speaker 2: I started school in '49' [1949], yeah, so '49' [1949], '50's [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay. You were born in '43' [1943]?
Speaker 2: Three [1943].
Speaker 1: Three [1943], okay, so, yeah, you start in '49' [1949], right, right, right.  So, well, other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: That's, that's all I remember.  I mean, you know, when I was in middle school and stuff like that, I remember baseball, you know, and things like that.  I mean downtown, you know, there was a movie theater which was air conditioned and cool, although we had to sit in the balcony, of course.  That, that, that, I remember.  I especially remember baseball.  I mean that was the fun thing that I did.  They dragged us off and had us do piano lessons at one point when I was in middle school.  So I actually took piano lessons.  I wasn't very good at it, but I tried.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there--you said there was a railroad track close by that you--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: A lot, lot of trains come through?
Speaker 2: No, no, it wasn't a lot of trains.  So, you know, I used to walk to school down the railroad track 'cause you, you didn't have to worry about (laughter) jumping out of the way of a train, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about food and music and--
Speaker 2: So, you know, when I grew up, I, I loved 'Popeye's' red beans and rice.  And I just wished my mother [Johnnie Virginia Johnson] had known how to fix--I ate a lot of red beans and rice when I was growing up, and unfortunately, she didn't know how to put the spices on it like 'Popeye's'.  It didn't have this, the little kick to it.  It was just sort of plain red beans and rice.  That's what I remember mostly growing up.  And the other I remember growing up in terms of food, although I never ate it, was wheat germ.  Now, my uncle [R.L. Johnson], for some reason really believed in wheat germ.  And every time he'd come into town, he-so he used to work at the creamery.  And so, actually, the thing that I remember was when he'd come from the creamery with ice cream.  I loved that.  But then he'd also stop at HEB.  We had a local HEB, and he stopped and pick up this wheat germ.  And we never understood quite what it was, and so it would just sit in the refrigerator, you know, and we had no idea what we were supposed to do with it.  But he, every time he'd go to the store, it seemed like he would buy some.
Speaker 1: So you all wouldn't eat it or use it--
Speaker 2: We wouldn't eat it or use it, but he'd just buy another one.  Well, maybe he ate it.  I don't know (laughter).  He, he bought, you know, my uncle, he was helping Aunt Ruby and my mother, but he was buying what he was interested in (laughter).  He didn't necessary buy what they needed.  I don't think he asked them, "What do you need me to pick up?"  He'd just go to the store and pick up some stuff that he thought would be useful for 'em.
Speaker 1: Now, did he eat over there himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when he was in town, yeah, yeah.  He would, he would, you know, they'd fix dinner for him.
Speaker 1: But he lived in another town?
Speaker 2: He lived in Kingsville [Texas], yeah, the next town over.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean so, when I was very small, I think he was working at the creamery in Alice [Texas].  And so then he, you know, he lived in Alice, and he would actually bring ice cream from the creamery in Alice.  But they closed the creamery in Alice and moved it to Kingsville.  I mean they had like these two branches.  And so what they did was they closed the one in Alice and kept the one in Kingsville.  He moved to Kingsville with it, and then he was coming over from Kingsville.  So this is a little bit later on.
Story_ID: 23460
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, so when you were growing up in your household, it was your mother [Johnnie Virginia Johnson] and your aunt and you and, do you have sisters or--?
Speaker 2: So my sister was born in 1950.  So, yeah, that's (unclear) the old school--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you've got a younger sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so just the four of you all?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Uncle R.L. [R.L. Johnson] would come over and visit, you know, and somehow or another, when he would come over, we'd have to adjust.  I'd sleep on the sofa or he'd sleep on the sofa or something like that, you know, when he would come to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you say he was very influential because he was sort of a self-trained engineer?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did he do for the creamery?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's, what happened was, I mean they had these machines that made milk, ice cream and stuff like that.  And they were old machines, and so basically, he had learned how they worked and how to keep, how to do the upkeep on them by, self taught.  And so I think that's one of the reasons he moved to Kingsville with them 'cause he was one of the few people who could really keep those machines running.  But at some point, they gave up, I mean, you know, they stopped making ice cream in Kingsville.  And they sold the site to a brewery, the Harsh (unclear) Brewery.  And he became a night watchman, and he stayed there, and stayed at the same place and worked as a night watchman for the brewery.
Story_ID: 23461
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Now, where did you, so you started school at Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Alice, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, and so you start in 1949--
Speaker 2: Forty nine [1949], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, did you like school?
Speaker 2: So I have to tell you this.  Something happened before that which I don't remember, and I don't have no idea how it happened, but at some point my step-grandfather, Benjamin Thompson, discovered that, you know, I was either curious or something like that.  So he taught me to read.  So when I came to school, I actually knew how to read.  And when I got to sixth grade, they were supposed to be teaching reading, and I already knew how to read.  So, you know, this is this little two-room school, so they just moved me up a grade.  And I was in second grade the first year.  And then in third grade, I was reading well enough that they moved me up to the fourth grade.  So I skipped two grades.  Now, the advantage was, you know, I got out of high school and everything a lot quicker.  The disadvantage was that meant I was dealing with people who were two years older than me, by and large.  That, in, in Carver, it didn't make that much difference because, you know, I knew everybody.  We all played together, and, you know, we'd all go out and play baseball or whatever together.  So it didn't really make any difference, but when I got to middle school, it was a little bit different in the sense that all of a sudden, I'm two years younger than these kids, and it's little bit of a, a little social distance or whatever, and not to mention the whole race thing coming up there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Carver is all black, right?
Speaker 2: Carver was all black, and I loved it.  I mean Ms. Dukes was a teacher in the first grade.  They skipped me two grades.  I had a great time.  I don't know what they had me doing, but I enjoyed school tremendously.  And then next, after that go to the grades five through eight, you know, with Ms. Wilson, and the best year there was eighth grade because the eighth graders, what happened with the rest of the students, you know, I mean you have the fifth grade is real exciting, and then sixth grade has to be sitting there doing something.  And sixth graders were saying the fifth grade through eighth, they have to do something.  Well, the eighth graders, while the fifth, sixth and seventh were reciting, the eighth grade got to go--we had a little stage, and they had a little dressing room for the stage.  So, the eighth graders could go up into dressing room and play checkers, chess or do whatever we wanted to while the other classes were reciting until it was our turn.  And then we'd come down and do our class work in, in there.  So that was the best grade as far as I was concerned 'cause we had a good time and we worked in class.  In fact, there, there was a cafe across the street, and one of the things, one of the, not tests, but was that one of the times when you were up there, you had to climb out the window, climb down this, this--remember, this is a, the school wasn't that big, but, you know, this, this stage is elevated.  And so the dressing room was elevated.  So you had to climb down the window, go across to Mr. Butler's cafe and get a coke.  And I did that once (laughter).  But that was--eighth grade was great.
Speaker 1: So that was a little, little rite of passage (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --everybody had to try to do that.
Speaker 2: Yes, but, but, you know, I mean it, you, it's really difficult to imagine and recall, but I mean that's what, what happened.  The fifth grade would recite, and the sixth, seventh and eighth would sit there.  And then the sixth grade would have their recitation, and do the same thing in the afternoon, you know, and so.  It's not very--you have a lot of time, when you have a lot of time on your hands.  And I don't remember what happened in the fifth, sixth and seventh, but I do remember eighth grade 'cause you'd be up in that room and have a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 23462
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, tell us, now, what happened next in school now?  You're, you're--
Speaker 2: So after eighth grade, Alice [Texas] didn't have enough black students, and so the Alice school district had an arrangement with the Kingsville [Texas] school district.  So grades nine through twelve were bused from Alice to Kingsville which is twenty-eight miles, and I knew classmates who had ridden the bus and had gone to school in Kingsville.  And I was looking forward to it 'cause in a sense, it's a chance to get out of Alice, at least for a, for a day, every day.  But 'Brown versus Board' was decided, and the Alice school district decided to live up to it, accept 'Brown versus Board'.  So I spent ninth grade in DuBoise [DuBoise Junior High School, Alice, Texas], which is the first time I'd gone to an integrated junior high school, I mean it was junior high school at that time.  So you just went for ninth grade, and then high school was William Adams [Williams Adams High School, Alice, Texas], grade ten through twelve, which was also integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: DuBoise was-I was, it was lucky for me in the sense that the main thing that I recall that happened to me at DuBoise was they discovered that I couldn't see.  You know, in Alice, in this two-room school, the boards were very close, and so, you know, it was a very small room, four, four, four grades cramped into one room.  So I didn't have any problem seeing everything.  But then when I went to DuBoise, you're in this classroom, and, you know, there's thirty seats in a room and the board up at the front.  And I couldn't see.  So I got glasses, and that I think (laughter) helped a lot 'cause that meant I could see what was actually going on in class.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how you discovered, how, how it was discovered you couldn't see?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember, but, you know, somehow I, I wasn't seeing what was on the board, and so they, they sent me, they told my, told my mother that I need to have an eye test.  I had an eye test, and they discovered I needed glasses.
Speaker 1: So the teacher noticed it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the teacher noticed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what was the racial makeup of--after integration for, I guess, DuBoise?
Speaker 2: You know, two or three blacks in a class of thirty, yeah, yeah, 'cause we, we were, it was a--there was a tight-knit black community, but it was very small.  It was very small.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there wasn't a lot of rancor or problems, I guess, would you say?
Speaker 2: There was some resentment, you know.  There were some kids who muttered some things and stuff like that, but, you know, mostly, it was uneventful.  Let's say it like that.  I mean, you know, the black kids would hang together, and the white kids still hung together.  So it, it was more like two separate worlds that were colliding but really not paying much attention to each other.  That's the way I recall it.
Story_ID: 23463
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know many white people in Alice when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not--no, no.  I knew the people my mother worked for, the people my aunt worked for.  Those were about the only people that I was aware of at all.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the, the communities were that segregated then where you just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --didn't even--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So church is all black.
Speaker 2: Church was all black.
Speaker 1: School was all black, the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Okay.
Speaker 1: Baseball, which I started, let's see--so I must have, I don't know what the age of Little League is, eleventh grade, something like that.  So I did meet a few kids in Little League.  And, actually, I was sort of disappointed, I think, 'cause when I went to school, I don't think I met that many, but occasionally, I'd see somebody who, you know, I had played baseball with.  So that was the other group of white people that I knew at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so black and white would play baseball together there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was there a common city park or something or--
Speaker 1: There was a Little League baseball park, you know.  I mean it was a long way from my house 'cause I remember walking, you had to put on the uniform and walk a long way to, to, to the games 'cause games were in the evening when it was cool.  And, and, you know, it was whites and Latinos 'cause I remember the best baseball player that I ever knew of in Alice was a guy named Armando Markeen (ph.).  He was just a fantastic pitcher.  And so, you know, there were all three races played in the Little League baseball.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Do you remember the name of your team?
Speaker 1: No, no (laughter).  I know the football team there.  Alice, the high school football team was the Coyotes, but I don't remember the baseball team.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: You know, I think they, they had several.  It was a league, and so there were like several teams.  So I have no idea which team I played on.
Story_ID: 23464
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your heroes growing up?  You're a--. You played baseball.  Were you a Jackie Robinson fan?
Speaker 2: I was a, well, so I--my mother [Johnnie Virginia Johnson] was more the Jackie Robinson fan because she was there when he had broken up.  Hank Aaron was my hero.  And I actually think I got to see Hank Aaron play.  He, he was playing in the, with Mobile [Alabama], and they came, and I don't know if their camp was in, near Texas or something like that, but they came and played in Corpus [Corpus Christi, Texas], and I got to see Hank Aaron play when he was a minor leaguer so, 'cause I followed him all throughout his career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew about him when he played for Mo-the Mobile Black Bears?
Speaker 2: Mobile, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So how did, it's hard to gauge sometimes how famous somebody would be in those days, and in the Negro Leagues. But, but I think what it was again was, you know, he was one of the few black players of the--I don't think this was, he was, he had, I think he was with the Mobile Farm Club of, not Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause he came up with a different team.
Speaker 1: It was the Milwaukee Braves--
Speaker 2: Milwaukee, he came up with Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: It was still the Braves.  It was the same team.  It just moved to--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, right.  But I think he was in the farm system, their farm system, and somehow, I don't, I thought it was Mobile, but I, you know, probably had it because I got it from his card, that, what he was doing was, this was when he was in the Minor League like for one year before he made it to the Majors.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he, I know he started out with the Mobile Black Bears in the Negro Leagues--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but then, quite possibly there's a Mobile farm team--
Speaker 2: Farm team from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] too.
Speaker 1: --for Milwaukee down there too.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm not sure, but it was, it was one of the farm teams from Milwaukee that was playing in Corpus.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any other heroes?
Speaker 2: That, that was, I mean 'cause I, I wasn't, you know, at that time, we didn't have a television, and I didn't know much about football.  I guess 1959 when the Colts [Baltimore Colts] beat the Giants [New York Giants] in that great overtime game, I did manage to see that.  And so the Baltimore Colts became one of my favorite teams and Johnny Unitas, Lenny Moore, that, that, that era of football team.
Story_ID: 23465
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, let's see--
Speaker 2: So, we were at ninth grade, so (unclear) I'll tell you one thing.  When I went to tenth grade, there was something that really, I think, the thing that changed my life the most, which was that they gave an aptitude test.  And I did fairly well on it.  So, actually, the counselor, high school counselor was named Stan Brooks.  And he called me into his office, and to best of my knowledge, it's probably the first time I ever heard the word "college" used.  And he asked me had I considered going to college?  And, of course, I hadn't 'cause I had no idea what it was.  But he said that I had done well on this aptitude test, and that, you know, if I kept working I could conceivably get a scholarship.  So, actually, I, I took the SAT test [SAT Reasoning Test; standardized test], and I didn't do very well.  But he gave me a book and said, you know, 'cause the problem was, I'd done very well in math, but I hadn't done very well in English.  So he gave me a book and had me study words, you know, and I spent the next year studying words.  And that's when I gave back one of the years.  So, you know, they had skipped me two grades in elementary school.  So I actually spent an extra year in high school, basically taking some classes and preparing for the SAT test.  And I did well enough that I got a scholarship to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, the name of your high school is William Adams?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I--that's there in Alice?
Speaker 2: That's in Alice [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so and that's an unusual story 'cause we have so many bad counselor stories where the counselor is the bad guy.
Speaker 2: No, this was, I mean, and he's 89 years old, and he contacted me recently.  And I'm gonna try to go, go look him up.  What happened was, after they discovered that I was pretty good in math and science, we happened to have an exceptionally good science teacher named Larry Orear (ph.).  And so I started taking classes with him, and Mr. Orear had gone to University of Texas [in Austin, Texas], and, in fact, he had gotten, was getting, working on his master's in mathematics at the University of Texas.  So when I was getting ready to go to school, when I finally got a scholarship, you know, I didn't know where to go to college.  And I didn't particularly wanna get that far away from home 'cause I had no experience at getting away from home.  And so Mr. Orear suggested University of Texas.  And I went up and I don't think--I didn't, I, I, I chose the National Merit.  I said I would take it at the University of Texas before I even ever visited.  But when I went to the University of Texas, he had me look up his master's advisor, whose name was Howard B. Curtis.  And Dr. Curtis was the one who really helped make a transition from high school to college easy for me, easier for me.
Story_ID: 23466
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't wanna get you out of high school yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll go back to, to high school [at Williams Adams High School, Alice, Texas] for a second.  Now, did you, were you involved in clubs and stuff in high school or run for student government or--
Speaker 2: No, not for student government.  But I was involved in clubs.  So this is the National Honor Society, 'cause I mean I think that was, I don't know what the conditions were for getting in it, but, you know, I was a member of the National Honor Society.  And that's where I met like, you know, other people who were very, very smart and who also were very competitive.  I mean, you know, I remember the competition for valedictorian, for example, of Alice High School.  I was not involved in the competition, but I was observing it.  And, you know, having people sort of take easy classes and try to make sure they could keep their grade point average up and have a better chance of being valedictorian.  I mean I remember that was sort of the first time I learned about, you know, that sort of social aspect of learning.  I thought you just went to school and you did the best you could and, you know, and you graduated, and then you go on and keep doing the best you can.  But there were actually these people who were competing to be valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And they were all in National Honor Society.
Speaker 1: And strategizing what kind of class they're gonna take to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to get there.
Speaker 2: --to make sure that they had the highest GPA [Grade Point Average].
Speaker 1: Okay,--
Speaker 2: And no socializing.  I mean, you know, I don't remember prom, you know, or anything like that.  But did go to the football games for the Alice Coyotes, you know, football team.  It was a long walk, but, you know, it was worth it.  And socializing in that sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the foot--the high school was named William Adams--
Speaker 2: William Adams, yeah, and the Alice Coyotes was the football team.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, okay, all right.  So they called the football team, not the Adams' Coyotes, but the Alice Coyotes?
Speaker 2: The Alice Coyotes.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), all right.
Speaker 2: It was for the whole city.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, football is, when you think of football, people think of Texas for some, you know, some reason.
Speaker 2: Yep, Friday night.
Speaker 1: High school, Friday night lights and all that sort of thing.  So what, was it really big in Alice?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean, well, first of all (laughter), there's nothing else to do in Alice, okay.  So, I mean it was really big, and, you know, for a kid like me who didn't have any money, I mean getting into the game was non-trivial.  I climbed a fence a few times to get into the game, but sometimes after halftime, they'd sort of let you into the game.  So, you know, we, it wasn't, I don't remember like them saying, okay, because you go to, here, here's a free pass because you're a student at Alice High School.  I mean there was supposed to be like a two dollar or dollar charge or something like that.  So sometimes I'd just go to the game and wouldn't actually get to see the game.  But the team, you know, I think they competed for the state championship.  They had some very good players.  I don't, don't remember their names or exactly how well they did, but they, they had a very good football team.
Speaker 1: Okay, any players make--
Speaker 2: The only one I remember, I think was a quarterback named Len Baillets (ph.), but, you know, I don't think he did very much in college or anything like that, but he was the star of the Alice football team.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you graduated, did you, did they tell you what rank you were or anything?
Speaker 2: You know, I was, I was the top ten.  But that's all I remember.  And, and that was the last graduation I attended.  So I actually did go to my graduation in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't go to any of the rest of 'em?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Story_ID: 23467
Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, University of Texas [in Austin, Texas].  Now, this is interesting.  You told us how, how you chose it and everything, but, you know, University of Texas was a, well, had a reputation as a pretty rough place for black people. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was, it [the University of Texas, Austin, Texas] was a rough place.  So the first thing, you know, you get there, and we were staying in, I was assigned to San Jacinto, dorm [dormitory] D.  Now, there're, black students, you know, it was segregated, housing was segregated.  So we had San Jacinto, dorm D, and we had Brackenridge.  Breckenridge was for the middle-class kids 'cause it cost like $140 a semester, and dorm D cost like $70 a semester.  So dorm D was much cheaper, and I was in dorm D.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is what, what, what year is it that you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: So I graduated in '63' [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, 19--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, wait a minute, I'm sorry.  I graduated from high school in '60' [1960].  I always confuse high school and college.  I graduated from high school in 1960.  I went to University of Texas in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So 1960, University of Texas, you're in Austin, Texas.
Speaker 2: Yeah at Austin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the dorms are segregated.  Now, this is, Texas, of all the southern states, has integrated as an integrated state, the state schools are integrated.  But like the--
Speaker 2: They had created Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] as a non-, you know, so that-- you know, before they integrated.  I mean so they were trying to avoid integration as long as they could.  So that sorta gives you a good, brief summary of what the history, history was in Texas.
Speaker 1: Right, but Alabama, Mississippi, you know, these other states had not integrated their schools--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: South Carolina.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Virginia, even, you know, they were, still completely segregated.
Speaker 2: On the other hand, like the athletics were still segregated.  So, you know, good, black football players were still having to leave the state.  But the school itself was integrated, and like I say, just remember that the black women lived in two women's dorms.  Black men lived in Brackenridge and San Jacinto.  And so, again, in terms of social interaction, it was very limited.  I mean I primarily socialized in the black community.  I mean I actually did have a few social skills at this point, and it was, but it was all within the black community.  I think I might have been in a, I played intramural basketball with whites.  But, you know, that was about, I don't remember that many clubs or anything like that. Well, there, there was sort of the math department, but the math department was unusual to say the least, because the math department was divided into third floor and fourth floor at the time.  And I don't remember which was which, but one of them was "applied" and one of them was "pure".  And since I was working with Dr. Curtis, and he was "applied", that meant I was "applied".  And the "applied" people couldn't have that much go to do with the "pure" people, and the "pure" people didn't have that much to do with the "applied" people.  We were two, two separate ships.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what, what do you mean by, what, what is meant by--is "pure" math more theoretical?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And like I said, that's the one that R. E. Moore, R. L. Moore, Robert E. Lee Moore was sort of the titular head of the "pure" math department.  He had this method which is called the 'Moore Method', and it's, it's, it's--that's, that's one of the reasons why I was interested in taking a class with him.  It's pure abstraction from first principle.  So he would--didn't let you go to the library, didn't let you read books.  He would give you a set of axioms and then you were supposed to develop, prove theorems using just those axioms.  And I don't know whether or not you could talk to the other students or what, but, you know, it's a well-known method of sort of purely abstraction in terms of dealing with math.  And Dr. Curtis and them, that group, you know, they'd give you a textbook, you'd read the textbook, you'd try to work the problems.  I mean it was a much more standard kind of a model of what teaching was about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and I know before we started, you, you, you said that at one time you thought about taking a course from Robert E. Lee Moore because he had such stature--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and another black student advised you of what the, what it might be like.
Speaker 2: A black told me that he had gone, he had actually, himself, personally gone to ask him--his name is Walker Hunt.  He later got a Ph.D. from the University of Texas.  He actually worked in pure math.  He worked with Ettlinger [Hyman Joseph Ettlinger] who was, I think--not number theory, but differential equations.  But Walker told me he had gone to Dr. Moore and asked him about taking a course with him, and Dr. Moore told him he was welcome to take the class, but his grade would start at a C and could only go down from there.  So Walker decided not to take it, and I decided I wouldn't even go ask.
Story_ID: 23468
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this is an interesting scenario in the South in those days.  Now, 1960, the year that John F. Kennedy was elected president and Lyndon B. Johnson from Texas becomes vice president, right?
Speaker 2: Didn't, didn't feel that, that much at the University of Texas.  But like I said, in 1962, when I was getting ready to graduate and the Civil Rights Movement was really starting to heat up, then that's the first time I sort of felt the effect of the national, what had happened, because John Connally was a good friend of Lyndon Johnson's and had been Secretary of Navy for John Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy], came back to Texas to run for governor.  And he and I--I was, I was involved in the Civil Rights Movement, but I wasn't a leader.  I mean, Lonnie Fogle was the, the actual leader of a lot of the demonstrations and things like that.  And actually, the Rice professor, Chandler Davidson, I think, was also a student there.  It was a white student who was very involved with that.  And I, I know they, they said that they had had these negotiations with so-called, I mean I think they thought they were representatives of Connally, trying to keep things peaceful so that he could run and be elected governor.  And he promised them, once he was elected governor, he would sort of deal with these issues.  And I think he kept things quiet enough.  He was elected governor, and he ignored it completely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in '62' [1962], '63' [1963], as I was getting ready to leave.
Speaker 1: So, now, Larry Fog-Lo-Lonnie Fogel, was he--he's a black student on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You say he was a leader of the Civil Rights activity.  Was he associated with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] or any of the major--
Speaker 2: No, no, this was, I think it was just, as far as I know, you know, it was just, it was a, you know, I don't know who else they were talking to, but as far as I understood it, this was a spontaneous movement, you know, the Civil Rights Movement was going on.  Hey, Austin isn't doing very much, you know.  We can't go to the movie theaters on the drag.  We can't go to, we could go to restaurants on campus, but once you got off campus, it was like totally segregated.  And so why don't we, you know, get these things, you know, have some demonstrations in front of them.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the organization?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It, there's--actually, they have a website that sort of has a lot of stories about that.  It's called 'Standings and Dirty Nothings'.  I can give you the, the web site.
Speaker 1: It's called, I'm sorry, what is it called?
Speaker 2: I think it's called 'Standings and Dirty Nothings' or something like that.  I've, I've got the website bookmarked, okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay, but, but, you know, it was a group of students which was led by students, and I don't think they had, you know, any particular--I, but I'm not, I'm not positive, affilia-national affiliations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Their primary target was the drag which was the commercial area around the University of Texas.
Speaker 1: So this in Austin, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the area that deals with students and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, the--
Speaker 1: --food and--
Speaker 2: --bookstore is there--
Speaker 1: --bookstore.
Speaker 2: --and the restaurants and the movies were all there, once you got off campus.  Now, movies on campus, of course, were desegregated, but once you go off campus, then, you know, I don't know if they didn't admit blacks, or 'cause I, I know, I never went.  So I always went to movies on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did, were there, were national speakers coming to campus?
Speaker 2: I don't, I really don't remember hearing anybody.  I heard Martin Luther King [Jr.] once, but that was when I was a graduate student at Rice, and I heard him over at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Yeah, so I don't remember any national speakers coming to the University of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, not any black ones anyway?
Speaker 2: Not black ones.  I mean I, I did, I was involved with some organization which brought speakers to campus, and we had a so-called, a radical named Paul Goodman, who came and gave a talk.  But that, that's about the most that, that, that I recall.  I don't remember any, you know, like I said, I don't remember a Stokely Carmichael or a Martin Luther King or anybody like that being on campus at Texas.
Story_ID: 23469
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you're basically, your mentor there is really Dr. Curtis, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so, what were you learning about math, and what, what were you seeing as your career track?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, so I have to go back a little bit to high school.  I mean I, when I got out of high school, I knew I wanted to do science, but I had no idea what science was, except that I knew I didn't like physics and chemistry because I broke things in lab.  So I figured math was the safest course for me, and then, so I go to Dr. Curtis, and that's sort of when I started finding out what math was like.  He gave me a reading course, and so I basically learned my math.  Again, I was advanced compared to some of the students, but on the other hand, you know--so I didn't quite fit in.  And so he gave me a reading course and calculus and I did two semesters of calculus with him.  And then I started taking the regular courses, and, again, he would advise me about which course to take and with whom.  And that went on for two years.
Speaker 1: So you had a couple of years of prep, I guess, with him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --just reading without--
Speaker 2: One year, just one year.
Speaker 1: One year--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --outside of class activity.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Just studying the lay of the land, getting up to speed.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean Mr. Orear had taught, had had these, you know, this was Sputnik, okay.  So Sputnik had happened in '57' [1957].  So after Sputnik, he had created these early morning classes.  We'd go and do algebra, believe it or not, can you imagine kids not going to football, but we'd go like before class for an hour and study math.  And so I did that.  So I had extra training, but I had never had calculus.  And so what Dr. Curtis suggested was that I take this book.  I remember it was called Haaser, La Salle and Sullivan.  And I would read it, and then I would come and talk to him.  And he'd, you know, ask questions about it, and I'd do problems and things like that.  So basically, I took a reading course with him on calculus.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the book called 'cause you said it so fast?
Speaker 2: Hasser, H-A-A-S-E-R, Lasalle, L-A-S-A-L-L-E, and Sullivan.  I just remember it very well 'cause that, you know, that was my introduction to calculus.
Story_ID: 23470
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, and, well, just kind of explain it to people what the atmosphere was, that was created by Sputnik in the United States.
Speaker 2: I mean it was absolute panic and fear, in the sense that they, they really felt like, oh, that either the Russians are gonna go past us and, you know, we're gonna be left in the dust scientifically and every other way 'cause, you know, Sputnik went up before the, and shortly after--we had been working a space program too.  But then shortly after Sputnik, which they launched successfully, we tried to launch one and it blew up on the launch, launch pad.  So, you know, that just reinforced this idea that we're falling behind scientifically.  NSF [National Science Foundation], I think really started creating these programs to, you know train more scientists and things like that.  I think that's one of the things that Mr. Orear had participated in when he went to University of Texas [in Austin, Texas], that was, training of high school teachers.  And so, so that's where a lot of people started thinking about doing science, as a result of that.  And unfortunately, I think a lot of those people are my age, and they're getting ready to retire.  And there's not the same kind of level of interest in going into science now that it was then.  But there was a real panic at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a big a push to--
Speaker 2: Big push.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 23471
Speaker 1: So, did, now, did, so was your--I mean did other students in, in the department [mathematics department at the University of Texas, in Austin, Texas] basically accept you, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no, no big deal.  In fact, I mean again, the, the "applied" [applied mathematics] students hung together.  I remember 'cause I have a, have--there's a white student named Gentry Lee, who I think later, he, he worked at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] for a while, and now he, he became a science fiction writer, okay.  But, you know, he and I were the "applied" students and we were supposed to compete in this contest that Texas had.  And I remember (laughter) him telling me, "Well, you know, we should study hard and prepare for the text."  You know, the Moore students are gonna win.  So we can forget about winning.  It's--that, that's not the thing.  But, you know, we, we participated.  We enjoyed it, and I, I got to know him fairly well.  And then he went off, he graduated, and like I say, he went to work for NASA and then became a science fiction writer.  But, so I remem--I have a lot of pleasant memories, no memories of interaction with any Moore students or anything like that, you know.  I mean they were, they were on the fourth floor or wherever, and we, that was a world apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember much about any of the other classes you took at the University of Texas?
Speaker 2: Only one, believe it or not.  And that was in my--well, I remember my advanced calculus class 'cause that was taught by a young professor who was very, very nice.  And so I remember that was the good class.  And then I took a lin-linear algebra class in my last year, in my senior year.  This was just, I'm getting ready to go off--well, I didn't know I was getting ready to go off to graduate school.  I just took a, took this class.  And the grader was a black woman named Vivian Mays, who it turns out was the ninth person to get a Ph.D., ninth woman, ninth black, maybe, and the fourth or fifth woman to get a Ph.D. in mathematics.  She was working on a Ph.D. with Dr. Edmundsen who was an applied mathematician.  So, and, and she was grading the course.  And she was very, very nice and helpful to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, what about courses in the liberal arts?  Do you remember any of those?
Speaker 2: The one I remember most was, I took a couple of poetry classes.  I was sort of fascinated with English literature, and I'd been so terrible with the words and things like that.  And so I took a course with Dr. Buford, reading courses on poetry and things like that.  But I think it convinced me that I didn't have it as an English major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I said, also, I met Dr. Silver because Dr. Silver was the philosophy professor, but he wanted to integrate the Silver Spurs, so I, I went and talked to him about letting him use my theta--
Speaker 1: Well, tell that story.  Now, this is, the Silver Spurs are what now?
Speaker 2: Okay, so the Silver Spurs was a service organization, and I don't know exactly what they did.  I mean I know that they, they would come out before the football games or something like that, you know, but then I think in general, they were supposed to do service projects around campus.  And they had always, I mean you supposedly got into it by grade-point average [GPA], but they had always been all white.  And Dr. Silver, who was a philosophy professor, wanted to see if they, why couldn't they integrate.  And so he asked me if he could, you know, recommend me to it.  And I remember sitting in his office, you know, 'cause he has one arm.  And so that's, that's, for a kid from Alice [Texas], this was very unusual.  Plus, you're talking to a professor, which is pretty unusual, I mean--there were some professors who were very nice.  There was a guy named Erwin Spear, who had the whole biology class over to his house for, you know, hors d'oeuvres or something like that, you know.  So I had met a few professors, but, you know, to actually be in a professor's office and talking to John Silver was quite an experience.  I had been with Dr. Curtis' office, but, you know, that was different, in the math department.  And so I agreed to let him do it, but nothing came of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he submitted your name, but they didn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, um-hum.  They (laughter) turned it down.
Speaker 1: No reaction.
Story_ID: 23472
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1963, this is your last--this is when you graduate.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, this is also, this is a big year in a lot of, in the Civil Rights Movement for a lot of reasons.  They, Medgar Evans was killed--
Speaker 2: That summer--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Metgar Evans was killed in the beginning of the summer, the March on Washington takes place in August, I guess.  Sixteenth Street Baptist Church--
Speaker 2: Was that '64' [1964] though?  Was that--
Speaker 1: No, that's Alabama, those--and Birmingham was blown up that same summer.
Speaker 2: That was the same summer, okay. And then JFK's [President John F. Kennedy] assassinated.
Speaker 1: So I was at Rice [Rice University, in Houston, Texas] when JFK was assassinated.  But, but so let me get to graduate school, which, again, I had no idea what graduate school was until Dr. Curtis said I should consider going to graduate school.  And, you know, I had no idea, but he suggested it, so--and he told me that he was a student at Rice.  And Rice was getting ready to desegregate.  So he, I should consider applying to Rice.  And he said that there'd been an added advantage because he was gonna be spending sabbatical at Rice.  So at least, when I came to Houston, I'd have somebody that I knew, you know, around.  So I applied to Rice, and I was accepted.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did you know anybody that went to the March on Washington that summer or--
Speaker 1: So that summer, no.  I, I came, so I came to Houston in June of 1963.  And I spent the whole summer preparing to go to graduate school in the fall.  And so, no, I, I didn't know anybody.  I mean the only people I met were my classmates at Rice who were about six, six students.  And we spent the whole summer preparing for--I couldn't have afforded to go to the March on Washington.
Story_ID: 23473
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, tell us about the will of William Marsh Rice, I guess?
Speaker 2: So when I say that the university had decided to desegregate, I mean, you know, Texas had desegregated because Herman Sweat sued, but Rice [Rice University, in Houston, Texas] actually decided to desegregate.  Now, William Marsh Rice's will had specified that Rice was supposed to be a university for white citizens of Texas.  And they had gone to court, I think in the '40s [1940s] to break the citizens of Texas, to allow people from outside of Texas to come to school.  So they thought it was gonna be straightforward to break the white part also because they saw the changes coming in terms of federal contracts and things like that.  And so they wanted to break it.  But, so when I, I was admitted, I think the assumption was that it was gonna be straightforward.  And I came that summer.  I took the classes, and in the middle of the summer, as I recall, I was told that two alumni had sued to prevent them from breaking William Marsh Rice's will.  And so I talked to Jim Douglas who was the, my main contact, and was chair of the math department.  And he said that I couldn't be admitted as a student in the fall.  So what they were gonna do was make me a research associate.  And as a research associate, employee, I could take all the courses I wanted.  So I'd just go ahead and take courses as though I was a regular student.  But, in fact, I would be a research associate for the first year.  And for some reason, probably because it was so late when this all happened, I decided to go ahead and do it.  I mean, you know, looking back, there's a risk, you know, because I mean they might not have won the suit, and then I would have been out of a year.  But, you know, I was young, and so I would have one more year, I gave back, I guess.  So I said, okay, I'll go ahead and try it.  So I spent the first year as a research associate.  I took classes.  I was paid, you know, as an employee of Rice University.  I, some time in the middle of the spring, the decision was announced that they had won the suit.  So the next summer, in 1964, next fall of 1964, I was admitted as a regular student.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you got credit for the courses you took?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23474
Speaker 1: Alright, so--
Speaker 2: But then I let--one other thing about 1963 that's memorable for me, since you mentioned it, was that, you know, I was here as a research associate.  And we were playing touch football one evening in November, and that's when I found out that J.F.K. [President John F. Kennedy] had been assassinated.  He had just been in Houston the day before, and now he was, had gone from Houston to Dallas, and that was quite a shock.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about J.F.K. in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I absolutely loved him.  He is my favorite president by far, you know, and so that was, that was a huge shock.  And I, the same as most everybody else, I went home and watching it on T.V., and, you know, glued to the T.V. for the next three or four days.
Speaker 1: Why do you think so many black people loved J.F.K.?
Speaker 2: You know, 'cause I wasn't alive for Roosevelt [President Franklin D. Roosevelt], and I have a, I thought probably a lot of people felt the same way about Roosevelt.  But he was the first president that I could identify with who seemed to really think that black people were equal to everyone else.  I mean, you know, and just, he felt like everybody should be treated equally.  Now, and then the fact that he proposed legislation about it, it was also, was a, you know, icing on the cake, but to me it was the fact that he really believed we were equal.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so Lyndon Johnson becomes the president.  Did you have much of an opinion about Lyndon Johnson then?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a very good opinion, I must admit.  That's based on my experience at, at Texas, you know, and he had been always so, so first of all, you know, there's a connection between Lyndon Johnson and Alice [Texas].  So that's, that's the first place.  Yeah, there's this famous story.  When he was elected in 1948, by eighty-seven votes, a lot of those votes came from San Diego, and San Diego was run by this boss named George Parr.  And so basically, he had stuffed the ballot box, you know, to help Lyndon Johnson, ensure Lyndon's election.  The story that I, I heard was, and I, I remember once growing up, I read it later--there was a young Mexican kid.  He was on the corner, and he was crying.  And they said, "What's the matter?"  He said, "My father, he came back from the dead to vote for Lyndon Johnson, but he didn't come see me."  So, you know, (laughter) it was--but it was serious because there was an attorney in Alice whose name was, I think it was Moyers, but you can definitely look it up.  And he was fighting the Parr machine.  And he was assassinated in Alice.  I mean he came home one evening and somebody was waiting in a tree or waiting in a driveway and shot him, killed him, and, you know, because he had been trying to dig up what was going on.  That was in the late '50s [1950s] or when I was in high school, something like that.  So--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --that, that was my background with Lyndon Johnson.
Speaker 1: So was this Moyers related to Bill Moyers?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, I don't know.  He was a lawyer in Alice, and so I don't, you know, I--and his name may not be Moyers.  I mean I, I--there was a famous reporter named, I think her name is Caro Brown [Pulitzer Prize winner, 1954] or something like that, who covered the case.  And she got a Pulitzer Prize for covering the case.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I think they eventually found, you know, who had actually done the murder, and I don't know, I don't think they were able to trace it back.  But, but it happened in Alice.  That was the thing I remember at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is big drama.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so--
Speaker 2: Lyndon Johnson was elected president.  I mean, given I had that sort of background about him, I didn't expect much.  But I must admit, except for the Vietnam War, I was actually very surprised and very pleasantly surprised.
Speaker 1: Right, right, he seemed to really do a lot to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, absolutely, and, and, and you know--
Speaker 1: --to enforce--
Speaker 2: --in a way that I didn't realize, he also seemed to really believe that everybody was equal.  So that's, that's--Kennedy had, I don't think Johnson expressed that as much when he was still the senator from Texas because he knew he still had to run in Texas.  But when he became president and was freed of having to just run in Texas, I mean he really was a, a great president.
Story_ID: 23475
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we were discussing too off camera that one of your fellow students was Dr. Frank Ryan, I mean who became Dr. Frank Ryan, anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was still a graduate student [at Rice University, in Houston, Texas] when I got here, and he was already playing, so he had graduated and he was playing professional football.  And what would happen was, he would leave in September or August and then come back in like January, after the football season was over.  And then he would be here with us, you know, for the rest of the time.  And as I mentioned to you, he would play basketball with us.  He was great 'cause he was 6'3" and he could dominate all of us, except we had a student named Don Williams, who was able to neutralize him by standing on his foot, (laughter) and then he couldn't jump quite as high.  But, you know, so he, he would play basketball, but he never played touch football with us, and we never understood why 'cause we knew he was much better than we were at football, but as I say, I finally discovered it was probably because of his contract that said he wasn't supposed to do that type of activity.  But he would play basketball with us and, and things like that.  He was a great, all around, just a nice guy and a very smart guy.  He worked in complex analysis.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he became later the quarterback of the Cleveland Browns--
Speaker 2: The Cleveland Browns, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when they won the last NFL Championship game--
Speaker 2: Before the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, before the merger.
Speaker 2: --merger, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And then he also came to Washington and became a Washington Redskin, backing up Sonny Jorgensen in the last few years of his career.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  Dr. Frank Ryan, okay.
Story_ID: 23476
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you're, let's see you were here from '63' [1963] to--
Speaker 2: Sixty eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '68' [1968].  So what happened was, I didn't graduate until '69' [1969], okay, but in '68' [1968], my advisor, Jim Douglas--.  So Jim Douglas was, I mean how, how, how I chose him as an advisor was that was, you know, difficult to figure it out, but I finally decided that Jim was gonna be my advisor.  And he was the chairman of the department [of mathematics, Rice University, in Houston, Texas], and he had been trying to get this mathematician, this well-known mathematician named Francois Treves, to come to Washington.  And I don't know what happened exactly.  You know, I'm a graduate student so I don't know exactly what's going on.  But I know after that failed and Treves decided to go to Rutgers--he didn't come to Rice [University]--he didn't come to Houston, that in the next year, Jim went to the University of Chicago [in Chicago, Illinois].  So basically, in 1969, he, he, he tells, in '68' [1968], he tells us he's going to the University of Chicago.  And so he had like two or three students, and so we had to go to the University of Chicago with him.  And there was also some students who were, had finished, one of my classmates, Jeff Lewis, had gotten a job at the University of Illinois in Chicago.  Another classmate who had just finished, Max Yeodyte (ph.) got a job at the University of Chicago, or had a job at the University of Chicago and Richard Sailor had a job at the University of Chicago.  So there was like this migration of people from Houston to, to Chicago.  I went as a graduate student.  Todd DuPont was another student of Jim's.  He went, and then these other two went as professors.  And so there was a group of six or seven Texans who all of a sudden are in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, I've just discovered we've gone a little bit too fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I need to go back to 1964 before we get you to Chicago.  But we, we'll--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --now, tell us about Nancy Stookesberry (ph.) Cole, Nancy Stookesberry Cole.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, now, I don't, that must have been in, it's 1964, and what happened was the Public Accommodations Act, I think had been passed at that time.  So theoretically, all restaurants are desegregated, right, except in Houston, it's spotty.  So Nancy Cole decided to organize a bunch of students from Rice and TSU [Texas Southern University, in Houston, Texas], and we were gonna go in pairs to these restaurants to see if we'd actually get admitted, admitted to the restaurants.  And frequently, we got tossed.  I mean we didn't, they, they, they--the law said we were supposed to be able to be admitted to the restaurants.  In fact, we would get tossed.  We would not get served.  We would not get admitted to the restaurant and so on.  But, for me, that's where I met my wife, Claudette Smith.  She was a TSU student, and I was a Rice student.  Jeff Lewis was the one who was a student at Rice that got me, you know, involved in it.  He invited me to come, so I went along with him.  But I met Claudette, and we started dating and eventually, we were, we married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Nancy Stookesberry Cole, that, that's a black student too, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, she's white.
Speaker 1: No, it was a white student.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a white student.
Speaker 1: That's why I asked 'cause the name Stookesberry sounded--
Speaker 2: Yeah, later, she was, I think the president of the, one of the college boards or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, yes, she, she and somebody else at TSU must have been the ones that organized it.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] was another big year in Civil Rights--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's Freedom Summer down in Mississippi and the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City.
Speaker 2: And, and the Public Accommodations Act and, you know, so, yeah, that was a big year.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So, now, there's a Hindu-Puerto Rican story, I think you should tell too.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So that was 1963, though, actually, 'cause that's when I first came.  And, and the first summer, Rice put us up in a dorm, so as I said, we were all supposed to study for our, you know, getting ready for graduate work.  So we were all studying, and we were put up in a dorm.  And I met some other students here.  One was a first year, like me.  The other one was Jeff Lewis who had actually, was in his second year here.  And at the end of the summer, we decided to get an apartment together.  So we looked, and I don't remember whether I went with them to look.  But anyway, we got an apartment on Alameda, and then at the end of the summer, my friend, Howard Jefferson from the University of Texas [in Austin, Texas], he had got a job teaching in Houston.  So he came down, and he had come over to talk to me, and he'd come over to talk to the guys.  And eventually, you know, he really liked the guys, so sometimes we'd eat together.  We'd fix dinner there.  Sometimes we'd go out and get something to eat.  So he was hanging around quite a bit.  He was around quite a bit with the guys, and he really liked them.  And then that's when the manager came to me and said that he had some complaints from some of the residents 'cause this black guy was visiting the apartment so much.  And I said, what about me, you know, I'm visiting the apartment all the time.  And he said, you're okay.  You're Puerto Rican, you know, so, then the same, the next day or the next night, the night manager came in.  And he had evidently had the same message he was supposed to deliver to me.  And so we have more or less the same conversation, except when I say, well, what about me?  He says, oh, you're okay.  You're Hindu.  So they had decided somehow (laughter) that I was okay, but my friend, Jeff, wasn't.  And so basically, we ended up moving.  So that's why, but that's how I became the world's only Hindu-Puerto Rican (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, that's a bizarre story.  It says something about the--
Speaker 2: The times.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there many foreign students on campus in those days?
Speaker 2: You know, I think there were, but, but, so. so one of my best friends was Cece Tu who was a Chinese student, and there weren't that many in the math department, but the math department program was very small, very, very small.  But, you know, there was, there were always one or two students on, on campus.  So I don't, no, I think this was just rationalization.  And I don't know whether they didn't actually see me when we were applying for the apartment.  If Jeff and Bob Bonner who were the two people I was living with had gone over to actually get the apartment or what had happened, but I, I called it rationalization after the fact.
Story_ID: 23477
Speaker 1: Okay, and while at Rice, you were working on the area of harmonic analysis.
Speaker 2: No, that's actually later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I started out working in partial differential equations with Jim Douglas.  So, so I was working in partial differential equations with Jim Douglas.  When I graduated and got out on my own, I started working in harmonic analysis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But with Jim, I was working primarily in partial differential equations.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us something about Jim Doug-, Douglas before--
Speaker 2: Oh, Jim, I could tell you so many stories and most of them are probably apocryphal, but, but Jim was a classic Texan.  He, the stories that I recall the best are, and, unfortunately, it's a sad situation.  We, we, we were in this place called Anniston Hall, and in Anniston Hall, they had this lectern in the room that he would lecture in.  And, you know, the sociology people would stand there and put their notes on it. But, you know, he thought it was an irritation.  So he'd just, every time he'd come in, he'd have to put it down on the floor.  So he'd clear the space, and he could write on the board.  But then one day his father had died, I think the day before.  And he came in, and he--and again, I don't think I was there.  I just heard the story, he came in and the lectern was there, and he was pissed.  And so he picked up the lectern and took it loose from the stand and threw it through the glass door of the office.  I mean, you know, there was a glass door leading into the room.  And he just, he had picked it up enough times, and he had it, you know, and so he just threw it.  And we all were like, okay, that's Douglas.  And then the other one was, that, I heard that, you know, he was like L.B.J. [President Lyndon B. Johnson], he talked and gesticulated when he talked, and stuff like that. And he was talking on the phone day, and he was gesticulating and he pulled the phone out of the jack.  And this wasn't, you know, in the old days, you didn't have the little simple thing where you just go put it back in.  I mean, you, he literally pulled the phone out of the wall.  So they said he picked the phone up, and he walked out to the secretary, and he said, the phone's broke, get it fixed (laughter), didn't say that he had broken it.  But, you know, just, get it fixed.  And that was the way he was.  But he was very, very nice to me.  He was, he didn't think very much about graduate students.  He thought we didn't work hard enough.  But he thought I was a graduate student who didn't work hard enough and everybody else didn't.  It wasn't like I was black and didn't work hard enough.  I was a graduate student, and because I was a graduate student, that meant--but, you know, in terms of everything else, he treated us all the same.  So, you know, he had us over to his house.  The other story I remember from, and one time we were at his house and, you know, doing what graduate students do, talking about philosophy and, you know, is there a God or what's the universe like and stuff like that.  And he walked up, and he heard what we were talking about, and he said, "I did that 20 years ago," and walked away, (laughter), you know, and we're, we're thinking, well, we're talking about all these important issues, and he just says, I (unclear) (laughter), and he was right, as always, as always.  But, you know, so then when he went, when he decided to go to Chicago, I guess I had to make a choice, but I had two years in working with him, so I decided to go to Chicago with him.  And that turned out to be extremely valuable for me in the sense that he was the new guy on the block in Chicago, and so, you know, he spent a lot more time with me as a final-year student in the sense that, you know, you just come up and talk and stuff like that because I think he was still getting to know his colleagues.  And actually, he got a student who had an office, to share an office with me, and he had been working with somebody else, but that professor had moved to another university.  And so he eventually switched to working with Jim Douglas.  His name was Harold Meyer, and so he'd come up and talk to Harold and I, you know, for, for an hour or two or something like that.  So it was, it was very useful in the sense of getting to know him as a person 'cause I remember it was, I was in the office one day with him, and this--I was, loved Chicago.  I mean Chicago is a wonderful city.  We were living in Hyde Park, you know.  We'd go downtown, ride the train, had all these, all this, access to all this stuff.  So I was having a wonderful time, but he came in one January, and he said, isn't it about time you graduate (laughter)?  And, actually, my answer would have been no, but he was my advisor, so I had to say, okay, I'll get to work on it.  And so by the end of the summer, I finished my dissertation and came back and defended it at Rice and went off to get a job.
Story_ID: 23478
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: So my dissertation was called, 'Unique Continuation for Solutions of Second Order Parabolic Differential Equations'.  And Jim Douglas had done something about the heat equation, which is a particular second order equation, a parabolic equation, and he'd asked me to generalize it to general second order parabolic equations.  And so I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is it, is it--is there a way that you could explain that to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can, I can sort of explain to it, okay, I mean, but in terms of what Jim did, I can explain it.  I can't explain it in terms of what I did.  But basically, the, the question, the mathematical question is, it turns out that if I tell you the temperature of the earth right now, there's an equation to satisfy.  It's called the heat equation, and you could predict what the temperature will be at any time in the future, okay, if you know exactly what the temperature is, you could--now, if you have an error, if you make a small error, then you'll have an error in future times and the error, you sort of know how much it'll get, it'll get bigger.  So there'll be a larger and larger error over time, but on the other hand, you can sort of say close to precisely what the temperature is gonna be, assuming the model is correct and all that.  Well, it turns out for backward problems, that's not true.  If I tell you the temperature of the earth today, and ask you what the temperature of the earth was twenty years ago, then it's a completely--it's called an ill-posed problem.  And you'll make a much bigger error.  So if you, even if you knew exactly what the thing is today--and you don't know exactly 'cause you got to round off to something, you're gonna make a huge error as you go back in time.  And I think this was, Jim started it for something to do with the well, I'm sorry, oil, the oil industry, where somehow there's an equation that's sort of, you know, you wanna know what the, what the situation in the well was.  You know what the situation in the well is now.  You'd like to know what the situation in the well was five to ten years ago so you'll know what's gonna happen, if it's gonna go--blow up.  Now, I don't, I didn't know exactly the application, but the, the, the basic idea is, if you know the temperature now, you can predict what's gonna happen in the future.  You can't tell what happened in the past.  And the question was, we know that for the heat equation--he had done that, he showed that it has what they called held irregularities.  So the error is gonna be bad, but it's not gonna be so bad as you go backwards in time. And I showed the same thing for a more general class of equations.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 23479
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, so you start looking for a job.  This is 1969.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight, '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: '68 [1968], '68' [1968]--
Speaker 2: So this is, yeah, I started in '68' [1968].  I started in January of '68' [1968], looking for a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you--okay, January of '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I'm gonna graduate in '69' [1969].
Speaker 1: And are you looking for a job in Chicago or--
Speaker 2: So, so, no.  The way that happened was very simple.  When he, when he said I should graduate, and once he decided that I had enough material to graduate, he said, where would you like to work?  And I had no idea.  So I went and asked my wife, Claudette [Smith], and she'd gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia] as an undergrad for two years, and then she'd gone to TSU [Texas Southern University, in Houston, Texas] to finish.  But she liked the experience in Washington [District of Columbia], so she said, you know, I'd like to go to Washington or some place on the east coast.  So I actually just came back and told Douglas, well, some place on the east coast, like Washington would be nice.  And he made a phone call, and the next day he told me I had a job at the University of Maryland [in College Park, Maryland].  So it was that simple.  I mean I didn't, I didn't go do a job interview.  I mean, you know, he, he did all the negotiating and the next thing I know I have a job offer from the University of Maryland.
Speaker 1: He's almost like LBJ.  If he could just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, really, he was a, he was a true Texan.  He is a true Texan 'cause he's still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so University of Maryland, College Park.  Now how long had they been integrated basically?
Speaker 2: So in terms of integration, Parron Mitchell, who was a congressman was the first student to get a degree from there.  I think he got his about '63' [1963].  So probably a little bit later than the University of Maryland--I mean University of Texas [in Austin, Texas], but, you know, somewhere around the same time as University of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I got there, I was probably the third or fourth black faculty member.  There weren't, there weren't that many.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many, well, were there very many black students there?
Speaker 2: No, there was a very, very small number of black students also.  So, you know, that was, that, yeah, there was a very, very small black population.  And I, I, I think I said on the, the web site, I'm not sure, but, you know, the first thing I remember when I got to campus, so two things which showed my ignorance.  We had to get a place to stay because we didn't have a place to stay.  So we got a motel.  And the motel, it turns out we stayed at the Watergate Motel which is the place where the Watergate burglary took place, but this is '63' [1963].  I had nothing to do with--'69' [1969], '68' [1968], '69' [1969], I had nothing to do with it.  No, okay, actually, I have to correct the timing.  You're, you're, you're right.  I graduated, I came to Maryland in '68' [1968], okay.  So Douglas' conversation with me was actually January of '67' [1967].  I always say I graduated in '69' [1969] because I did, and what happened was, Rice [University, in Houston, Texas] didn't have December graduations.  So I came in the summer of '68' [1968] and defended my dissertation.  And actually, it was because I--that's right, I know it was in the summer because I let my friend Howard Jefferson use my apartment, and he was in my apartment when the tear gas happened in Grant Park [in Chicago, Illinois].  So, you know, it was definitely the summer of the Convention [Democratic National Convention] that I came back down here and defended.  And then I went off to the University of Maryland.  So, actually, it was '67' [1967] that, I guess, January of '67' [1967], when Douglas had the conversation with me.  Then in '68' [1968], I start at Maryland, but I didn't graduate from Rice until '69' [1969] because the next graduation was in May of 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that, yeah.
Story_ID: 23480
Speaker 1: So you were in Chicago when Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated then?
Speaker 2: I was in Chicago when Dr. King was assassinated.  I had been working with the R.F.--my wife and I were both working on Robert Kennedy's campaign.  We were canvassing in Gary, Indiana, and I remember very well the evening when I found out that Dr. King had been assassinated, yeah.
Speaker 1: April 4th, '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: 1968.
Speaker 1: And now you--
Speaker 2: Then I was also there when Robert Kennedy was assassinated that, that summer in June--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause again, that was a huge disappointment 'cause, you know, he had won or came close to winning the Indiana primary, and then he went off to California and then got assassinated in California.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, but the riots didn't really affect you--
Speaker 2: No, we were, we were in Hyde Park.  So, yeah, it didn't, it didn't affect us, but, you know, I mean--let's see so, the riots, yeah, they were after the King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination and I don't remember, I think they were worse in Washington, to tell you the truth, than they were in Chicago.  Wherever they were, they were down on the South side of Chicago and we didn't, we didn't see that, that much.  But when we got to Washington in the fall of '68' [1968], I mean you could see the after effects of the riots in Washington.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the major riot in Chicago was on the West side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on Madison Street, which is really all burnt out, really, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, see, well I just never went out there, I guess, 'cause I was in-- mostly in Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hyde Park's a long way away from the West side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But when I got to Washington, like I said, then we saw the effects of the assassination of Dr. King.
Story_ID: 23481
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, did they make you feel welcome at the University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: So, you know, at that time, there were so few black staff [at the University of Maryland, in College Park, Maryland], that there wasn't even a black faculty and staff association.  Later, after I'd been there, we developed a few more people and there was a black faculty and staff association.  And so I had some people that I could, you know, associate with, talk to, black faculty in different areas.  In the math department, it was like being a graduate student at Rice [Rice University in Houston, Texas] in the sense that we're, it's very insular.  We're all there together, okay.  And there were enough people who were very, very friendly.  The chairman, Brett Kirwan, was extremely nice.  He would, he and his wife, Patty--he's now the chancellor of the University of Maryland system, but, you know, he was always very, very nice, had a colleague named John Benedetto (ph.), who was Italo-American [Italian-American].  And he said that when, when he first came to Maryland, they had been worried because, you know, some of these Italians were kind of swarthy, and they were afraid he might look too much like a black person.  But, you know, he, he was extremely nice, and still is a good friend of mine.  So in terms of the department, I made lots of friends, and I had a very good time.  Once you were outside of the department, it was a southern campus.  I mean I'm, that's all there was to it at that time.  I mean when Brett became president, you know, it changed quite a bit.  But at that time, it was definitely a southern campus.
Speaker 1: And what's Brett's last, last name?
Speaker 2: Kirwan, K-I-R-W-A-N.
Speaker 1: Kirwan, okay, all right.  All right, so, okay.  Now, what--tell us about John Benedetto.
Speaker 2: Okay, John is the person who introduced me to harmonic analysis.  And that's how I switched, sort of, from PDE [partial differential equations] into harmonic analysis.  He and his wife, Cathy, lived in the same building that we lived in.  We, we, we were renting an apartment at 4800 Berwyn House Road.  And so, and they had a son, John Benedetto, and Claudette was pregnant with Malcolm.  So, you know, Cathy had a car and took me--when I got there, I didn't know how to drive.  And so at first Cathy was our lifeline because she would take Claudette to the grocery store, and that's how we got groceries.  I learned how to drive about two months before my son was born.  So I was able to drive her to the hospital for the delivery, but that was the first time I drove on my own, independently.  So it was, I cut it kind of close.  But Cathy was extremely helpful, and then John used to be somebody I would talk to in the math department.  And he was very friendly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is your introduction to harmonic analysis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what is harmonic analysis?
Speaker 2: So harmonic analysis is the study of--so for mathematicians, it's the Fourier transform or the Fourier series.  But basically, the idea is you have these harmonics, either the IKX.  They're- K is called the harmonic.  It's a frequency measure.  And the idea is that you can take a function and break it up into these harmonics, the sums of harmonics.  So it's simple decomposition of a function.  And then once you have the simple decomposition, the idea is, well, then you study the simple function, and if you can figure out the properties of that, you can figure out what's happening in general.  So that's what harmonic analysis is.  It's, there're two parts.  It's called spectral analysis, is breaking a function down into its spectral pieces.  And then spectral synthesis, taking those pieces and seeing if you can put 'em back together and get the function or get the information about the function.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, you became an associate professor in '72' [1972], I guess it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, so you're on the tenure track?
Speaker 2: Full professor in '80' [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what are some of the highlights of your--
Speaker 2: So, it, highlights or lowlights.  I think that--
Speaker 1: Well, both.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the lowlight, I mean it wasn't, it wasn't intentional, but, you know, Maryland [University of Maryland] had the situat-system where they would assign two people to be your mentors.  They were assigned, and I was assigned two people.  And they never actually came to talk to me and find out what was going on.  And so finally, one of them was kind of shocked because he discovered that I had written two or three papers and so he came in--he was very nice, and he said, he, he didn't realize that I had, you know, been doing so much work.  And the reason I had been doing so much work was I had shortly figured out that there were two possibilities.  I either wanted to stay at Maryland or I didn't.  And in either case, I needed to do publications.  So I was doing publications to prepare for either outcome.  And so they didn't even realize what was going on, but then they looked at the publications.  They did the evaluation and so I got tenure.  But I think that was one of the highlights, lowlights.
Story_ID: 23482
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so we were, all right, we were getting ready to talk about--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, yeah, so I'm tenured.  So, you know, I mean one of the things that I think people don't always realize, and I, I was fortunate enough to realize is, I said to myself, okay, I am now a forty-five-year fact at the University of Maryland [in College Park, Maryland].  I, I was twenty nine years old.  Assuming I could live to sixty-five or seventy, I'd be around for thirty-five, thirty-six years, and so that gave me time to do whatever I wanted to do.  And so I really took the attitude that, you know, I'm gonna be here for a while.  And I started working, and, and, you know, things went along I thought okay.  Then in 1977, Jim Donaldson, who I think may be one of the people you've also introduced, interviewed for The HistoryMakers, he, I had, he--I had met him in Chicago [Illinois].  So he was--
Speaker 1: The artist?
Speaker 2: No, this is Jim Donaldson, the math--
Speaker 1: Jim Donaldson, okay, Jim Donaldson.
Speaker 2: Jim Donaldson, yeah.  He's a dean at Howard [University, in Washington, District of Columbia] now.  He's stepping down this summer.  But he is a mathematician also.  And I had met him at the University of Illinois in Chicago when I was a student at Chicago.  And then he came to Howard as chairman of the math department at Howard.  And so we had been friendly and stayed in contact, you know.  You don't meet that many black mathematicians.  So we had, you know, stayed in contact when I, when he came to Howard.  And so in 1977, he told me that Howard was thinking about instituting a Ph.D. program in mathematics.  And he asked if I'd like to come over and join in the effort, participate in the effort.  And at that point, I was a little frustrated at Maryland [University of Maryland], and I wasn't sure.  So I said, okay, I'll try it.  And so I actually went over, and I spent two years on leave at Howard University, while they were setting up the Ph.D. program.  And I think it was a valuable experience for me, but I'll summarize my experience in the following way.  And this is actually, I think the conversation I had with Jim when I decided to go back to Maryland.  I said, I feel like that I'll have more influence as one out of eighty at Maryland than I have as one out of twenty-five at Howard.  And I, I really meant that in the sense that Howard was a very top-down place, stuff came from the administration and then it was decided, you know, and moved down, whereas at Maryland, I felt like things went from the bottom up.  And I had a chance to have some type of influence in Maryland.  So I went back to Maryland.  I got promoted in 1980, and I now was a full professor.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting analysis.  Many have said that the black colleges and uni-, universities are more autocratic, you know, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, I think that, I mean I think they are very good with students, okay, and that's, that's actually, when we talk about, you know, the black students that came to Maryland, that was one of their biggest hurdles, was that they were coming from a situation where they were, they ruled the universe.  I mean they, they really, life was organized around the students to try to make their life better, to make sure that they did well, to support them, nurture them and get them through.  And they came to Maryland, and here's this graduate program.  And, hey, go swim.  You know, I mean we're, we're gonna be here if you succeed, and we're gonna be here if you fail.  So good luck, and, you know, changing that attitude and, and conveying to the students that, okay, we're gonna, we're interested in making sure you succeed.  That was actually one of the biggest problems I had with Maryland.  Maryland just had, it, it, it was a big graduate school, and, you know, good luck, was the attitude toward students.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the autocrat-, autocracy, has a plus side in terms of the faculty.  The faculty really spent a lot of effort on the students, even more so than we did at schools like Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, Howard, being more paternalistic in that sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, because you're really looking out, but you're looking out for the students.
Speaker 1: But in that paternalism, comes a rigidity and hierarchy that--
Speaker 2: And I, I think Howard lost the wonderful opportunity in the sense that they were the premium black institution, and they didn't realize that schools like Maryland and schools like Rice all of a sudden started competing with them for the best black students.  And so they lost some students that they didn't have to lose because they weren't competing for it.  They didn't realize they were competing for them.  There had been years when they didn't have to compete for them, and all of a sudden, they really needed to compete for them.  And they weren't prepared for the competition.
Story_ID: 23483
Speaker 1: Okay, now,--
Speaker 2: So, so when I went back to Maryland as a full professor, I don't remember anything remarkable happening except that the one situation, okay, which I'll tell you about later.  If there's something before that, we can talk about it also, but it was in about 19--so, two things, I guess.  In 1987, Nelson Markley asked me to become graduate chair.  And so 'Associate Chair for Graduate Studies' is the name that they gave it later.  That meant I was responsible for recruiting and bringing to campus students and then trying to, you know, select them to make sure they had a good chance in our program, and then trying to help 'em get through the program to, to a degree.  And we hadn't done very well with black students.  I mean I had actually had an episode in the early '70s [1970s] when I first got there, where they had recruited some black students.  And I had done my best to try to help 'em.  But, you know, I realized that they really hadn't picked students who were well suited to the Maryland program.  So I worked as hard as I could with them, but, you know, they had deficiencies, it was a long way, so, so, to go.  And we were successful in the sense that, you know, I think they got masters and things like that.  I actually had had one of the brightest students I have ever seen, black students, who we lost.  But we lost him to the streets.  I mean basically he had been smoking marijuana when he was in college, and he had been successful at it.  Then he got to college and graduate school, and he started smoking marijuana, and, you know, he couldn't, couldn't do both.  And he basically ended up choosing the marijuana I think over--so that, that was a real loss.  Almost all the students I lost, I would characterize it as losing to life, not the mathematics.  There were issues outside of mathematics that they just really couldn't, couldn't, couldn't get control over.  But when I became graduate chair, I remember one thing, one episode, in particular.  I had just gotten there, and I was determined to get some black students.  And I got a call from the University of North Texas [in Denton, Texas] about a graduate student, black graduate student, who was basically leaving their program, and they recommended him for our program.  And, you know, I, I think the problem that a lot of students make, sorry, schools make, mistakes that they make when they try to do this is they say, well, we'll just get anybody.  We wanna get some numbers and get people in here.  But I actually looked at the student, and and, my feeling was the student was not good enough for Maryland.  Now, that's the subjective judgment.  I could have been wrong.  But I turned him down, and I turned him down, and when I turned him down, I said, you know, I really have to find some real students.  If I'm gonna turn this student down, I've gotta find some students.  And we, we did find some students, and we started bringing in the students into the, the program.  At first, it's like one or two, but gradually, we got a group of three, four, five students in the program at Maryland.  And then my term ended.  You have three years as graduate chair.  So I left the graduate chairmanship, and I went back and doing my regular duties.
Story_ID: 23484
Speaker 1: But then the next year--so, actually, I got a call from the Math Association of America, which was one of the national math societies.  And they were gonna set up an office of diversity in the math and, MAA office.  And they wanted me to head it.  They were talking to me about the possibility of heading it.  And I said, again, that was a time when I, I thought there was a chance I could become chairman of the math department in Maryland.  And I thought I could probably do more if I were chairman of the math department at Maryland than if I was head of this big national diffuse, you know, theoretically, you could affect more people, but realistically, you know, the policies are gonna be set by a board and stuff like that.  And you're just not gonna have as much control.  So I turned them down and stayed at Maryland.  And I was selected chair.  I was actually elected chair in 1991.  Now, I have to say, election is a, you, you have to be a little bit careful.  They have an election, and they have a search committee.  And so I was surprised that I actually won the election as well as being picked by the search committee.  So I became chairman.  And when I became chairman, then we had, we actually had a racial incident in the math department.  What happened was, there were some students who were sitting in the lounge.  And one of the faculty members came in and he was saying how, you know, we're bringing in all these black students, and they're not really that qualified, and, you know, they, they, they just, they don't belong here.  And the students heard it, and they went to complain to the program director, the graduate program director, not the--the assistant to the graduate chair, not the graduate chair herself.  She was a woman named Janet Cooper, and she was very friendly.  And so they went and told her, but what we were surprised about was, first, one student came in and told her.  And then a second student came in and told her, and he didn't know the first student.  These were both black students who were complaining about what had happened in the lounge.  And they didn't know each other.  So we said, okay, we need to make sure that they know each other.  And I think what had happened was, they felt like they were on a white campus.  The power structure was white, everything was white.  They were supposed to hang with the regular students.  They weren't supposed to talk to each other.  And all we wanted to tell 'em was, no, you can talk to each other too.  You can talk to the white students.  We encourage you to, but, you know, talk to each other too.  So we actually scheduled a, kind of a meet and greet.  It was a--, just a dinner, you know, you catered some wings or something like that for the students to meet each other.  And they started talking to each other, and then I started, as chair, I started meeting with them periodically.  I'd say at least about once a month.  I would just send out an invitation and say, you know, you can come.  Sometimes I would bring somebody from off campus, and actually, the first one was because there was somebody from off campus who wanted to recruit.  And so I said, you know, this guy from NSA [National Security Agency] is gonna be here.  Anybody who wants to talk to him, come on, and we'll talk.  And we sat there for an hour and, and talked.  And essentially what happened over time, was they really started talking to each other.  And that was the, the thing that we really wanted.  We didn't realize how important it was, but it turned out to be extremely important, and that's, I think, what made it possible for the black students to succeed.  I remember after I stepped down as chair, and I'm just a faculty member again, and I got a, a note from somebody.  And it said, "So and so is going to be defending his thesis next week.  Would everybody come to such and such a room at four o'clock to ask him questions?"  And so I, it was first time I had seen anybody, anything like this, but I went down there.  And the students, the other black students were there.  He presented what he was gonna present as his doctoral dissertation defense.  They asked questions, okay.  Two days later I went to his regular doctoral dissertation defense.  I don't think the faculty asked any harder questions than he had already been asked by the other students.  And so, you know, they were helping each other prepare, for they were studying together for exams.  And that's what it made it possible for so many of 'em to, to succeed.
Story_ID: 23485
Speaker 1: What did, did they have a, a name for the organization or just a--
Speaker 2: It was just the black students.  And, in fact, they got an award called 'The Golden Geese' because they said that people who fly together, but they, they didn't call themselves anything.  They just stuck together.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they presented the Golden--
Speaker 2: They got the 'Golden Geese Award' because they, they presented it to the black graduate students in the math department because they hung together the most, you know, and sort of flew in formation.
Speaker 1: All right, okay (laughter).  Now, you received in '86' [1986], you received the Distinguished Minority Faculty Award.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, who is this award given by?
Speaker 2: It was given, so, so, again, as I say, when I first got to Maryland, there weren't enough black faculty to have an organization, but eventually, in the late '80's [1980s], no early '80's [1980s], they created a Black Faculty and Staff Association.  And they gave an award to the distinguished minority faculty.  The only thing was, I split it with somebody, so it, it was, it was an interesting situation.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause there're, I know there's a national, is it called the National Math--
Speaker 2: National Association of Mathematicians.  That's the black, yeah, the, the, the main professional societies for mathematicians is the American Assoc--American Mathematical Society.  That's the researchers.  Then the MAA, is Mathematical Association of America.  That's the, primarily, the college teachers and researchers alone, but their focus is more on teaching.  And then the National Association of Mathematicians is for black mathematicians.  And it sort of combines both because there's not enough of us to sort of have an organization of teachers and an organization of researchers.  So this is, this is both.
Speaker 1: Okay, and have you been a part of that before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been a part of that group.  Let's see, so they, they actually, they asked me to give, they have an annual lecture, they have two annual lectures.  One is a research talk, and I gave that in 1975.  And then there's a general interests called 'The Cox-Talbert Talk', and I gave that, I think, in 2003.  There's an award back there that says whenever it is.  I've forgotten the exact, exact year, but it was in Baltimore, the meeting was in Baltimore.  And this was after we had had a lot of the black students had graduated, and so they asked me to give the Cox-Talbert Talk.
Story_ID: 23486
Speaker 1: Who, who is Cox-Talbert?
Speaker 2: So Elbert Cox is the first known American, black American to get a Ph.D. in mathematics--
Speaker 1: That's right, Elbert Cox.
Speaker 2: Okay, and Walter Talbert was a long-time professor of mathematics at Morgan State who did an excellent job of training lots of mathematicians.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Elbert Cox was the first black math Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And where, where, where did he get it?
Speaker 2: Now, you know, I, I, I have to look that up in the history book. [Cornell University, 1925] I think it was Yale, but I, you know, maybe, that, that may have been Boucher who was the first Ph.D., period.  His was in physics, and I think he was at Yale.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But I thought Cox might have been at Yale, but I'm not positive.  But, you know, that, that's an interesting story because most, many of the black Ph.D.s in math, after Cox, okay, got their degrees from J. R. Klein at the University of Pennsylvania [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And J.R. Klein was a student of R. L. Moore [Robert Lee Moore, faculty at the University of Texas in Austin, Texas], so here you have Moore, who refused to have anything to do with blacks.  And his student, J.R. Klein, is producing most of the really good black mathematicians for a long period of time.  And I think Moore wasn't happy about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he produced--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Klein produced Woodward and Butcher who were, were teaching at Howard, and Claiter, I think, who was a well-known--. The, the NAM [National Association of Mathematicians] research talk is named for Claiter, and he was a student of Klein also, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Klein produced all,--
Speaker 2: A lot of black Ph.D.s, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, at, at University of Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wow, okay.  So, all these connections--
Speaker 2: So, Moore, yeah, Moore, Moore didn't produce them himself, but (laughter), he must be frustrated that one of his students produced them.  But, you know, that's, again, another story that they told, that, that Moore went to hear this talk one time, you know, and guess--he just looked, he's looking at the list.  And he sees a topic, it looks like a topic of interest.  And he got to the talk and discovered that the speaker was black; he walked out and refused to listen to it.
Speaker 1: He's a true, old-school Texan.
Speaker 2: Yes, he--. That's right.
Story_ID: 23487
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, now, 2002, your first wife passed away, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's been a--now, how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: One, one son.
Speaker 1: Just one son?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your son's name?
Speaker 2: Malcolm, Malcolm Patrice Johnson.  We really stuck it to him (laughter).  We named him for Malcolm X and Patrice Lumumba.
Speaker 1: Two great heroes who--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --both wore glasses.
Speaker 2: And both of whom were dead (laughter) at the time, so that was a--but he's, he's turned out okay.  He survived it well.
Speaker 1: Now, how, I mean do you, I mean so it says something about what you were thinking at the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: You, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, and also, he was born in 1969 which is a year after--well, not a year after, yeah, a year after Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Robert Kennedy assassinations.  And I guess the other thing we were thinking about was, you know, a lot of people are gonna be naming their kids Martin and Robert, so we wanted to go a different direction.  And I guess Malcolm X had been killed at that point.
Speaker 1: '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: '65 [1965], so, you know, but, we, we felt Malcolm was deserved.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lumumba in '61' [1961], I think.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, he deserved, yeah, as I said, my son didn't appreciate it later on (laughter), but he, he appreciates it now.
Speaker 1: All right, well, what did he--
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, I mean he just--first of all, Patrice is, you know, gender neutral, and so he sort of wanted to be Patrick or something like that.  We said, no, no, it's Patrice.  And so he just, Malcolm P.  And Malcolm, he never had any problem with.  He was (unclear).  He, he may, I think he, actually, when he learned about Malcolm X, he was very pleased with, with that name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Patrice is you know, French pronunciation--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it sounds effeminate to people.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, that was the only problem.  So he was, he was Malcolm P.
Speaker 1: All right, so, you all, I mean you were choosing your--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --activists pretty carefully then, in those days too, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 23488
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2007, now, I don't wanna skip over anything, so tell me if I am.  2007 when you're age sixty-four, you, you win the Mentor Award for Lifetime Achievement from the American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's the significance of this award?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I think the significance for me is the students nominated me, and I don't know exactly how, you know, the nomination process worked, although I did work on it later for a woman named Etta Faulkner, who had a lot of influence on my life.  So let me just tell you a word about Etta, and then, then the students nominated me for this award.  So I actually got it after Etta--no, I'm, wait a minute.  I'm not sure.  But, but, but I, no, I do remember that Etta had received it, and so I was very happy to be associated with and award that had her name on it.  She was a professor at Spelman [Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia], and I had worked on nominating her for the award.  And the issue was that the mentor award was supposed to be about people who help people get Ph.D.s.  And she taught at an undergraduate institution.  But our view was, you know, she prepared these students so well, and she encouraged them to go on to get graduate degrees, and she deserved the award.  And she got the award.  Now, I think they gave it to me because by that time, the Maryland program [in the mathematics department at the University of Maryland in College Park, Maryland] which I started when I was the graduate director and continued when I was chair, had reached critical mass and had produced at that point around, twelve to fifteen African American Ph.D.s.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's remarkable.
Speaker 2: It was a remarkable group of people, remarkable group of people.  And I say that, the most important thing was that they did so much of it on their own, but they did it together.  We had the first three, the first woman to get a Ph.D. it turned out, hadn't happened at Maryland, the first black woman.  But then three of 'em finished at the same time.  And so that got some, some national attention when that happened.  And then we, but we had people who their Ph.D.s there and went to work at NIH [National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Maryland].  We had people who went to work in industry.  We had people who went to teach.  So, you know, it was, it's a remarkable group of people.
Story_ID: 23489
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us, now, one of the people we interviewed this year was Catherine Johnson in Hampton, Virginia who worked with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  She was like, what they called the human calculator for NASA and plotted the trajectories of space flights for John Glenn and others.  Did, did-can, can you tell us a little bit about the history of black in mathematics in this country?
Speaker 2: So, so I've read about it.  You know, I guess I can't really tell you-- I helped Jim Donaldson.  He--so the AMS, American Math Society, the main professional organization, celebrated its centenary in 1988.  And so they asked Jim to contribute an article about blacks in mathematics.  And Jim wrote the article, but then we were trying to get it typed up, and so we had access to Tech, which is a mathematical typesetting language.  And so he came over to Maryland and, you know, we talked about.  So I remember quite a bit, but most of what I learned came from Jim Donaldson, and, unfortunately, I don't think I kept a copy of that article.  But he talked about Elbert Cox.  He talked about Charles Reason who actually didn't get a Ph.D., but who had been a very good mathematician.  He, he had a list, I think, and it was a well-researched list of like the first ten blacks to get their degrees in mathematics, some of whom you may have talked to, like David Blackwell, who, who's now deceased.  At that time, we didn't know about Euphemia Lofton, who actually was the first woman to get a Ph.D.  That was discovered later.
Speaker 1: Now, where was she from?
Speaker 2: She was from the UDC [University of the District of Columbia, in Washington, District of Columbia], (unclear) from D.C.  She was teaching.  She was a teacher in the District of Columbia who went back to American University [in Washington, District of Columbia] to complete her Ph.D., and she completed it.  The, the first ones that we had known about were Marjorie Brown who got a degree from University of Michigan [in Ann Arbor, Michigan] and taught at North Carolina Central [in Durham, North Carolina], I think, for a long time, and Evelyn Boyd Granville, who was in industry.  She spent a lot of time.  She, she moved back and forth, California and places like that, but in industry and she spent some time teaching.  I think she's still alive, Marjorie Brown died.  But Vi [Vivienne] Mayes was, as I said, like the fifth, so I had met her when I was a student.  She was like the fifth woman to get a Ph.D. in Mathematics.  She got it from the University of Texas [in Austin, Texas].  And then that was interesting because later she, she, she contacted me when I was at Maryland [University of Maryland, in College Park, Maryland].  I was out of the chairmanship, but she was gonna have a sabbatical.  And she wanted to spend it at Maryland.  And I, I remember the year, this was like 1995.  So I talked to the chairman, and we had arranged for her to come spend the sabbatical at Maryland.  And she was ill, I think she had multiple sclerosis, something like that.  And she actually had a couple of episodes.  So, you know, but, but, she enjoyed being in the research environment.  And she actually learned quite a bit about her topic, which was wavelets.  It was a modern area of harmonic analysis that she wanted to study.  But what was interesting was, and this is two--1996--five [1995], okay, 'cause she died in 1996, I remember.  She went back to Baylor [Baylor University in Houston, Texas] after her, after her sabbatical.  And she gave a talk on what she had done on her sabbatical.  And they were all excited.  They, they really, you know, they hadn't learned that much about it, so they organized a seminar and started to work on this area of mathematics.  And they cut her out of it.  They wouldn't invite her (laughter).  I, I just couldn't, couldn't, couldn't imagine.  You know, I mean, 1996, she died in the summer of 1996 because we had a conference called the 'Conference of African American Researchers in the Mathematical Sciences'.  And I was one of the organizers, and one of the things I told them when we started it, it was June 23rd, was that she had just died about two weeks ago.  And that's 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 23490
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd just ask, you know, kind of put that out there.  But, now, you retired in, in--
Speaker 2: 2009.
Speaker 1: 2009, and you're currently a visiting professor here at Rice [Rice University, in Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Well, what are your reflections on your experiences at the University of Maryland and what are you doing here at, at Rice right now?
Speaker 2: That's, I mean, so, so Maryland [University of Maryland in College Park, Maryland] was my career.  I mean that was a whole career.  I feel like I, because I was a tenured faculty member, I knew the culture.  I contributed to the culture.  You know, I mean I, I grew up in the culture, so I have to take responsibility for it.  But on the other hand, you know, we got a lot of black students, and we got a lot of students who got degrees.  And I was very happy about that.  When I came to Rice, I actually had a choice between applied math and pure math.  And I chose a--pure math 'cause my degree was in the pure math department here.  When I was here at Rice, there was only a pure math.  There was not--the split happened later.  So they, there actually was, at one time, Douglas would have been an applied mathematician.  But there was only a math department.  And so in about 1969, I read--one of my colleagues is working on a history, and he showed me how the president had this idea that he wanted to split off the math department, applied math department.  So they created an applied math department in around 1968 or something like that, I'm not sure, after I, after I left.  So I could have gone to the applied math department, but, you know, my degree was in math.  And so I really wanted to come back to math.  I was the first African American to get a Ph.D. in the math department.  I am also the last African American to get a Ph.D. in the math department.  That was forty years ago, okay.  So, you know, I mean I haven't, we haven't found any African American students yet, but that's one of the things that I certainly am trying to work on as, you know, if I, if I have a chance to help an African American student who can succeed in math, I'd like to be able to do it.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you, in terms of Maryland even, is there, do you think that you left sort of a, the math department in Maryland in a condition where it's gonna continue doing the--
Speaker 2: So, so that's actually an interesting question.  I mean there was a chairman for ten years after me.  And I don't think that the focus was quite the same, but when you have a critical mass of students, I mean then when students come, they sort of look, okay, oh, there's some students like me here.  Oh, there's some students like me who succeeded.  And so, they, I don't think we had quite a flow, but there was a steady stream, let's say, of students into Maryland.  And, of course, the publicity helped.  And so I would say, yes, 'cause actually, about six weeks ago, one of the students who, so, again, can I tell you a story?  This was a student, this is long after I'm chair, okay.  I was, I got, I got a note, I mean I still had contacts with Spelman [Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia].  And so I got a note from Spelman.  It said, you know, got one of our really good students--who I had met.  Her name is Shelby Willison.  She was actually Etta's grand-daughter.  So, and Etta Falconer is a legend in my mind, and here's her grand-daughter applying to Maryland.  And so the problem is, she's applied to Maryland, and they've offered her an assistantship, but she's applied to Princeton [Princeton University, in Princeton, New Jersey], and they've offered her a better assistantship.  And she really wants to come to Maryland, but, you know, she's got a better deal at Princeton.  So I contacted the chairman of the applied math program and said, look, you know, here, here's this student.  She's extremely bright.  She was like sixteen years old coming out of college.  And, and she's extremely bright, and she's got a better deal at Princeton.  Well, to their credit, they, they finally realized they had made a mistake, and they offered her a better deal.  She came to Maryland, and she finished her Ph.D., in cancer research, of all things.  So, you know, I, I think that illustrates where it is.  There wasn't the same attention, but because the students had been there before and because they knew other people who had been there, there were still some people who wanted to come.  And so we're still getting students, and we're still producing students.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the students have carried the momentum forward?
Speaker 2: Students, momentum, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause, I, when you, you explained what they were doing, you really took pleasure in the fact that they'd organized themselves--
Speaker 2: Themselves, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and started--
Speaker 2: --absolutely, yeah.  That's, that's the thing that, you know, it was much more than I ever anticipated.  We were trying to do it.  We just, we just wanted them to know that they could talk to each other.  And they actually organized themselves, much better than we had organized them.  And I think it's better because it came from them.  And so they had an incentive to keep it going.
Speaker 1: They have a momentum there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're trying to establish something similar here at Rice, and--
Speaker 2: Except as a non-tenured faculty member, it's a different situation, okay.  I mean as a visitor, I do what they let me do, and I, I am encouraged in the sense that we had a Hispanic student for, I thought, the first time, who has done extremely well.  And I, I think I did bring him to their attention in a way that, you know, he probably wouldn't have gotten their attention otherwise.  But he's done extremely well.  So I hope that we'll be able to do the same thing with some black student at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 23491
Speaker 1: Do you wanna tell this story on camera?
Speaker 2: I (unclear).  Sherry Scott was, she had had difficulty in passing her written exams.  So I was working downtown with the AMS [American Mathematical Society].  And I said, okay, I would come out on Saturday and help her prepare for the wri-, upcoming written exams.  And so I would come out every Saturday.  I had a key to my old office as chair [of the mathematics department at the University of Maryland, in College Park, Maryland], which was abandoned.  It was nothing.  I mean it was just the board, the blackboard.
Speaker 1: Is that at University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: At the University of Maryland.  And we'd sit there and study for two or three hours preparing for the written exam.  And actually, at one point, she had had difficulty because she had exhausted her support.  And so my colleague, James Turner, gave her support for one more semester.  She passed the written exams.  She got a Ph.D.  I think she's gonna be the next one to get tenure, but, you know, we're, we've still got our fingers crossed on that one.  But they were just extremely determined and extremely nice people.
Story_ID: 23492
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about now--oh, we were talking when I came in about Ron Walters.  He's one of your colleagues, and he's, not in the math department--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but in political science.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, so, you know, the black faculty and staff at Maryland [University of Maryland, in College Park, Maryland] was primarily staff because there are a lot more staff members than there are faculty members.  But, you know, we would have meetings occasionally.  And I especially remember that there was called the 'Provost Discussions on Diversity, Democracy and Higher Education'.  And they invited Ron [Ronald] Walters [political scientist].  I mean I, so I would see him occasionally at the black faculty and staff meetings and things of that type.  But they invited him after Obama [President Barack Obama] was elected president to give a talk on--and I don't remember the exact topic, but roughly speaking, it was 'Obama and post-racial politics in America'.  And he gave just an absolutely--first of all, he analyzed the vote in a way that, you know, I never heard it analyzed before.  He explained how the coalition that Obama had put together to win.  But then he went on talking about, you know, so what is that gonna mean for post-racial politics, and I think he predicted what we've seen, which is there isn't gonna be (laughter) any post-racial politics.  They're gonna respond racially just like, just like we've seen them do.  And I, and when I left Maryland, I just had no idea that he was sick.  And I was shocked when I, when he died a couple of years after I left Maryland.
Speaker 1: Right, he just passed away real recently.
Speaker 2: Recently, yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him, I guess about five years ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, really, okay, okay.  No, he was a wonderful political, political scientist.  I mean I was amazed that he stayed at Maryland because I thought he could have done a lot better.  But, you know, we, we were lucky to have him at Maryland.
Story_ID: 23493
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: So the students are my legacy.  I, I think.  You know, I made some choices that, to some extent, I regret now, but, you know, I felt like it was best for the students.  And they definitely are my legacy.  So the, the choices I made was, I didn't direct the dissertations of any of them.  I felt like people might say, okay, black professor and black student, you know.  You're just cutting them some slack.  They all got the degrees with other advisors and they did extremely well.  So, so that was one thing.  I think the other thing is, you can't see the small things that I did that made it possible for them to succeed.  And, and I know about 'em, and, you know, I will tell you about one of 'em, which is not--it wasn't that big of a deal.  But I had an opportunity to go to one of the national research sites called the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute and be the deputy director of that.  And actually, I, I even was considering the possibility that, you know, I was gonna rent the place to Sherry or someone, you know, to let them live there while I was out there.  But in the end, I felt--I think this was about 1998 after I had left the chairmanship, that, that I still needed to be there to pay attention to what's happening to the students.  And it was a small, subtle thing, and it turned out, I think the fact that I stayed helped make it easier for Sherry to pass the exams.  And then she went on and got a Ph.D.  So there's, there's little things like that, you know.  I mean I, I, it, it--I could have done it if I hadn't been there.  I might have been able to do it from California by email or by phone conversation.  But I'm happy that I was there and able to actually just put a little bit of a push behind it and make it possible for her, her to make it.  So, each story is different.  I mean, and, and it's not all victories, okay.  I mean I, I had a huge loss.  As I said, I, most of the losses I had were not to math.  They were to life.  So I had this student who was extremely bright named Rhonda Datcher (ph.), extremely bright.  And she was married.  And her husband was an english major, and she was a math major.  And at some point, they decided that they needed some income.  Well, guess which one is gonna go back to work, english major, math major.  So she decides that she's gonna be the one who's gonna go back to work.  She's gonna go to work for NSA [National Security Agency].  I remember, she came, came to my office, and I wanted to talk to her.  Now, you know, I really can't do anything about a family decision.  That's a family decision.  But (laughter) I actually told her when she sat down, I said, you're never gonna leave this office alive unless you agree to stay in graduate (laughter) school.  But, you know, she explained, and so I agreed that, you know, that was the best thing for her to do.  So she went off.  She could have gotten a Ph.D.  She had actually passed the exam and started working with somebody.  But she went out and worked at NSA.  Then NSA sees how bright she is, and they said, okay, we'll pay you to go back to school.  So I was very happy.  She came back to school.  She started working with somebody else in an applied area that would have had applications to NSA.  But then in the end, you know, she just, she, she didn't complete--I mean she had passed the exams.  She's working on a dissertation, and she never finished it.  And so, to me, that was a loss in the sense it was a waste.  It's not anything I could have done or she could have done.  I mean it was a choice she had to make as a, for her family in terms of what was best for her.  But, you know, it's a, it's a loss, I feel, in the sense that that was somebody who could have had a Ph.D.  On the other hand, if she's got a good life as a mathematician without a Ph.D, I can't complain about that.  We had a student who had, had his training as an undergraduate in horticulture.  And he wanted a master's in mathematics.  And his name is Jesse Chittoms (ph.).  And he worked so hard, so hard, and he got his master's in mathematics.  That was, to me, as good a success as any of the people who got Ph.D.s.  So it's the students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, when you look back again at your career, is there any major thing that you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: That's a something I thought about.  You know, you think about that from time to time.  I think not, but, you know, I could have stayed at Howard [Howard University, in Washington, District of Columbia].  And I think I had more of an impact by coming back to Maryland [University of Maryland] than if I had stayed at Howard.  I could have gone to the MAA [Mathematical Association of America].  I think I had a bigger impact by staying at Maryland than I would have by going to the MAA.  And so, no, I, I don't think it's anything I would change.  I mean I, I sure there are things that I should have done differently.  But, but I just, in general, let's say I'm happy with the choices I made.
Story_ID: 23494
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, also, my, my concern is science education still because that's an important, I mean you have to look at the history, the long sweep of things.  We produced a huge number of African American mathematicians in the '40s [1940s].  I mean this is a time of segregation, and yet, there were enough African American mathematicians produced to populate HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] all over the South.  And I don't know how, I don't know why.  I know there were some schools, I've heard stories, you know, about University of Michigan [in Ann Arbor, Michigan] did a wonderful job.  They had a professor named Maxwell Reed, Fisk [Fisk University, in Nashville, Tennessee], Lee Lorch was a white professor.  Maxwell Reed was also white.  He, Lee Lorch trained six students, black students at Fisk in the '50s [1950s].  They went on to get Ph.D.s.  No student, Fisk student, before has gone on to get a math Ph.D.  No Fiske student after has gone on to get a math Ph.D.  And yet, here they were in the '50s [1950s]--he got ran out of Fisk.  But he produced six students who went on to get Ph.D.s.  Etta Falconer was one of 'em.  And so there's been a time where we were producing African American mathematicians, and yet here we are in our enlightened times today, and whether it's the students or the faculty, I can't tell you.  But we're not doing as well, to some extent, as we did in the '40s [1940s].  And that's, that's just puzzling to me.  And that's, that's a concern.  I mean I don't, I don't know whether I should be concerned about the faculty because, you know, I--what I think happens is, they just haven't seen black students.  And so when they see a black student, they, they, they have no model of the success of a black student.  And, therefore, they think the student is there for affirmative action or some other reason, and they start finding reasons for them not to succeed.  At Maryland, because we have so many students who have succeeded, you can't say you haven't seen a successful black student.  You've seen different kinds of successful black students.  You've seen women, you've seen men, you've seen people who have gone into 'applied' [mathematics], you've seen people who have gone into 'pure' [mathematics].  And so you know African Americans can succeed.  And I think that knowledge still doesn't exist, but it existed in the '40s [1940s].  But it doesn't exist in a lot of schools today.  And it's partly because the schools think they've gotten so much better.  So, therefore, the students can't be good enough for us.
Story_ID: 23495
Speaker 1: Now, did you have much interaction with Freeman Hrabowski [president of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County] over at--
Speaker 2: So, not much.  I went to, you know, they, they, they were looking for mentors.  And so I would go up there [University of Maryland, Baltimore County] and participate as a mentor in their undergraduate program.  But, you know, I was running a competing program at the University of Maryland [in College Park, Maryland] called the Banneker Scholarship program.  So we were competing for the same students.  And sometimes they won, sometimes we won.  We got--the court threw us out because, you know, we were supporting too many black students, the Michael Williams era at the [United States] Department of Education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I did also, you know, when they invited me to, to participate as a mentor, I went up to Baltimore several times and participated in, with their undergraduate students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, thought I'd ask that.
Story_ID: 23496
Speaker 1: Now, now, you got married again in 2008?
Speaker 2: 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you--so tell us about your family, your wife and your son.
Speaker 2: Well, I can't.  We're, we're, we're gonna be divorced in a couple of months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that, that didn't work out.  That didn't work out.  But my son is still in Los Angeles [California].  He is a, he's working as an aspiring writer.  But he basically has a day job at Warner Brothers that keeps food on the table and the lights on and stuff like that.  And, again, I, I, I'm very impressed with him.  I think he's a wonderful person.  And he's doing, he's made his mother and I proud of him.
Story_ID: 23497
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think so.  I'm either, I'm--my life is sixty-nine years and so there's a lot of it, but I think we've covered the, the, the main points.  I don't think there's anything that I had thought-I've, I've told you about my failures.  I mean I think that's the main thing is, you know, I had some successes, and I'm very pleased with them.  But there were some students that I wish there was a way that I could have gotten through to them and, and made it possible for them to succeed.  But like I said, it's primarily a matter of life.  It wasn't so much mathematics.  They had the mathematics under perfect control, but things in life spin out of control for them.  So I think, I think we've covered just about everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, so, of course, I'm tempted by the, the Warren Buffet response when he was asked "What would you like people to say at your funeral?"  He said, "He was really, really old." (laughter)  But I, no, I'm, I'm--so, I guess, how would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as one of a number of people and not just me.  There's Lee Lorch, who I talked about at Fisk [Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee].  There's Maxwell Reed, who I talked about at Michigan [University of Michigan, in Ann Arbor, Michigan].  There was Clarence Steven, Stevens who was at Morgan State [Morgan State University, in Baltimore, Maryland], and then went to Potsdam [New York College of Potsdam, in Potsdam, New York].  And, and so there's a lot of people who have shown that it's possible to produce African American students of the highest quality who can excel in mathematics.  And, you know, and Richard Topey (ph.) at Rice [Rice University, in Houston, Texas] is one who's done it also.  And so I would just like to be remembered as one of those people who people can point to and say, it can be done.  And then I hope maybe, at some point, somebody looks at that, and we actually get it done on a more consistent basis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, thank you very much.
