Story_ID: 297987
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Observing is Sir Lewis Jones.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Gertrude Jeannette.  Well I should say [HistoryMaker] Gertrude Hadley Jeannette.  G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, Gertrude, Hadley, H-A-D-L-E-Y, Jeannette, J-E-A-N-N-E-T-T-E, Gertrude Hadley Jeannette.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November the 28th, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was born in a small town called Urbana, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired as a, well I was an actress.  Well I suppose I'm still an actress.  I do commercials once in a while.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I believe that is June the 9th, 2005, June the 9th, 2005.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address if you don't want.
Speaker 2: Well we are in I would call Central Harlem [New York, New York] on, used to be Lenox Avenue.  It's now Malcolm X Boulevard.  We're very proud to say it's Malcolm X Boulevard now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's on 116th Street, between 116th Street and 117th Street on Malcolm X Boulevard.
Story_ID: 297988
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight kind of test, I mean warm up questions I guess, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, ma'am, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  I wouldn't say I have a favorite food, because all food, good food, my favorite.  But I would say a good pot of mixed greens.  Not overcooked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some good corn bread.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  Yes, I would say purple.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love spring, because that's when everything is blooming, everything is coming to life.  I love spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I like fall after Labor Day.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite saying would be greeting someone, saying, "Go well and stay well."
Story_ID: 297989
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Willis Hadley] side.  So we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Salley, S-A-L-L-E-Y, I think Salley, Gertrude, G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, Crawford was her maiden name, C-R-A-W-F-O-R-D, and she married my father Hadley, H-A-D-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eufaula, Oklahoma, E-U-F-A-U-L-A, Eufaula, E-U-F-A-U-L-A, Eufaula, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: I think it was 1895.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors?
Speaker 2: Well I know my grandmother and grandfather, they were also born, I think, I know they were born in Oklahoma on the reservations.  I know they were--my mother was born on a reservation.  My grandmother was Caroline [Crawford]--I don't know her maiden name.  But she was from Madagascar I think.  I think her, her, her parents were from Madagascar.  And I know she wound up there with the other Indians [Native Americans].  Caroline was her name, and she married Frank Crawford, so Crawford was her last name.  And my grandfather was named Frank Crawford.  He was over the Indians' affairs.  He was appointed over the Indians' affairs.  And he was responsible for my father coming there teaching on the reservation.  My father was the first black man to teach on the Indian reservation.
Speaker 1: In Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: In Oklahoma.  But this was at a mission.  I think this mission was in Spiro, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a famous black Indian named Crawford Goldsby.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they made a movie about him.  They called it 'The Cherokee Kid,' [sic.] I think, or something.
Speaker 2: Well my people were Cherokees.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Crawford Goldsby was his name, you know.  But his first name was Crawford.  But there might be some kind of connection, I don't know.  So I just thought I'd mention that.  So he was the first black man to teach on the reservation.  Do you know what kind of people were living on the reservation?
Speaker 2: They were mostly Cherokee in this particular mission.  They had these mission schools where the Indians were taught.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, the man I was thinking about was called Cherokee Bill, not Cherokee Kid, Cherokee Bill.
Speaker 2: Cherokee Bill.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his name was Crawford Goldsby.  Yeah, okay.  So mostly Cherokees, huh, over there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 297990
Speaker 1: Now the story about Madagascar, now did your--is there more to that story?  Did they talk about that any at all?
Speaker 2: I would hear my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] and father [Willis Hadley] talk about it, and my aunts and things.  And because they were trying to trace where did grandma [Caroline Crawford] come from, because she wasn't really a part of that Indian [Native American] tribe.  But they accepted her.  She came as a little girl, and they accepted her into, and her mother and father.  And I think that it's all dim to me.  I wish I had taken more notes, paid more attention.  At that time these stories bore me.  You sit around, you listen to the old people.  You didn't care one way or the other.  But after you get older, you try to go back and knit it together.  And I'm sorry I didn't pay more attention to what they were saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from those days on the reservations that are passed down to you from your relatives?
Speaker 2: I haven't gone on the reservations since I went back to Arkansas and I took my mother out on the reservation there.  And I visited my grandmother and my aunts, and of course now they weren't living on the reservation then.  It was--they had their own houses close by.  And we drove out to that.  And one thing that I notice that they would take chickens and they would clean them.  And they would take this clay, Oklahoma's known for its clay, pure clay.  And make kind of a mud pottery.  Like they make that pottery out of clay.  And they would make a dome of clay around these chickens.  And they had a brick oven.  I guess we would call it a barbecue oven now.  A brick oven, and they would put these trays of chicken--whatever meat, around this clay.  I guess we would call it aluminum foil, cooking with aluminum foil today.  And they would bake and they would put it in there before they go to bed at night and get up the next morning, get ready for the cookout.  And they would crack--they knew exactly how to crack that chicken in the right place.  And the chicken would open up and take the skin off.  But you could smell that chicken two or three miles away.  You could smell that meat, beef or whatever they had put in that clay.  And that, that piece of pottery will be the shape of a chicken.  So they would rinse that off and they would carve the chicken and put it in these clay--and put it on the table.  They'd put about five or six chickens (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 297991
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] talk about growing up?  About the things she did when she grew--when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about the quiltings and, you know you go out on the--pass through Albuquerque [New Mexico] now on the train, you can get off and buy some of the most beautiful quilts in the world.  And she talked about it and my mother made--she and her friends would make--have these quilting bees and see how many--who's quilting.  They would take 'em to the fair and get prizes and whatnot.  I still have a quilt that my mother made.  And she would talk about the crocheting and the quilting and the needlework and the pottery growing up out there.  And they raised all--everything mostly they ate, they raised.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: At this mission [in Oklahoma].  My mother?  That's where my father [Willis Hadley] taught.  The Indian [Native American] mission.  That's what they call it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was an Indian mission.  Did it have any other name other than that?
Speaker 2: That's all I can remember, the Indian mission school.  My mother, that's where my father taught at.
Story_ID: 297992
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father, Willis, W-I-L-L-I-S, Lawrence, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, Lawrence Hadley, H-A-D-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was shortly after, let me see, 1875.  Yeah, 1870, '65 [1865], 1865 because when did we get our independence?  Eighteen sixty-three [1863], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Eighteen sixty-five [1865].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was much older than my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley].
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born two years after emancipation.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Urbana, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Same place, okay.
Speaker 2: Same place.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what do you know about your--the ancestors on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well I know that my grandfather came from South Africa.  He was a Watusi, real tall.  And he came at the age of fourteen.  I still have a walking cane that he carved with the animals and alligators and things on it.  I still have it in there.  It's been handed down.  And he came with the clothes on his back and that walking cane.  He was brought here by the--a member of the Hadley family out of Boston [Massachusetts].  This man was over in Africa on a safari or whatever you call these things when you go over there.  And my grandfather was his guide at the age of fourteen, he was his guide.  And it all depends on who's telling the story.  It seems that there was a wounded lion, or sometimes it was a wounded leopard that he had wounded, and this boy, my grandfather, killed it with an arrow and saved old man Hadley's life.  So he persuaded my great-grandfather and grandmother to allow him to bring him back to America and educate him.  They promised that he would educate.  So then he bought up a lot of land down in Arkansas and he kept his promise.  He educated my grandfather.  And they were never called slaves, they were called--they got the name of sharecroppers.  You gotta share.  You couldn't pay them any money because slaves weren't allowed to be paid.  So but they--he would give them a share of whatever they raised on that plot of land.  And when he died, all of the people that lived on his farm, he left them forty acres.  And my father bought out some of the others as he went on, my grandfather did, and then later on my father bought out his half-brothers and whatnot.  And when my father died it was 365 acres.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.  And it's, it's unusual but it's just, I guess pieced all the different kinds of ways that we get here I guess.  So now, now do you know exactly--was he from--you said he was a Watusi?
Speaker 2: He was a Watusi.  They believe in that dancing and storytelling.  And he was called a griot, griot, storyteller.  He would entertain all of the rest of the people who lived on the plantation, both black and white, about how he could dance like a gazelle or--and he would tell them that--he would get on his toes and do like a bird.  And my father used to tell us how his father would do, entertain everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was, he had a pretty good education and he saw that my father got a good education also.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did your father go to school?
Speaker 2: My father went to school in Little Rock [Arkansas].  He went first to Pine Bluff Normal [Pine Bluff Normal Institute, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], then he left there because they taught a lot of farming there.  And then at Philander Smith College in Little Rock.
Story_ID: 297993
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Salley Crawford Hadley and Willis Hadley] met?
Speaker 2: Well, he was my mother's teacher (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: This was in Oklahoma, right?
Speaker 2: Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well he was brought out there by my [maternal] grandfather [Frank Crawford] to teach.  And so they had been sending mostly white teachers out there to teach.  And my grandfather requested an educated black man to come out and teach.  And the educational department in Arkansas sent out my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when he met my mother.  And he taught there for two years.  Of course he had already--his wife had died and he had four children by his first wife.
Speaker 1: Okay, already, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so when did they meet?  'Bout what year did they meet?
Speaker 2: I think they met in Spiro, Spiro, Oklahoma.  Because that was the closest town to the mission.  The mission was outside of Spiro, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year they got married?  Do you know when they got married?
Speaker 2: They got married in 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1909, okay.  Now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had--there were twelve of us.  And I'm the only one left.  They're all deceased now.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you--where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: Well I am my mother's--see my father had four children, then he had eight children by my mother.  And I am the fourth child of that union.  I had, I had three brothers older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I had two brothers after me, then I had a sister and another brother.
Story_ID: 297994
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, lot of them.
Speaker 1: Well one, the first one.  Can you remember the first memory?  I mean the first thing you can really remember that you know for sure you remembered.
Speaker 2: I remember--see we had a big house.  That's what we call a big house.  And smaller houses where the people worked on the farm lived.  I mean we used to always say go up to the big house.  I remember the big house.  I guess I was about five or six years old.  And I used to love to go up under the house and listen to the older folks talk about their men and whatnot.  'Course I couldn't put it all together then.  But I had to be grown before I knew what they talking about.  So I--in fact the book that I'm writing now is all about that.  But I remember listening to these stories.  And I remember around about--shortly after that, my father [Willis Hadley] leased out the farm and--not leased out the farm, he leased some of the property to the Standard Oil Company and he bought some property in Little Rock and he moved us all to Little Rock, Arkansas.  And--
Speaker 1: About how old were you when he did that?
Speaker 2: I think I was around about nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--so, so you started off in Oklahoma, then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I started off in Urbana, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Urbana, Arkansas, and then moved to Little Rock.
Speaker 2: Little Rock.  That's just about--
Speaker 1: When you were about nine.
Speaker 2: I think it's about sixty miles--
Story_ID: 297995
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Urbana [Arkansas] and Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: You know, drying fruit.  We had a big orchard.  And when school was out, we would go and gather the fruit, and if my brothers climbed the trees, I would want to climb the trees and my father [Willis Hadley] said, "You gonna be a tomboy, you get down out of that tree."  But I can remember biting into the apples.  I'd get up in that tree and I'd eat more apples than I would throw down.  And I remember gathering the nuts in the fall, the pecans and the black walnuts.  That farm life at the time, I didn't know it, but it was heavenly.  And then we would go fishing on Saturdays and catch big trout and things like that.  We had a big lake that ran through our farm and we'd go fishing.  And then we'd come home and clean it and have a big fish fry, big fry pans.  All of those things I remember as if it were yesterday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What, what were you like?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I had four brothers older than I and one brother right after me.  And if they needed another person on the ball, on the--playing with the stick ball, I was that person.  And my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] and father was, "Come in this house, come in this house.  You out there playing with those boys."  But everything they did, I wanted to do.  If they climbed the tree, I wanted to climb that tree.  I didn't want them to outdo me in anything.  And, but I wasn't--some things I wasn't allowed to do, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 297996
Speaker 1: Let's see now, where did you start school?  Did you start in Urbana [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Urbana, I started in school in Urbana (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: And all of us knew how to read and write when we went to school, every one of us.  My father [Willis Hadley] saw that, and my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] too.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: What was the name?
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school in Urbana?
Speaker 2: Union School [ph.], Urbana, Union School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it didn't no farther than the ninth grade.  That's one reason my father said, "I've got to get my children to Little Rock [Arkansas]."
Speaker 1: Okay, and then in Little Rock, what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I first started off at a school out in College Station [Arkansas], just a few miles outside of Little Rock.  That's where my father bought and built a lot of--had quite a few houses.  And they had a school there called the College Station School [College Station Elementary School, College Station, Arkansas].  And that also went to the ninth grade.  And then after that, you went into Dunbar High [Negro School of Industrial Arts; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  After I finished the ninth grade there, I went into Dunbar High.
Speaker 1: Okay now, let's go back to grade school.  Now did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was smart, but I stammered.  I was smart in writing out questions, but I wasn't good at oral.  And my father tried his best, he would frighten me more than anything else, because my father didn't like sloppy speech.  And first my tongue was tied and he had it clipped.  And then it--I got a lazy tongue, I couldn't, I didn't know what to do with it.  And then exercises and whatnot.  That's one reason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you say that your tongue was tied.
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of like that.
Speaker 1: They tied it down?
Speaker 2: No, I was born with it tied down.
Speaker 1: You were, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You haven't heard of tied tongue people?
Speaker 1: Well I've only heard it as an expression.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's wrong, you tongue tied?  You know, people say that.  But I didn't know it really--you were born with your tongue actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a little lesion under there, attached.  Your tongue tied down like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I talked like that, with the tongue down.  So he took me to a doctor and had it clipped, so he says, "No excuse now."  And I didn't know what to do with the tongue.  And so then I learned that I had to exercise the tongue, get it so I could speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my father--then I started stammering.  I was a stammerer.  I did that until I came to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay so you, you started stammering after your tongue was clipped.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: After you had the operation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I wasn't sure, sure--I learned later.  That I wasn't sure--I wasn't sure and I was trying so hard until that caused the stammering.  And I think my father who tried so hard, and actually he told me when I came to New York and started studying speech at the American Negro Theatre.  That's the only reason I joined American Negro Theatre, was because of the speech impediment.
Story_ID: 297997
Speaker 1: --We were talking about school, and now did you have any favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I had good teachers, they were very patient with me.  And I liked all of my teachers.  I don't think--there's one teacher that I disliked in my whole life.
Speaker 1: And what did they--
Speaker 2: And, and that was because she was, she was very partial to certain people.  She didn't like the poor people or the people who didn't come to school dressed a certain way.  And the--and she would pick on those students.  And I have a habit of taking up for people.  And one day I asked her, why was she picking on this girl?  And I told her, I said, one day I said, this child may be--well maybe this student may be over teaching your students, one of your children.  And how would you like for him to talk like--and she tried to give me a D when I know that I was an A student.  And I had--I went through--that's the only teacher I ever disliked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you graduated from Dunbar High School [Negro School of Industrial Arts; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], right?  And what year was it?
Speaker 2: Well I graduated in 1933.  But I didn't get my diploma because I ran away and got married.
Speaker 1: Now we gonna save this story for a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just talk about high school for a minute.  Now you started high school.  Now Dunbar is a famous high school in Little Rock [Arkansas].  It's the school that the black community had.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's the one that they left to integrate Central, right?  People left Dunbar to integrate Central High School [Little Rock Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] much later.
Speaker 2: Much later.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now were you involved in high school activities when you were a student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played basketball, I played tennis, and I joined the acting group, and I was in the class play, because my father [Willis Hadley] kept pushing me that that would help my speech and to speak.  And so my teacher said, "Well I'm gonna give you one line.  This character hasn't but one line, but I'm gonna give that to you, and you just work on it and you say that to please your father."  So I got in the class play also.  Nearly everything I tried to do in school because I wanted to please my father.
Story_ID: 297998
Speaker 1: Did you like school when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now well when did you meet your husband?  Did you--were you a senior by then, or--
Speaker 2: At my prom, I met him at my prom, and Cab Calloway played for our prom [at Negro School of Industrial Arts; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And--
Speaker 1: Now that's really a big deal for those days, isn't it?  Cab Calloway.
Speaker 2: Oh, Cab Calloway was not famous then.  That was in 1933.
Speaker 1: All right, so he was just a virgin.
Speaker 2: You know, he was playing the circuit, the southern circuit like all the bands came there.  And that's the way the name of the Big Apple [New York, New York] got started.  And we--they said we're from the Big Apple.  And I'm going back to the Big Apple now.  When you leave, when I leave here, I'll be going back to the Big Apple.  That's what the name, the Big Apple got started.  Those bands used to come through there.  Well my husband was down there visiting.  He had been over at Hot Springs [Arkansas] and the local papers carried his name and whatnot.  And so my brothers, they tagged onto him and they would follow him.  And they invited him to my prom.  And that's the first time I met him.  He was--he--and that's the first time we had seen the Lindy hop.  He and the girl that sang with Cab Calloway got out--well he knew Cab and all that gang.  And they got out on the floor they did the Lindy hop.  That was in 1933, and we put the ring around.  Then he saw me standing over there.  My brothers had already introduced him to me.  Said, "This is Joe Jeannette [II] from New York.  He's the prizefighter that we were telling you about."  And I met him and whatnot.  Then all of a sudden, he said something to the girl he was dancing to, and then he reached over there and pulled me out on the floor.  I said, "Wait a minute, I can't do all that stuff now."  I say--he said, "Just follow my lead."  And he was throwing me out and pulling me back and every--all my classmates started laughing and giggling.  "Go Gertrude [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette], go Gertrude, go."  And anyway--and my father [Willis Hadley] was sitting over there, you know, he chaperoned all these things.  He was sitting over there sucking his tongue.  Well he didn't mind the Lindy hop so much because that wasn't too close, you know what I mean.  He didn't like that slow drag that they used to do.  But anyway that's the way I met him.  And then I walked off the floor when he said, "Will you marry me?"  And I said, "Just because I'm a small town girl, I'm not a fool."  And I walked off the floor.  'Cause I thought that he was a big shot from New York [New York], and he's gonna ask me the first time he meets me, will you marry me?  And well anyway he got--I was staying with one of the nurses during the period of graduation, 'cause all the activities we were doing, the slumber parties, the sleepovers, and the prom and everything.  We lived out in the suburbs, but my father'd make it in there anyway, but he allowed me to stay with the head nurse at the hospital who used to be a classmate of his.  Anyway, my brothers gave him that telephone number.  And he would call me every day, say, "I meant what I said, will you marry me?  I always said if I met a girl like you, I was gonna marry her."  And I would hang up.  And he'd call back again, "Will you marry me?"  And he just kept on.  So I asked my father if I could go to the slumber party.  And my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] had made me a beautiful pair of these what you call lounging pajamas in those days, the big bell bottom pajamas, everything for my slumber party.  My father said, "No.  You don't go to no slumber party."  And my mother said, "Well, it's gonna be chaperoned by teachers and whatnot.  The girls be at one house and the boys over at the other house."  And my father said, "No, she can't go."  So my husband called me the next day, said, "Will you marry me?"  I said, "Yes."  And I ran away and came to New York.  And my father wouldn't let me get my graduation, so I had to come back in 1934 to get my graduation, my--
Speaker 1: The diploma.
Speaker 2: My diploma.
Speaker 1: Well that's a--one might guess that you did this because you were tired of your father telling you what to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Story_ID: 297999
Speaker 1: Did you like Mr. Jeannette [Joe Jeannette, II] any at all at that point?
Speaker 2: I didn't know him.  To tell you the truth, I only knew him eighteen days, I think it was eighteen days, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: It was a way to get away from home.  And then we went--we went over to Hot Springs [Arkansas] and got married.  So it wouldn't come out in the Little Rock [Arkansas] papers, 'cause you know they print the death, and the weddings.  And so then we started, we went out got the--I started crying.  So when we got to St. Louis [Missouri], he said, "Call your parents [Salley Crawford Hadley and Willis Hadley] and tell 'em where you are; tell them that you got married."  He said how--he said, "By the way, how, how old are you?"  I said, "Nineteen."  But of course I was seventeen.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So could he have--
Speaker 2: He said, "Well, you are of age.  Call your parents."  Well I called 'em in St. Louis and my father said, "You just wait right there, young lady.  And you tell that man I'm coming and I'm bringing my shotgun and I'm gonna blow his brains out."  And so I told him, I said, "My papa's coming and he gonna blow your brains out."  He said, "Well you know I'm not gonna stick around for that."  So we, we came on--he said, "How old are you now?"  I said, "Nineteen."  And he said, "I wanna know exactly how old you are."  I said, "Seventeen."  So he said, "My Lord, what have I gotten myself in?  Say, you know you got to be eighteen years old to marry without consent of your parents."  He said, "I don't know what to do."  So his stepfather, yeah it was his stepfather, said, "Now I tell you what.  I would send this girl back to Little Rock and I would go back to New York [New York] before--the marriage has not been consummated or anything like that, so send her back to Little Rock and you go back."  And I said, "Yeah, I wanna go home."  He said, "Do you really wanna go home?"  I said, "No, my father's gonna kill me if I go home."  He said, "Now what do you wanna do?"  I said, "Let's go to New York."  And so we came on into New York.  Landed on Sugar Hill, 355 Sugar Hill, never forget that address.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: And so, well what did your father do?
Speaker 2: Well my mother talked him in, I talked to my mother.  So you see you had party lines.  Everybody knew your business.  So when I called my mother, everybody gets on the line to find out what happened.  And my mother said, "You know you got everybody talking about you.  Now you made your bed, you're gonna have to lie in it," and my father came on the line and he said, "You heard what your mother said.  You made your bed, now you lie in it.  And I had planned for you to go to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and we had saved and scraped and these are hard times.  And I wanted you to go to Fisk.  And you have made your bed, you chose to run off with a prizefighter.  And you know it's not what I had in mind for you.  So but you just, you made your bed, now you lie in it."  So I did.  And I regretted that he never heard me speak without stuttering because I joined the acting classes and things.  And he never got a chance to see me on stage.  Those are things that I regret.  I think he would have been proud of what I did with my life.
Speaker 1: But you did see your father again, right?  You did see him again didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Then he learned to like my husband.  They used to go for long walks and talks and things like that.  He told, he forgave us and he said that I didn't make a bad choice, but he still wished I had gone on to school.  And I told him I was in school--had a WPA [Works Progress Administration] school at that time in Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] in the basement, that's where I met Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal].  And he's the one who told me I could get rid of my impediment by taking acting classes at the American Negro Theatre.  They had just found out--I think it was about two years old, the American Negro Theatre at that time.  And I was taking classes there, I was taking bookkeeping, which is coming in very handy with the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players.  And all of that.
Story_ID: 298000
Speaker 1: When you first got to New York [New York], I mean this is a big change.  Here you're leaving Little Rock [Arkansas] and coming to New York City and you're the only one--you only know one person.  That's your husband [Joe Jeannette, II].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So I mean how did you feel?
Speaker 2: I felt lonely.  I had my crying spells, and he was very, very patient.  And he said, "I want you to go and finish whatever education.  Go, find a school."  He took me to the YW [Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)] that was at 137th Street [West 137th Street Branch YWCA, New York, New York].  He said, "I want you to join the Y and get in the programs here.  I don't want to be the person that stops you from getting an education."  And so I started going to school.  One school after another.  I went to the New School of Dramatic Research [Dramatic Workshop, The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], I studied writing under [John] Gassner, studied directing under Strasberg, Lee Strasberg was my teacher in directing.
Speaker 1: Now did you--I mean is this, is this the first thing you did when you, when got here?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: No, the first thing I did, I joined the Y and took part in all of the activities there.  The swimming and whatever.  And then I joined the WPA [Works Progress Administration] schools.  I didn't go to the colleges because they was teaching you then how to do a trade.  And I took a secretarial course, shorthand and all of that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the--those were the first things I did when I got here.  Then I met Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal] and he said, "I notice that you stammer.  We got good speech therapists at the American Negro Theatre."
Speaker 1: Now how long had you been here when, when you started going to the American Negro Theatre?
Speaker 2: I started at American Negro Theatre in 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd been here about nine years when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay 1942, now, now in the meantime when you got here, was your husband still fighting?  Was he still a boxer?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  He was training fighters, he was training fighters.  You know in those days they want you to lay down for somebody, some white hope, great white hope.  They wanted you to take a dive for that.  And he refused to do that, so he started training fighters.  He also started working on the docks.  Go down there and work on the docks, and then he would, he worked out at Stillman's Gymnasium [New York, New York] right here on 116th Street [sic. 125th Street], the Pioneer Gymnasium [New York, New York], and he trained fighters for the Golden Gloves and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all those--those were jobs that paid money, the training (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 298001
Speaker 1: When did you become the first woman to--
Speaker 2: Ride a motorcycle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I rode a motorcycle, I think it was in 1935.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?  I mean how did--what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband [Joe Jeannette, II] was the president of the Harlem Dusters.  That was a motorcycle club with fifty members, Harlem Dusters, he was the president.  And most of them had their girlfriends and wives, they brought them to the auxiliary, ladies' auxiliary.  We rode behind our husbands.  And we would go on gypsy tours and whatnot.  And it was really a wonderful club.  I mean everybody was well disciplined, if not you had to get out.  If you broke rank or tried to show off or something like that when we went out, they were unified.  And so my husband said one day to me, "How would you like to be the first woman to learn to ride a motorcycle in the club?"  He didn't think about riding in the state, he didn't know, we didn't know that until I got my license and they said that well you know you're the first woman.  And I said, "No.  I'm satisfied riding behind you.  I just hold onto you.  No, no, no."  He said, "Well let's try it anyway."  And he would take me on 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard] there, they had this--the L ran on 8th Avenue at that time.  The L train, they had these big pillars.  And he would push me with no motor running, take the motorcycle and push me around, and have me to guide in and out those L posts to get the swing of the motorcycle.  Then he would get on and crank it up and he said, "Now hold onto me and watch me."  And then he would take the motorcycle and go in and out those el posts like that.  All right.  Then he cranked it up and he showed me where the handbrakes were, where the foot brakes were, and where the gas--you turn on here, hand brake left hand, the gas was here, and showed me how to crank it.  And then he put it on the stand and he just let me get the feel of the motor and that up on the stand, not moving.  Then he pulled the stand out from under me.  He said, "Now I want you to ease on up off the clutch, ease it on down and turn on the gas slowly."  And I'm--and he walked along with me, but he didn't put his hands on it.  So I went on.  And he said, "Now I'm gonna stand back.  All you got to do, you know the brakes.  If you feel wobbly or anything.  But don't feel wobbly, just sit straight, don't try to guide the motorcycle.  Just sit straight on it."  And so finally I got the hang of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he kept on 'til I got it and I went up and took my license, took the test.
Speaker 1: Now how long did it take you to learn how to do it?
Speaker 2: I guess he pushed me around those L posts about a good, for about a month, about two or three days a week for about a month.
Speaker 1: Okay so, and what year did you get your license?  Was that '35 [1935]?
Speaker 2: It was '35 [1935].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now at this time did you know how to drive a car?
Speaker 2: No.  Oh yeah, yeah.  I learned to drive a car, we had three cars.  A Dodge, well the Dodge truck and a Chrysler.  I'll never forget that 1927 Chrysler that I learned on.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Now you learned how to drive in New York [New York] or did you already know?
Speaker 2: Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Little Rock.  Now that was 1927.  I think I was about thirteen or fourteen.  I learned to drive a car.
Story_ID: 298002
Speaker 1: When was it that you became the first woman to get a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Taxi driver?
Speaker 1: Yeah, woman taxi driver.
Speaker 2: That was in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's the same--
Speaker 2: You see that was when World War II [WWII] started.
Speaker 1: That's '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: They advertised in the paper, they said that so many men were being taken, and that they were gonna have to train women to drive the cabs (background noise).  Women were going into plants and everything else, taking over jobs that men, you know, and I said, "Well I know one thing, I can drive a car.  I don't know nothing about working over there in those plants and things."  But I went down and got an application, and they gave me a book about the city and whatnot, but I had ridden all over Brooklyn [New York], and everywhere on that motorcycle with my husband [Joe Jeanette, II] and in the cars.  I pretty much knew more than the cab drivers knew anyway. But I took the book, and I'm a quick study.  I got the main streets in Brooklyn, the main streets and whatnot.  So when they came up for the test, I took the oral test and then they--now the men don't have to do this.  If they get a driver's license, they don't have to take the test.  And you know these drivers, these cab drivers today, they--you have to tell them where to go and how to get there because they don't know anything.  But we had to take a test and they would say such and such.  "If I'm on Central Park West at 86th Street and Central Park West and I wanna go to 120 Broadway.  How would you get there?  What is the nearest way?"  And I would--I would tell 'em.  I said, "If you wanna go through the city, that will be the nearest way.  The quickest way would be to go and get the drive, then go down and you'll come off at South Ferry [Street], and then you go to Broadway, and then you go down to 120."  And I passed the test.  That day, thirty-two of us took the test and only two of us passed.  But the other girl didn't get her license because she had citations on her driver's license.  And so I, I was the first.  And I made every paper in New York [New York], we had six papers.  We had the Journal [New York Journal-American], the [New York Daily] Mirror, The [New York] Times, the New York [Daily] News.  I made every paper.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful--
Story_ID: 298003
Speaker 1: At the same time, now 1942, you're taking lessons at the American Negro Theatre, right?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband [Joe Jeannette, II] didn't know about me driving the cab until he saw it in the papers.  'Cause he never would have allowed me to take that test.  And then he came home, said, "I have to look in the papers to find out what my wife is doing behind my back."  And I said, "Well now you don't have to pay for my acting lesson."  I said, "I can drive a cab and pay for my own acting lessons."  So that's the way I paid for my acting lesson.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was the American Negro Theatre like?  I mean who did you meet there?
Speaker 2: Well I met Alice--these people were there when I got there.  [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, Alice Childress, Clarice Taylor, the girl who does Moms Mabley so well.  Alvin Childress, Alice's husband, who later went in and did 'Amos 'n Andy' out there on the coast.
Speaker 1: Who did he play in Amos?
Speaker 2: He was the one with--the driver, the cab driver.  That's Alvin Childress (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was Amos [Jones].
Speaker 2: Amos.
Speaker 1: He played Amos.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he played Amos, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the head of the outfit was the founders, Abe Hill [Abram Hill] and Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Fred O'Neal was the one who recommended that I go there.  So I went and I said, "I just want to take the speech class, nothing else."  But they insisted that I would have to take the whole course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I mean how long was it before you were cured of stammering?
Speaker 2: They said I was cured long before I would admit it.  They just kept on, they pushed me out on the stage.  They said, "You got to get out there.  'Cause you haven't--just don't think about it."  And I found if I learned what I was gone--knew what I was going to say, I wouldn't stammer.  And I made sure I knew what I was going to say before I went out there.  I studied.  And I had what everybody thought was--would tell me was what do you call these memories?
Speaker 1: A photographic memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I could read something over once or twice and I almost could recite it verbatim, you know what I mean?  And I learned that because of my speech, I remember if I could just know what I was gonna say, I wouldn't have too much stammering to do.  So I was there two years.  And the first time--and they insisted that everybody who's graduating had to audition for the play.  And I was shocked when I was cast as the leading--I auditioned because I didn't think they--I was gonna get it anyway.  And they gave me the leading role.
Speaker 1: And what play was it?
Speaker 2: It was called 'Our Town.'
Speaker 1: Now, Thornton Wilder's 'Our Town'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Thornton Wilder's 'Our Town.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know you did everything improv.  I mean you had no real props.  But I played the part of the stage--narrator.  I was the narrator.  And now just imagine somebody--I went to my teacher, Ms. Thornton [ph.], not Ms. Thornton, Osceola Archer [Osceola Macarthy Adams].  She was also [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and all of their teacher.  They came on after the war [World War II, WWII], they came in 1945.  I was there in 1942.  In fact, I registered Sidney Poitier when he came in.  They came in under the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 1: Okay, you actually registered him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he would tell you I would--I was responsible for him staying there too.  Because he got up and auditioned, he was saying--he did this 'O Captain! My Captain!' [Walt Whitman]  I don't know if you know that poem or not.  But it's a rhyme about twenty-five verses, "O Captain, My Captain, do you see the dawn?" [sic].  Or something like that, whatnot.  "Oh Captain," and he had a West Indian accent, you could just cut it with a knife.  And naturally students sitting out there listening to the audition, they were giggling and whatnot.  But he--and they ask for this only for three or four minutes.  But he insisted on doing all twenty-five of those verses, whatever.  And then when he got through, he ran off the stage 'cause everybody was in stitches by the time--because Abe Hill just kept saying, "Thank you young man, thank you."  And he just kept going.
Story_ID: 298004
Speaker 1: We were discussing the dynamic between Ms. Osceola Archer [Osceola Macarthy Adams] and Sidney Poitier and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte in terms of her being their teacher and acting coach.
Speaker 2: Well, I had graduated almost then, and I was called one of the senior students.  And I was allowed to go out, and Osceola Archer would take me--she would teach.  She would direct big stars in summer stock.  And she would take me along as an apprentice.  And I mean big stars.  She would direct up in summer stock, but she--
Speaker 1: Like who?  Now what big stars?
Speaker 2: Well [Guy Edward] Hearn for one, who's a great Broadway actor.  And what was--this Irish guy that played on Broadway for years.  Fredric March was one of the stars.  Ethel Barrymore.  Did she direct that--but I was in that--I took lessons out under the shady tree.  I know what we do in summer stock, you know.  We'd be rehearsing one play in the daytime and go on stage with another play at that night, you know what I mean.  And the next week we would go up with this play that we were rehearsing, and we started rehearsing another play.  That would be for the whole summer season.  We'd go up there, what is this, Haverstraw, New York, that was one.  And what was up there in Massachusetts, what is that resort place up there where all the rich people go?
Speaker 1: You're talking about Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] or--
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard, and where are the Kennedys?
Speaker 1: In Hyannis Port [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Hyannis Port.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All up there.  And that's where most of the rich (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nantucket [Massachusetts], all that.
Speaker 2: Summer stock theater is--
Speaker 1: Cape Cod [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Cape Cod.  That's where we would go.  And I remember what we would have to do as apprentices, we would maybe have one line to go on and say.  And then we would have to be the dresser for the stars, you know.  And I was appointed to be Ethel Barrymore's dresser one time.  And that night I had to go and say, "Your tea is ready, madam."  And I would just get the shakes before I'd go on to say that one line.  So I'm gonna--and then in the daytime you'd go out under the shade trees, and these stars will teach you your different--you take your advanced course in acting.  And you were allowed to ask different questions.  You can ask about certain things that happened on stage, and why did this happen, and whatnot.  And they would give us free lessons.  We didn't get paid, we just only got a stipend.  And I kept costumes cleaned and ironed and whatnot.  And then I would serve her her cup of tea out there under the shade tree.  Mostly with scotch.  So one time I asked her, I said, "Ms. Barrymore, what do you do to get rid of the butterflies?"  I said, "I only have this one line and I die a thousand deaths before I go out and say that one line."  She says, "Well you say it very well my dear.  Now about the butterflies, if you should happen to learn how to get rid of the butterflies, then will you please tell me?  I get them every night."  She said, "I have never gone on stage without butterflies.  But when I start talking, they disappear."  And I learned that, I learned that once you got out there, just act natural and they'll go away.  But it's so hard.
Speaker 1: You need more than one line to get rid of them I guess if you--you know she had a lot of lines probably to help her (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  But I'd go out there and I'd say, "Madam, your tea is ready."  Your tea is served or something, whatever it was.  And then I disappeared.  I'd go off the stage and say my God, you'd thought I had gone out there and done a whole scene.
Speaker 1: So now--so you did summer stock and--
Speaker 2: Long before I hit Broadway.  I had a lot of summer stock under my--and I had worked with a lot of famous people.
Story_ID: 298005
Speaker 1: You wrote a play.  We have some pictures of a play that you wrote that Isabel Sanford was in and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'This Way Forward' [Gertrude Jeannette].  It was all about the farm life, and everything as I knew it.  'This Way Forward.'
Speaker 1: When did you write that play?
Speaker 2: I started writing in--let me see, I was at American Negro Theatre, '42 [1942], in 1945.  And I finished it, I put it up at the American Negro Theatre first, American Negro Theatre workshop in 1950.  That was the first time it was done.  And I was encouraged to go get on and do some rewrites on it.  Then I've done it several times and a lot of the colleges and things have done it.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know one of the actresses in there was Isabel Sanford, I think we saw on the picture, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Isabel Sanford, the first time she was in a play.  She also started out with American Negro Theatre, but it closed down the year that she started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so she stayed on with my group [the Elks Community Theatre].  I took over the space that American Negro Theatre had vacated.
Speaker 1: And what space was that?
Speaker 2: That was, the American Negro Theatre had rented two floors from the Elks [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks] building there, 15 West 126th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifteen West, that's Max Glanville, Alice Childress and all of them, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee.
Speaker 1: So this is--we're talking about 1950 or so, or--
Speaker 2: They closed in--well they really shut down before that, but they kept the workshops and things going 'til 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I took over in 1950.
Speaker 1: But you saw the development of Sidney Poitier and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte when they first came.
Speaker 2: Yes, I saw Sidney Poitier and Harry Belafonte, and a boy by the name of, Smith [ph.] was his last name.  He was a beautiful singer.  He's dead now too.  And a guy from Louisiana, he came in--a gang of 'em came in under the Bill of Rights [G.I. Bill, Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  Very talented young men.  And Grillo [Evelio Grillo, Sr.] was his last name, and he was from New Orleans [Louisiana].  But he went back teaching back down there and he went back teaching.  He went back and got his degree from that--what is the name of that famous university there in New Orleans?  Malane [sic. Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] or something like that.  I can't think of it now.
Speaker 1: Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: There's Xavier.
Speaker 2: Xavier, maybe that, I think that may have been that, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Xavier in New Orleans I know, those two.  Those are two black schools there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis part of the group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Ossie was really with another group that was--with Dick Campbell in another library.  We started out at the--you know where the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] is now?  The Countee Cullen [Library, New York, New York]?  We started out in the basement there.  And then we moved to 15 West--we took over two floors there at the Elks' building.  And he came in--now Ossie was not a part of that, but he was infatuated with Ruby Dee.  And he was over there as much as he was at the other library at 125th Street and Fifth Avenue.  Yeah, yeah, 125th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The library there.  They, they had that basement, and Dick Campbell, he was the--he did a lot of [U.S.] Army shows.  What you call 'em?  The USO [United Service Organizations]?
Speaker 1: USO, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, USO shows.  And he was married to Muriel Rahn, the first operatic singer, you know Muriel Rahn?  She was the first, she was before Marian Anderson.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: Muriel, M-U-R-I-E-L, Muriel, R-A-H-N, I think is the way she spelled her name.  I don't, I'm not sure.  Better look that up, Muriel Rahn, opera singer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 298006
Speaker 1: You started a group up yourself in 1950 then, you started your own group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.  We went under the name of the Elks Community Theatre.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After--Elks Community Theatre.
Speaker 1: And what are the highlights of the Elks Community Theatre?
Speaker 2: Well that's--we did several plays there.  Frank Silvera would come around and direct some.  And he would help me out and that's when I would try to get him to audition for other than black roles.  Then he finally did.  But he was a big help.
Speaker 1: Now you suggested, now we talked about this off camera, but it's not on camera, but now.  But can you tell us about him?  Now Frank Silvera, what did he look like and what was his dilemma?
Speaker 2: Well I remember that he used to come and he just would come back from an audition.  And he--well he always called me sis.  He would say "Sis, I'm too black for white and I'm too white for black.  But I'm the best damn actor in this town."  I said, "You certainly are," and he was.  He said, "Now I know I should have had that role.  I know nobody read that role better than me, and nobody could that role better than I could.  But they gave it to somebody else because I'm not black enough."  And so I said to him, I said, "Why do you always audition for just black roles?"  I said, "You say yourself you too black for blacks.  There's in between people who, not looking as white as white, you know, black as black."  I said, "Why don't you audition for some of those roles?"  I said, "There are Italian roles."  I said, "You're good at languages."  I said, "Mexican roles."  I said, "Jewish roles."  He said, "But that's--you know there's a part, a good Jewish part they're casting for.  You know I'm going down and read for it because I can speak a little Yiddish.  I'm going down there and audition for it."  I said go, go.  And he went down and he auditioned and he got the role.  He played the father of Strasberg's daughter [Susan Strasberg], I forget her name now.  Lee Strasberg was a great actor.  Then he came out of the acting profession and he started teaching directing.
Speaker 1: He was teaching [Konstantin] Stanislavski's method acting.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  A lot of people studied under.  I think Marlon [Brando] did.  I think Marlon was there when I was there, but I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're talking about Marlon--
Speaker 2: Marlon Brando.  But he was back in the younger class.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Frank Silvera, so he had a interesting career.  He was a great actor, but he--
Speaker 2: Great actor.  He knew theater, he knew makeup.  He made me up for my first Broadway role.  They were--they had been auditioning for the mother [Grace Kumalo] in 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson].  That Paton's book ['Cry, the Beloved Country,' Alan Paton], beautiful story, was turned into a musical.  Some said that the director made catfish row out of it.  Made, made, what is that musical?
Speaker 1: 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] out of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he turned it into another--this same director directed 'Porgy and Bess' too, you know.  Rouben Mamoulian directed both, both pieces, 'Porgy and Bess.'  And they said he took this beautiful story about South Africa and turned it into a musical.  And so he said, "Sis, go down and audition for that mother.  Go down."  I said, "Well you know they're not gonna take me."  I said, "I'm not a professional."  And I said, "All these professional people are auditioning and whatnot."  He said they're not satisfied.  Said, "This girl has just--this woman is supposed to be just about your complexion," because you know in South Africa, they had what you called the coloreds, light brown skin.  And he said, "You look like the woman that they want."  So he took my--I was wearing my hair real long in.  He took and parted it in the center.  I think I showed you a picture back there of that.  Parted it in the center, brought it round and he twisted up and made a bun in the back.  And he tried to put a little gray around my edges there.  And I had to play the part of a mother, of a twenty-nine year old boy.  I think I was twenty-nine or thirty-two or something like that.  But anyway, he took me down on the subway, and I went in, I auditioned.  I didn't care.  I just auditioned because I knew I wasn't gonna get the role, but I was going to satisfy Silvera.  And so they told me to read this and I read it.  And they said read this, I read it.  They said well turn to page so-and-so and read that.  I did.  He said, "Do you belong to the union?"  I said, "No."  Then I got up to leave.  He said, "Wait just a minute."  He said, "We can, we can put you in the union, and but we'll just take so much out of your salary every week."  And so the stage manager said, "Ms. Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeanette], he's trying to tell you you got the role."
Story_ID: 298007
Speaker 1: Then I got frightened.  I wasn't frightened at first 'cause I had nothing to lose.  But now--and I just--he said, "Give Ms. Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeanette] a script."  So now we've got the cast for this.  The mother [Grace Kumalo] was the one thing.  And [Alan] Paton who wrote the book ['Cry, the Beloved Country'], he was sitting over there, he was very pleased.  He said, "I'm very pleased, I'm very pleased with her."
Speaker 2: Alan Paton.
Speaker 1: Alan Paton.  And so the--I went out and Frank [Silvera] was sitting on outside that.  And I was stunned, I was in shock.  He said, "What happened?"  I said, "I got the role."  And he just picked me up and whirled me around.  "I knew you'd get it, I knew this was your role.  Come on girl, let's go and start working on this piece."  So he brought me on back to the apartment and he said--I said I got to be at rehearsal tomorrow.  He said, "Yeah, they've been waiting to cast the mother.  That's why all these--they finally found--I knew you was what they were looking for."  So anyway I got it.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This was the year of 1949, '49 [1949].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you said that was the year you were born, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: That's the first year I was on Broadway.
Speaker 2: And what's the name of it again?  Alan Paton's--
Speaker 1: 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson].
Speaker 2: 'Lost in the Stars,' right.
Speaker 1: That's the name they gave it, but it was called 'Cry, the Beloved Country.'  It was taken from 'Cry, the Beloved Country.'  That beautiful novel.  They turned it into a musical and called it 'Lost in the Stars.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now that, that clarifies it for me, 'cause I knew they did 'Cry, the Beloved Country,' but I didn't--so they did it as 'Lost in the Stars' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'Lost in the Stars.'  And Kurt Weill wrote the music to that.  And now they--[Rouben] Mamoulian was thought that all black people could sing.  He didn't audition me to sing anything.  The first day of rehearsal, we ran through the script and we sat around and we did the script.  And he said to the music director, said, "Take Ms. Jeannette down there and go over her song with her because I'd like to hear it."  And I said, "What song?"  He said, "You have one number to sing."  I said, "I don't sing."  He said, "You don't sing."  He said, "I know you can sing with that speaking voice, I know you can sing."  So Georgette Harvey was in the company, and Georgette Harvey was a known concert singer.  And she was world known, she had traveled all--in fact she was engaged to an emperor's son in Japan, and he paid her off to get her out of town.  And, but that she was a beautiful woman in her younger days.  But now she was in her twilight zone when--twilight years when, when she was in that.  And I was so honored just to be in the cast with this great Georgette Harvey.  So she said to--and she had also played in the original 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gerswhin].  And she said, "Mr. Mamoulian, I can teach her how to sing that song.  Anybody who can speak as well as she speaks and has that tone, I can teach her to sing."  Says just give her to me.  And he said, "Well we've got to get somebody else in here," they was gonna get ready to take the part from me.  But Paton said, "No, I want her as the mother, I want her as the mother."  And so Georgette Harvey, bless her soul, she worked with me for weeks and I--and she said--she came back.  She said "Mr. Mamoulian, I was wrong.  Everybody who speaks well cannot sing.  This child is tone deaf."
Speaker 2: Well what happened?  How did they get around that?
Speaker 1: Well, they started auditioning people all over again who could sing.  But most of the people they auditioned, I would go up there in my dressing room and I looked down on the stage and there they were.  We'd break for lunch.  When we'd break for lunch, they were auditioning people to take my part.  But Paton had made up his mind that they have to give that song to someone else.  That he was gonna keep me.  And they kept auditioning people who could sing.  They could get people there who could sing, but they could not--and they got people who could act, they couldn't sing.  So--and Paton said, "I want her as my mother.  I want her as my mother."  Said, "You've got, you got a lot of singers around here.  Give that song to someone else."  So Todd Duncan took it.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: They rewrote it so a man could sing it.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and you didn't have to sing.
Speaker 1: 'The Little Gray House.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was that song, 'The Little Gray House.'
Speaker 2: Okay, so how long did the play run?
Speaker 1: We were on Broadway two years and then we toured for a year.
Speaker 2: That's a pretty good run.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 298008
Speaker 1: We opened the same time as this play that you--'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] was playing across the street from us.  And with this girl that you was talking about, and they closed at the same time we did and they went on tour with us.  We met out there in San Francisco [California] and we had softball teams.  We would play their team and when we went down to Los Angeles [California], they came on down to Los Angeles.  They played at one theater, we were playing at another theater.  And we toured together, 'South Pacific,' and we would get together at night and go to the bowling alley, things like that.
Speaker 2: Now was all this theater activity, hard on your marriage?  Did your husband [Joe Jeannette, II] care about you being on the road so much?
Speaker 1: He was so happy.  He pushed my career every step of the way.  And he was--long before I would get, he would tell Frank [Silvera]--talk to her.  She's doubting herself.  He felt so guilty that I--my father [Willis Hadley] made him feel so guilty 'bout me not going to, my not going to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], until he felt it was his duty to make me-- he never reached his pinnacle of being heavyweight champion, 'cause black people weren't allowed to be heavyweight champion after Jack Johnson, you know, until Joe Louis came along.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you toured--so, so what, what happened after this play?  The woman of 'South Pacific' we were talking about was Juanita Hall, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Juanita Hall, right.  And she was similar to Frank Silvera in that she played many different kinds of people.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Other than African Americans, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to know her very well?
Speaker 1: No, only when--just when we'd go out and she wasn't much in the activities with the cast.  We'd go out to the bowling alleys and we had a softball team that we would play round robin.  Whatever team was in town, we would challenge that team all through the tour.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what did you do after 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson]?
Speaker 1: 'Lost in the Stars.'  Let me see, you mean my next--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh, I came back and I got busy with my own group [Our Theater] and started working with my own group.  And then what was my next play on Broadway?
Speaker 2: Now what year was 'Lost in the Stars'?  That was--
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-nine [1949].
Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949] and '50 [1950]?
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950] and I think we closed in fifty--the tour ended in '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay, so '49 [1949] to '52 [1952].
Story_ID: 298009
Speaker 1: So you came back and started working with your own group at (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Now what was my next--
Speaker 1: It was still the Elks Community Theatre, was it called?
Speaker 2: Elks Community Theatre.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later opened--when we left the Elks Community Theatre because of--it was getting ready to close down or something.  I found a place out at One West 125th Street.  And we called it Our Theater.  I rented that basement down there and I put in Our Theater.  And we started there.  And I got help from Leigh Whipper.  You remember Leigh Whipper?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  In fact our director [Julieanna Richardson] interviewed him just before he passed away, on audiotape, yes.  It wasn't--she didn't have--she was in college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] then and she didn't have access to video.  But she did interview him on audiotape.  And Leigh Whipper, now he was the son of Frances Rollin Whipper who wrote the biography ['Life and Public Services of Martin R. Delany,' Frank A. Rollin] of Martin Delany (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --back in the 1900s [sic.], yeah.
Speaker 2: And you see I tell these young people today that Clarence Muse and Leigh Whipper and those people were educated people.  I tell them about Hattie McDaniel was an educated woman, and did concerts with people like Paul Robeson.  She was a great singer.  But they had to do roles that you would call Uncle Tom roles, but I call them doing roles that were about the time, the piece.  You know what I mean?  Like 'Gone with the Wind.'  I said she did a marvelous job in that.  Well I think she was the first woman to get Academy Award [Oscar] for supporting actress.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, and she had a big role in the movie.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And she did well.  I don't care what role she played, she played it well.
Speaker 1: Did you know her very well?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know her very well.
Speaker 1: Did you--I know Butterfly McQueen lived here.
Speaker 2: I knew Butterfly McQueen.  That was another educated girl.  She was really educated.
Speaker 1: Where did she go to school, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know where Butterfly went to school.  I think it was here in New York [New York].  I think it was on a--I think it was either Case [ph.] or Hunter College [New York, New York] that she got her degree [sic. City College of New York, New York, New York].  But she had a Ph.D. [sic.].  And people talk about that girl played that role, in fact she should have been nominated too.  And then when you sit down and talk to her, you're talking to a very educated person.  And since I've been in the theater, she helped me out a great deal.  But she was sick and she would begin--and she was so hurt over the way that she felt that her own people viewed her, of the type of roles that she played.  And I would tell them, I say you're standing on the shoulders of the Butterfly McQueens.  I said you're standing on their shoulders.  She was, she was a brilliant actress.  And she was very--she would come into the theater and, and--"What is this trash doing, let's clean this place up.  Spick and span, pick up that"--and then out--she bought a house, one of these brownstone houses.  And she would get up and sweep out in front of everybody else's in her block.  And everybody said she was senile and crazy.  She said, "Because I refuse to live--and because people say that we are filthy, we don't have to be like they say we are--"
Story_ID: 298010
Speaker 1: We were talking about the documentary 'Scandalize My Name[: Stories From the Blacklist]' about the [Senator Joseph] McCarthy era.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they--you are on giving testimony, so is [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.  You said Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal] and some others.  It's run on public television a lot.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what was that era like for you?  I mean what can you tell us about that era?
Speaker 2: Well, you see it happened at a time when it didn't affect me too much because I wasn't a big name.  He was going after big names.  And see Ruby Dee and Ossie, they were well known in the theater.  And so was Dick Campbell, Fred O'Neal and some of these people, you know, who didn't get called up, they were accused of turning in others.  But I don't think they could prove a lot of the people, so I won't even call their names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think it--do you suspect that what they were trying to do was turn people against each other and probably destroy--
Speaker 2: Well you see a lot of people had to leave here and go, like William Marshall.  Bill Marshall had to go to France.  He came back here a few years ago, and he did a few things out in California.  But a lot of people left and some people died over this.  And they couldn't make a living here, because they were blacklisted, on the blacklist.
Speaker 1: So this is a serious, some serious business.  So this is in the early '50s [1950s], right, when this reaches its heyday I guess until--I think it was '54 [1954] that McCarthy sort of, he lost steam and he crashed.  When that trial [Army-McCarthy hearings] was televised in a lot of--public opinion turned against what he was doing.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 298011
Speaker 1: Now in the '50s [1950s] did you continue to run your theater group, Our Theater?
Speaker 2: Yeah, did Our Theater, and I stayed there until--and then I went on the road with different shows.  Some with big stars like in 'The Little Foxes' [Lillian Hellman].  I worked with people like Geraldine Page and this woman from England, what was her name?  She was married to the big star in England, the star there.
Speaker 1: Vivien Leigh, or not--
Speaker 2: Vivien Leigh.
Speaker 1: The one that was married to Laurence Olivier.
Speaker 2: Laurence Olivier, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess I worked in every big city that produces plays with big stars.
Speaker 1: Now the plays with big stars, though, there's a--usually when black people were in those plays in those days, they had to play the servant, right?
Speaker 2: Well 'Little Foxes' was a servant.  But this role could be played.  I could show you the reviews that I got when I played with Geraldine Page.  And they said--it went on--they talked about Geraldine Page and then her accomplish--being an accomplished actress.  Said, "But when--when Ms. Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette] is on the stage, you don't see anybody but Ms. Jeannette."  Said, "Rarely have we seen anyone with so much dignity."  You see it's not the role that you play, it's the way you play it.  And that's the way I was taught by Osceola Archer [Osceola Macarthy Adams].  Say if you can be a ditch digger and play it with dignity.  Play it believably.  And so when I had my little arguments on stage with, you know, her, I would just tell her.  Just look her in the face and, and talk to her.  Because I felt secure because of her husband.  See her husband left me practically in charge of raising the daughter.  And I would tell her.  I said, "Mr. So-and-So wouldn't like that."  And I just look--and I wouldn't say, "Mr. So-and-So ain't gonna like that."  I just said you know Ms. Scarlett, Mr. So-and-So--not Ms. Scarlett.  What was her name in 'The Little Foxes'?  'The Little Foxes.'  I forget the name of--Bette Davis played it also.  But it's the way you play it.  And my father's [Willis Hadley] training, stand up straight and walk--the reason, one of the reasons the guy liked me so much in--
Speaker 1: 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson]?
Speaker 2: 'Lost in the Stars' is because he said, "You remind me of the women in Africa with your posture."  Said, "Those women can walk miles with a pail of water on their head and not spill a drop."  And you--my father used to teach us that.  Stand up straight.  That's not your culture, bending over.  You, your culture is stand straight, walk straight, look straight, talk straight.  That's the way we were brought up.
Story_ID: 298012
Speaker 1: Now did you know Paul Robeson?  I notice his picture is prominent in your apartment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew Paul.
Speaker 1: And what, yeah tell us about when did you meet Paul Robeson then?
Speaker 2: I met Paul Robeson up here at the Countee Cullen Library [New York, New York] when he spoke there.  When he was accused of being--and a lot of black people turned against him, said, "Why are you having him speak here?  He's a Communist, he's a red."  And most of them who were accusing him didn't even know what a red looked like.  Didn't know what a Communist look like.  But they had been taught that, you know, through the press.  That Paul Robeson's this and that and the other.  All I knew was that Paul Robeson taught the way my father [Willis Hadley] talked, about Africa and dignity of our culture.  And what we stood for.  That's all I knew.  And I loved him for it.  When they gave me the Paul Robeson Award, you'll see it over behind that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When they gave me that Paul Robeson Award, that's what I said in accepting the award.  I was at, up there at--what is the name of this place where he, he was the troopers, what you call those Nazi troopers, what you call 'em?
Speaker 1: The SS [Schutzstaffel].
Speaker 2: You know they came in with the--well, you're too young to know.
Speaker 1: Storm troopers?
Speaker 2: The storm troopers.  You know they had the Nazi gang right up there with the cross and everything on--
Speaker 1: Here in New York [New York] you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right up here at--they were going--they tried to lynch him up there.  You know they had--didn't you know New York State had one of the Nazi, one of the biggest Nazi camps?
Speaker 1: I think they called it the German American Bund.
Speaker 2: German American something.  They had it out there in Indiana here recently.  Remember they were marching out there.
Speaker 1: Then later it was the American Nazi Party.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: George Lincoln Rockwell, I think was in charge of that.
Speaker 2: Well this time they had--and they were calling them Communist and all of that.  And, but--and the New Yorkers didn't--upstate, they didn't care.  They didn't care because they were mostly Ku Klux Klan [KKK] themselves.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And we were up there on our motorcycle.  And my husband [Joe Jeannette, II] was somewhat of a--bodyguard, you know, kind of guarding Paul.  So they rushed Paul over to his car and whatnot.  And then he got on the motorcycle.  We got on the motorcycle and we followed the car on around until it was on out.
Speaker 1: Are you referring to the concert at Peekskill, New York?
Speaker 2: Peekskill, that's what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: The riot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking 'bout that Peekskill thing.  It was frightening.  And thing about it is, it didn't happen down south, it was here in New York.
Story_ID: 298013
Speaker 1: Paul Robeson, his last years are really quiet and he really didn't do, you know--well, what happened to him?
Speaker 2: We made him the first honoree of the Paul Robe- Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he died in Philadelphia.  His son [Paul Robeson, Jr.], I saw his son the other day.  And he was telling me he would like to get me on the committee that was trying to get a theater named after Paul Robeson.  And I told him I would help him all I can.  He went into bad health, but he never swayed one from what he stood for, and that's what I will always love him for.  He knew what he was saying was true.  He never lied about anything.  And they didn't say he lied.  They just said he shouldn't have said it.  And he got a lot of black people here in New York [New York] to say that they didn't want to be associated with him.  Just like for an instance, we do that.  We are so mis-educated.  I got to say this.  We're so mis-educated.  What we're doing, what they have been doing to our men who, who have made it and they're talented and brilliant.  They're doing the same thing to Michael Jackson now.  This boy hasn't done anything but help children because he sees himself as Peter Pan.  He has done--he has given so much money to charities.  He has given so much money to Africa.  No one person has donated as much money to helping colleges and African people, as this boy.  He owns, he's smart enough to own Neverland [Ranch, Santa Barbara County, California], which is on how many acres.  And stack it up--they say it's just like Disneyland [Anaheim, California].  Says it's not--Disneyland hasn't got too much on this.  All because he never had a childhood and he said he never wanted to grow up.  But he's brilliant, he's a genius.  His sons, he was genius enough, now he owned the catalog of The Beatles, the--Elvis Presley.  He owned his own catalog.  He's smart enough to invest in things that was gonna, you know.  But they're trying to take it away from him.  They gonna try to keep him in court.  Everybody they brought in there to testify against him, his lawyer has found out was a motive, money motive.  A reason he had fired somebody.  They bring in all these disgruntled people to do this, and then all the people who testified for him, they wouldn't allow this in.  They don't want that said.  I mean the judge out there, it's just so obvious that they're setting this boy up and they're gonna try to milk him of that money.
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: They did that to Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when--so in the '60s [1960s] I guess, I think Paul Robeson left the country at some point, didn't he?
Speaker 2: He--well, he traveled all over Europe.  He was wanted to speak here and all of the--Finland, Denmark and all of those places.  And he played [William] Shakespeare in most of these houses, England and all over, Russia, everywhere.
Speaker 1: He was international.
Speaker 2: He was an international star.
Speaker 1: But he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then they took his passport and wouldn't allow him to leave the country.  And that's when--and they wouldn't allow him to work here, and they wouldn't allow him to work abroad.  And that's what they gonna do to Michael Jackson.
Story_ID: 298014
Speaker 1: In terms of what you were doing during the '60s [1960s], what plays were you involved in during the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Well I went out to California to help Frank Silvera do Baldwin's [James Baldwin] '[The] Amen Corner.'  And we played out there for a couple of years.  San Francisco [California] and all the way around.
Speaker 1: So did you play Sister Margaret?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't play, I played Sister Odessa, which is the most demanding role in the whole play.  I mean Sister Odessa deals with all, all angles.  And then nearly every night Nat King Cole and Marlon Brando was in the audience.  And they were financing the show, mostly what kept it going.  They loved 'The Amen Corner.'  And Nat King Cole negotiated to bring it to Broadway.  He called, I can't think of his name right now, talked to him the other day.  They got a Broadway house, and we knew that Nat was outpatient with the cancer.  But he would come there and he would have bad days and whatever, he was taking that chemo.  The week that we was supposed to leave, that's the week he died.  But on his deathbed he told his wife [Maria Cole], take 'The Amen Corner' to Broadway.  So she did.  After we buried him, came on in here and we put it on Broadway.  Had a hard time on Broadway.  At that time they didn't have any set--at that time they didn't have any set designers, no stagehands, not even a wardrobe mistress, black, on Broadway.  Frank brought his own--he hired one here when he got here.  A black woman.  And he brought his own set designer because--so they said, "Well no he can't build a set.  He doesn't belong to the union."  So Frank said, "Then how much does it cost to join the union?"  He said, "Well it doesn't work like that."  Frank said, "I know how it works."  It works--handed down from the uncle to son and whatnot and you got your own little family.  And blacks are never in there.  So I wanna know how much it cost.  So he said, "It's gonna cost you so-and-so-and-so, but you gotta go through channels."  He said, "No, here's your check.  You just give it to whoever is supposed to get."  And he said, "What is the name of the union?"  Stage union, made it out to stagehand union.  And he kept it.  Then it leaked out to the press, the press got on it and he's coming in here, he's gonna change Broadway and whatnot.  They do the same thing like they try everything in the press.  We know what play's gonna go on and last before because the press will let you know if they get a preview.  They're gonna crash it anyway.  But anyway we went up on Broadway and then we had a offer to go to travel in Europe with it.  But then Baldwin organized his own European troupe to go.  He took it away from Frank Silvera because what the press was doing to him.  He didn't feel good.  But anyway, he took it away.
Speaker 1: And put a different cast up.
Speaker 2: He put a different cast.  He went up with--instead of Beah Richards, who was the person who's supposed to go, he took Claudia McNeil over there.  And then they stayed over there--after we closed on Broadway, then Rosetta LeNoire, who was playing my role, said she wanted out of that cast over there.  They wasn't up to her standard.  And she wanted out.  So [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards asked me would I go over, so I went over and I took her role.  That's what I played--I had invented the role anyway.  Anyway that was Broadway.
Story_ID: 298015
Speaker 1: I think it was '[The] Skin of Our Teeth' [Thornton Wilder] with Elizabeth Ashley starring in that.  And again, I took what I thought was a mediocre role [Ivy].  But wound up getting some of the best reviews in the whole cast.  And I've been very fortunate.  Taking roles that I thought was just--I mean second fiddle, I mean third, fourth, fifth fiddle.  Maybe all the way down.  And let me see, what was the next play?  I know I did Tennessee Williams' play, his last play ['Vieux Carre'].  There was another one that I--Sylvia, Sylvia--what was the name?  Sylvia--she played in all the old movies with Joan Crawford and all of--Sylvia Sidney.  You know her?  Maybe you're too young (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The name--
Speaker 1: Well I played with Sylvia Sidney in that.  And I had to sing some spirituals in it.  Now I can sing spirituals, but classical music like in 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson], I couldn't sing that.  So I had to sing that.  And do you know the guy who was auditioning for--what's this with the red hi-tops, brick, 'Somewhere over the Rainbow.'  What is that name of that?
Speaker 2: 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 1: 'The Wiz.'  He was auditioning 'The Wiz.'  And he came opening night and he heard me singing these spirituals, and he left a note in my dressing room to be--he would like to audition, he wanted me to audition the next day for--what was that mama?  My friend Theresa Merritt got that role.
Speaker 2: Oh, the evil witch (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that?
Speaker 2: Was it the evil witch?
Speaker 1: No, not the evil witch.
Speaker 2: The good witch?
Speaker 1: The mama.
Speaker 2: The mama, the mother, Auntie Em or--
Speaker 1: Auntie Em.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: That's the role he wanted me for.  And I had to tell him I didn't, I couldn't sing classical songs.  He said, "I heard you singing."  I said, "Well everybody's raised up on spirituals.  You got to do, you can sing that a capella anyway."  I said, "But I don't read music, I can't sing classical songs.  I don't have the voice."  "Well you sure could fool me.  When I heard you I said I gotta audition this girl."  And so that was my big chance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Everybody thinks I can sing, but I can't.  But everybody can sing the blues and things like that.
Speaker 2: Now you were in '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] quite a bit too on tour, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I would have been in the original, but at the time I was out of town on tour.  And I had a run of the play contract and I couldn't break it.  They were looking for me to do the mama in 'Raisin in the Sun,' because at that time Claudia McNeil had never been heard of.  Only in nightclubs, she did nightclub singing.  But she had never done anything dramatic.
Speaker 2: Now do you have a--I know you've done some television, some commercials.  You've done a lot of different things, but do you have a favorite role, or a favorite play that you were in, or TV show?
Speaker 1: I think maybe doing Mama [Lena Younger] was about my favorite role in 'Raisin.'  Whatever role that paid me, I would do it and that was my favorite role at the time.  I don't think I've done anything.  I worked with--I forgot that 'Nobody Loves an Albatross' [Ronald Alexander] with Robert Preston.  That was a fun play to do.  He was, he was fun to work with.  I played the part of his housekeeper [Sarah Washington], but I was his--they were doing a take-off on Susskind.  I don't know if you remember David Susskind.
Speaker 2: Right, David Susskind, right.
Speaker 1: Well they was doing a take-off on him.  And Robert Preston played David Susskind [Nat Bentley] and they said his housekeeper did all reading the scripts and passed on the scripts.  So I would read a script and Robert would ask me, he said, "What do you--did you read that script I gave you?"  I said, "Yes, I read it."  "What do you think of it?"  I would say, "It's all right, but it bogs down in the middle and I don't like the twist at the end.  He needs a new ending, I don't like that twist at the end."  So when the young man comes in with his script and he sits down, and he said, "Well your script is pretty good, but it bogs down in the middle, and I don't like the twist at the end."  He tells--and the audience would die laughing.  Every script, he would give it to me to read, and then I have to tell him, but I'm his housekeeper now.  And I would come in and I would serve tea and whatnot.  And he would be sitting there auditioning people.  And reciting--he never read the scripts.  I'm the one who was feeding him the script.  I enjoyed that; it was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 298016
Speaker 1: Do you have a particular philosophy of acting?
Speaker 2: My philosophy is know what you're going to do before you go on stage.  Know what you're gonna say, know why you're gonna say it.  Know who you're going to say it to, and all I know is, my philosophy is to know, know your craft.  Work hard at learning your craft.  Be--my philosophy I teach my students, be the character, don't act the character, be the character.  As Osceola Archer [Osceola Macarthy Adams] used to say use the five senses, see, hear, feel, taste, smell.  And she used to say be sure you see the person before you comment on it.  Be sure--if somebody walks in with a beautiful dress, let us know that you have seen the dress, before you say that is a beautiful dress.  Let us know you've seen it first.  If there's a smell, let us know that you smell something before you say, what is that I smell?  Let us know that you have smelled it.  Let us know you have--that iron is hot.  Before we--you say the iron is hot, we see you moving your hand away from it.  We know, we connect.  And use the five senses.  And that is be in the character and not act in the character.
Story_ID: 298017
Speaker 1: Tell me about the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players.  Now when did the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players start, and we know how it got named, right?  Those who have heard the first part of this interview know that Hadley is your maiden name and your father's [Willis Hadley] name, right?
Speaker 2: No, well when we organized, when we left the Our Theater and we went over to the place, rented the--over at St. Philip's.
Speaker 1: St. Philip's Episcopal Church [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got the whole basement down there.  And we gonna be closing down for the summer for some new renovations and whatnot.  But they said, what are we gonna call this group?  Cause we're gonna--this group is--we're gonna hold onto this group.  Well I had been teaching in the CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] program, and when that closed down, I got some of the people, you know, from that to come in with me.  And we were thinking of a name.  And they didn't wanna use Our Theater.  They said, "Ms. Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette], why don't we call it the Jeannette Theater?"  I said, "No, we're not gone make it personal.  We're gonna make it something that everybody, all of us, it will belong to all of us."  They said, "What is your maiden name?"  I said, "Hadley."  They said, "Why can't we call it the Hadley Theater?"  I said, "No, won't call it Hadley."  So they said, "Well give us some time to think it over."  So they went out and they came back and they said, "How 'bout Harlem Artists Development League Especially for You?"  I said I'll buy that.
Story_ID: 298018
Speaker 1: You just finished telling us how the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players were named.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Harlem Artists Development League Especially for You.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And abbreviated, it comes out H.A.D.L.E.Y.
Speaker 1: Now what year were the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players formed?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what have been some of the highlights of the organization, of the theater?
Speaker 2: I've done--Alice Childress has been there.  I've done her plays.  I've done '[To Be] Young, Gifted and Black,' [Lorraine Hansberry] which I originated, in that I played Mama and I originated that, in 'Young, Gifted and Black.'  I've done Mama [Lena Younger], '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] there.
Story_ID: 298019
Speaker 1: We were talking about the H.A.D.L.E.Y. Players and the kind of plays.  You said you produced plays by Alice Childress.  You did '[To Be] Young, Gifted and Black' [Lorraine Hansberry], 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry].
Speaker 2: And Dean [Philip Hayes Dean], what is his name?  He's out there in California now.  He's a good writer, he's out there writing.  Very difficult to work with, but he's a genius, he's a good writer.  I had to bar him from rehearsals a couple of times.  But what is, his last name is--oh my God, Dean, I wanna say Howard Dean, but that is our latest president candidate.  But I can't think of his name right now.  I've done his plays.  Who wrote the 'Blind Sty' [sic.]?
Speaker 1: '[The] Sty of the Blind Pig' [Philip Hayes Dean]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've done that.  I've done--this season we did that beautiful 'HOME' [Samm-Art Williams].  Do you know that play?  'HOME'?
Speaker 1: 'HOME,' right, yes.
Speaker 2: We did it and we got beautiful reviews for that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  'HOME'?
Speaker 2: 'HOME,' and we did 'The Old Settler' too by John Henry Redwood.  His wife directed it.  We have done some famous playwrights.  This guy Evans [Don Evans].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Art Evans?
Speaker 2: No, no, Lydia, 'The Song of Miss Lydia.' [sic. 'A Lovesong for Ms. Lydia,' Don Evans]
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Song of Miss Lydia' by Evans.  I, I--we have done some fabulous work.
Speaker 1: Now you're a friend of Loften Mitchell's too, you were a friend of Loften Mitchell.  I've seen pictures of--
Speaker 2: I mean that was my buddy, buddy, buddy.  Almost as close as Frank Silvera.  He had--I directed his first play called 'The Bancroft Dynasty' [Loften Mitchell].  A story of a middle class black family and everything was handed down, it was 'The Bancroft Dynasty.'  I directed that play.  And that was his first play.  Since then you know he has gone on to write plays for Broadway.  And then he had the chair up there in the New York university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], upstate here.  I forget which one it was now.  He was, he had that chair up there for a long time.  I can't think of it.  But anyway, we were very good friends and he was a wonderful writer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he also wrote the Paul Robeson eulogy.  He also wrote a history of Paul Robeson that is done on this guy, 'Like It Is,' Gil Noble's show, quite often.  And he and Paul were very good friends, very good friends.
Story_ID: 298020
Speaker 1: Do you have an assessment or an opinion about the state of black theater in the--today as opposed to what it used to be for black actors I guess in big shows and in community theater?
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, I wish--we have some very talented writers out there.  And I just wish they were bold enough to write--deal with the subject honestly and not write what they call commercial theater.  I think if they would do that, it may not sell on Broadway, but there's a whole big world out there.  And most of the big stars are taking advantage of that, going out on tours, and playing at the big universities and, and colleges, and what you call regional theater.  There's a whole big world out there.  Broadway is not everything.  Don't write because I can say this and I know it will get published.  If I portray this character this way, I know I can get on Broadway.  And if I use the N word a thousand times in the script, I know I can get to Broadway.  Now that's not taking anything from what the writer is, because one writer that I know that has to have all of this in there, redundantly, he's a very good writer.  But he writes commercially and he sometimes has four and five plays on Broadway at once.  I just wish that didn't have to happen in 2000.  The same thing about our music boys.  We have so many talented people out, the rappers and whatnot, so talented.  I just wish they would use that talent in a more positive way.  And I, I believe they would become millionaires.  Just as they're millionaires now, these rappers.  But my gosh, how we have to talk about their women and things like that, that's commercial.  The language they use, they do it because it'll sell.  But Michael Jackson's made millions, he never said any of those words.
Story_ID: 298021
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The concerns?  Not going back and dealing with their culture from a, from an educational matter.  If they deal with their culture, they got to do it in a distorted way to sell.  I just wish, I don't know.  I make this speech so often.  I just wish the community, I wish we as a people would stick together more; come together.  Don't let them divide us this way.  I know I can get a job if I say this.  I know I'll get my name in the paper if I do this.  I know I'm a writer, I would like to be--get on this newspaper or that newspaper and I won't get on there if I let 'em know that I'm proud of myself; that I'm a human being, and I feel just as you feel.  They're afraid to do that.  I was reading a piece this morning about Crunch [ph.], I think it was for the [New York] Daily News.  I don't mind calling his name because I tell it to his face.  And then Armstrong [HistoryMaker Armstrong Williams], we had a guy, Armstrong.  Well finally they caught up with him and he's no longer with us.  You know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 1: You're talking about Armstrong Williams?  The conservative--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That type of selling your soul to be on television.  Selling your soul to have an article in the paper.  That's selling your soul because you know these people are intelligent.  You know they know better.  They--you know that they know that they are lying.  They're telling the same lie that is being told to them.  That's--I just wish we would--and I can't talk about our ministers and the church too harshly.  I think they have really abdicated their position.  They should do more teaching and stop preaching.  I don't want them to tell me how I'm gonna live when I get to heaven.  I want them to tell me how I'm gonna live here on earth, and they don't do that.  They'll tell you--they, they will not denounce this war in Iraq [Iraq War], this vulgar war in Iraq.  This unnecessary--and them lives that are being lost over there.  These preachers refuse to get up in church and preach against it because they took the money.
Story_ID: 298022
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think maybe I would like to have been a lawyer like Cochran [Johnnie Cochran].  But maybe I wouldn't have gotten too far because I would be so outspoken.  And we had two lawyers here, two good lawyers to lose their license because they were good.  And we had a judge just died, they called him "Turn 'Em Loose Bruce" Wright [Bruce M. Wright].  He knew when the cops brought in somebody and they had trumped up charges on him.  He knew.  And he would turn 'em loose.  They called him "Turn 'Em Loose Bruce" Wright.  I would be that type of person.  And they--well he just died.  But he could write poetry and he could rhythm.  And every time they would try to pin him in, why did you do this?  And he would bring the law, read the law to them.  The law says this, the law says that.  And he would go by the book of the law.  And he judged by the law.
Speaker 1: So you're saying you would--if you had another pro--another lifetime, you'd try another profession.  Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because this is so divided, we are so divided.  We--I've been trying to organize the different theater groups where we could come together and help one another, and put on great plays.  And if I'm gonna open this week, you don't open.  And then you open next week.  I support you.
Speaker 1: Now there was--do you remember the Black Theater Alliance back in the old days with Hazel Joan Bryant I think it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was part of that.  And we got the black alliance now, we got a new one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We meet every first Monday.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so that's--
Speaker 2: We still not getting together, but we trying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.]?  Did you--are they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a member.  Been a member of AUDELCO--in fact from the very beginning.  What's the girl who started it?  Vivian Robinson.  She came to me and she wanted to introduce some pioneers.  And she didn't know different wants.  I gave her the name of the first pioneers that she put on the roster--Dick Campbell, Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal], I think Leigh Whipper and all that gang.  And yeah, I've been a member of AUDELCO since its beginning.
Story_ID: 298023
Speaker 1: When you look back again at your life and all the things you've done and see the many, many awards here and so forth.  What would you consider to be your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: My legacy would be Gertrude Hadley [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette] lived, tried to change the world and wound up doing nothing.
Speaker 1: Well I don't think that's true.
Speaker 2: I just--it seems like all my life, ever since I've been grown, see I used to dislike my father [Willis Hadley] for doing what I'm doing.  He used to get up and just preach about stick together and our African culture.  And we were the first civilization, the Africans had the first civilization and all other countries drained that civilization and pushed us back.  But--and we used to say, "Mama, can't you get papa--when he make, he's gonna make a speech, so-and-so at this place.  Can you ask him to please stop talking about Africa?"  I said, "The kids are telling us their father said they didn't lose anything in Africa and everything."  My mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] said, "If I told your father that, he'd skin you alive.  Your father thinks you lost everything in Africa.  You lost your name, your identity, your culture, you lost everything there.  So that's the way he sees it.  So if you tell him that the other kids are saying their parents said they didn't lose anything in Africa, he doesn't want you to be that ignorant."  And so she said, "Now I'm not gonna tell him what you said because I know he'll skin you alive."  But we were ashamed of our father, he'd get up there and we'd look around and the kids would look at us and grin.  And they would tell us, "When is your father gonna take you all back to Africa?"  And we were ashamed of it.  And now I find myself doing the same thing.  And my students and everything, they're ashamed of me.  They said, "Here we go again."
Story_ID: 298024
Speaker 1: Was your father [Willis Hadley] a Garveyite?
Speaker 2: Yes Lord, yes indeed.  Garveyite.  And he was a Jack Johnson fan.  Although now he didn't think much of prizefighting, but he was a Jack Johnson fan because Jack Johnson was a smart man.  He was really--he could speak seven languages fluently.  He never went no higher than the fourth grade.  He knew what he could have done if he had a chance to go to college.  And many day I've heard him talk, you know, talk about, you know his life and how he came up and how the way he left the South.  He was working on the docks and he--his mother used to bring pies down there and sell 'em for five cents apiece.
Speaker 1: Now you knew Jack Johnson, right, you met him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause your husband [Joe Jeannette, II] was a prizefighter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: So that's about it.
Speaker 1: So when did you first meet Jack Johnson?
Speaker 2: When I first came here.  Jack used to say, "Joe, why did you go down there and bring--marry this child?  You know, you're old enough to be her father."  He teased my husband like that.  You see Jack was with the old Joe also.  He and the old Joe Jeannette, the first Joe Jeannette, they were almost like twins.  They fought several times because that's the only--you know, club fights, they called 'em club fights because nobody would fight, give 'em a chance to fight in the big ring.  But Jack Johnson went out and he with his big mouth, he made, he--that's who Muhammad Ali patterned himself after.  He made them fight, he made those fights.  So he would say, "I can whip any man in the world.  They're afraid to fight me.  There's nobody in the world can whip Jack Johnson."  And he kept saying it until somebody took him on and he proved that nobody could whip him.
Speaker 1: Now there's an interesting thing you were saying before when we came in, is that your husband was the coach for--
Speaker 2: Braddock [James J. Braddock].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jim, James Braddock who--there's a movie out now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Starring Russell Crowe.
Speaker 2: Yeah called--
Speaker 1: Called 'Cinderella Man.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And in the movie there's a white fight trainer that trains Jim Braddock and there's a black one that stands back and doesn't say anything.  And you're saying that it was just the opposite.
Speaker 2: It was just the opposite.  He's the one who taught Braddock how to whip Max Baer.  He was in training to whip Max Baer.  And he was in his corner.  And I went to see the movie just to see what they did.  And he's standing over there with all this gray hair.  And in the corner, and all he would do was put the mouthpiece in, you know, put that--and put the water for him to--every time he'd come back to the corner, he'd put some water on his--sponge him off or something like that.  But in the training camp, he did the training.
Story_ID: 298025
Speaker 1: How long did your--was your husband [Joe Jeannette, II] with you?  I mean--
Speaker 2: How long it was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when did your husband pass away?
Speaker 2: When did he pass away?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He died in 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And Jack Johnson died in 1946 I believe.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '46 [1946].  In a car accident.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He used to drive that car like--well I'm not gonna say it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said your father [Willis Hadley] never got a chance to see you act or become involved in theater.
Speaker 2: No.  He died in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] get a chance to see you perform?
Speaker 2: My mother died in 1942, eleven months' difference in their death, 1942.
Speaker 1: Now do you have any children?
Speaker 2: I had one son [Spencer Jeannette].  He died at the age of five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your brothers again, eight brothers and sisters, right, or twelve rather.
Speaker 2: It was twelve with my half brothers and sisters.  We weren't allowed to say half.  We would just say brother and sister.  But my father had the four children.  In fact two of them were older than my mother.  And two of them younger than my mother.  But they were--they all got along like sisters.  And I think they loved their--they loved my mother as much as we did.  I mean they were so glad to get away from that--my father would leave them with their aunt, their mother's sister while he would go off and teach.  And their aunt raised them.  And they were so glad when my father came home and brought his bride.  And they looked at her, they said, "She's just like, she's just as young as we are."  And they said we--so they'd make dresses.  They would go and get the catalog and get dresses and cut 'em out and everything.  They grew up together.
Story_ID: 298026
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that you think we should talk about before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: What is your last question?  I think you can go ahead and ask the last question.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, okay.  Our last question is similar to legacy.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered--you know that's hard for me to say, it's very hard, because I would just like for people to remember me as they know me.  Remember me as a--people who know me, those are the only ones who can remember me.  Just, how did I treat you?  How did I treat--did I play fair with you?  Did I ever mistreat anyone on my way?  I may have--I argue with people every day.  I argued with you 'cause I try to get my point across and I hope you try to get your point across.  And I don't want you to agree with me just for the sake of agreeing with me.  But I just like for people to remember me as they know me, as they knew me.  I think I'd be satisfied with that.
Story_ID: 298027
Speaker 1: The picture that you have here is a picture of my husband, Joe Jeannette, II, and myself.  That is in front of a brownstone that we were thinking about buying.  Well we didn't buy it.  We were in it for a while and decided it was too much work.  We didn't, we didn't buy it.  That was a brownstone.  That was in 1935.
Speaker 2: Pose the picture like this.
Speaker 1: This was a picture that was taken in 1949.  The outfit that I'm wearing was to be at a party that was being thrown for the 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson] cast.  And that is the gown that I wore for that party that was being given for the cast of 'Lost in the Stars.'  You will notice the difference in the hairdo and the style because I played the part of a minister's wife.  I hope we have that picture.  And I didn't look anything like that on stage.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken from one of the productions that I played Mama [Lena Younger] in '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry].  And I had just slapped my daughter [Beneatha Younger] for taking the Lord's name in vain.  Then I admonished her that in this house there is always God.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture, that's when the afros first came out.  And I just had to have me one.  And I think at this time I was doing some--well that was the year when afros came out, I forget what year it was.
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Must have been around '67 [1967] or somewhere in there.  And I'm just trying to think what it was that I was playing in at that time.  I know it was something Off Broadway.  I think it was 'Moon on a Rainbow Shawl' [Errol John].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the cast.  I played Mama in this, in Lorraine Hansberry's 'To be Young, Gifted and Black.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Gertrude Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette] in 'The Skin of Our Teeth' [Thornton Wilder].  The skin, no, the skin of--what is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's 'The Skin of Our Teeth.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Skin of Our Teeth' where I played several roles.  And I had to recite that Greek philosopher, which one was--
Speaker 2: Plato, Aristotle.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the star of the show got sick, and I was working in the dressing room and I memorized the part and I came out and I told the stage manager who was looking at me as though I'm crazy, I said I can do that part, and I got up and I did it.
Speaker 2: This is a scene from Eugene O'Neill's 'All God's Chillun [Got Wings].'  The young man standing to my right there with the young girl he had just married.  I forget her name, but the young man is Earle Hyman.  You will remember him as the father of Bill Cosby in 'The Cosby Show.'
Speaker 1: The girl is Carol [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah the girl was, yeah that was Carol.
Speaker 1: And the year?
Speaker 2: And that was in 1950.
Speaker 1: Two.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's right, 1952, and I was playing his older--oh, this is my high school play.  And you have no--you're not ready yet.  The high school play in my high school homeroom.  This is a scene from my year that I graduated, 1933 from my homeroom.  This is my homeroom class.  And I had just broke a--I had just popped a button on my blouse.  And the girl standing to my right said your blouse is open.  And I turned around, you see me standing sideways and everybody around me giggling.
Speaker 1: Dunbar High School [Negro School of Industrial Arts; Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], right?
Speaker 2: Dunbar High School.
Speaker 1: Little Rock.
Speaker 2: Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-three [1933].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: This was our little dinette in St. Louis, Missouri.  We also had a tavern.  Maybe we have a picture of the tavern also.  But this is the dinette.  That was I think it was 1954 I think, something like that.
Speaker 1: This was one of--this is a picture--there's Beah Richards in the center, the great--
Speaker 2: Can we go from left to right?  From the end.
Speaker 1: Left to right.
Speaker 2: This way.
Speaker 1: Left to right, that's Gertrude Jeannette seated, and that's Beah Richards in the center, and that's Loften Mitchell at the far right.  Standing there's Mickey Grant, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and the guy that--Leon Helmsley [sic. Larry Leon Hamlin] and Esther Rolle, Ed Cambridge [Edmund Cambridge] and my good friend Joe Seneca.
Speaker 2: This is from the same picture with different people.  Well no some of the same people.  I don't need to name 'em, but there's Gertrude Jeannette, Mickey Grant, Esther Rolle, Leon Helmsley, or is that--yeah.  And I don't know the young man standing--I know him but I can't think of his name now.
Speaker 1: This is Mrs. [Evelyn] Scott, a dear and a great actress who played my mother in Eugene O'Neill's 'All God's Chillun.'  And I'm there--she's there trying to shame me out of some of the terrible things I was doing to my brother.
Speaker 2: That's Evelyn Scott, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is a scene taken from '[The] Member of the Wedding' [Carson McCullers].  Max Glanville played it--he's not in this scene, but he played in that picture with me.  And that's--this is at the very end of the play.  It's when I'm walking off singing, "His eyes is on the sparrow and I know he watches me."
Speaker 1: Another scene from 'The Skin of Our Teeth' with--that's--I can't think of the young lady to, to the left, the first one.
Speaker 2: Ashley, you said?
Speaker 1: No, Elizabeth Ashley is in the center.  She was the star of the show.  And this little girl, talented little girl, but I can't think of her name.  And of course that is Gertrude Jeannette sitting over there getting ready to go on to do a different role.
Story_ID: 298028
Speaker 1: Now I won't be able to identify all of the people in this, but I remember most of the names.  This is--I forget the year but we were all, we were all pioneers, and we were honored down at the [National] Black Theatre Festival, Leon Helmsley's [sic. Larry Leon Hamlin].  And I know there is [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, I know there is the writer, what's his name?  Mitchell, Loften Mitchell, and Helen Martin.  You know she played (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is Helen Martin, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Helen Martin and--
Speaker 2: If you don't know, just say I don't know who it is and we just keep going.
Speaker 1: I just, I know all of these people.  But in the back row you find Denzel Washington.
Speaker 2: That's him right there I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right there.
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: And there's [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, and Joe Seneca to the left over there standing, and just so many people.  Most of them are gone now.  Helen Martin, Esther Rolle was in that picture.
Speaker 2: This is a scene from my first play, 'This Way Forward' [Gertrude Jeannette].  It was about the farm life that I grew up with, doing the quilting.  And the lady played Aunt Effie, who was the midwife and brought all the children into the world, including the role that I played.  And sitting all to the far right is Isabel Sanford, and that's Gertrude Jeannette [HistoryMaker Gertrude Hadley Jeannette] standing, and Alma Clark [ph.] is seated.  And of course I can't think of the young man who directed this, but he was a very talented young man.
Speaker 1: Now that's the way I looked in playing the mother [Grace Kumalo] in 'Lost in the Stars' [Maxwell Anderson].  That's the way I was made up.  I was playing the preacher's wife in 'Lost in the Stars.'
Speaker 2: Now I'm trying to--this is Paul Winfield up there in the center.  Now I can't--there's Brett [Somers], Brett--
Speaker 1: Summers.
Speaker 2: No, not from St. Louis [Missouri].  That's Paul Winfield.  He had--he was a big shot on the--first black man on a big corporate board, this is the board meeting that he's holding at his home.  I am his mother, that's me standing.  But he got me as his housekeeper.  He introduced me to these big shots as his housekeeper.  He was ashamed of me.  This is from that same play.  It was called 'Happy Ending' then, but they had to change the name because another play had been named before that.  I forgot the new name they gave.  That's Paul Winfield and the girl that he was--wedding was gonna have at my house.  And also the board members from the big shot.  You'll see me back there with my little maid costume on.  And I was playing Paul, my son's, housekeeper.
Speaker 1: This was a scene from 'Lost in the Stars.'  Was taken from that beautiful novel that [Alan] Paton wrote, 'Cry, the Beloved Country.'  If you notice that I'm there with my husband, Todd, Todd Duncan [Stephen Kumalo].  And the young man who befriended us, I can't think of his name now.  And there's the guard and there's two or three singers over there.  But the main focus is on the minister with the cane and me as his wife.  This is from 'Lost in the Stars.'
Speaker 2: That's my baby, Spencer [Jeannette].  He had his tonsils taken out in--at the age of five and he developed a strep throat and died the same year this picture was taken.
Speaker 1: There the old Savoy [Ballroom, New York, New York] on Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard] and 142nd Street.  You'll see the picture of the Savoy.  That's my husband to my left and that's me to my right.  That was back in--oh, I can't remember.  Was back, way back.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-five [1935].
Speaker 1: Was it '35 [1935]?  Nineteen thirty-five [1935].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--that's my [maternal] grandmother.  They said that she was--that's in Oklahoma.  They said she was from Madagascar.  But she was accepted by the Indian [Native American] people.  She was raised up on the reservation also.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Caroline Crawford.  She married a Crawford.  I don't know her maiden name.  I did know it, but I can't think of it now.
Speaker 2: Now this is Frank Crawford, my grandfather on my mother's side.  This is my mother's father.  He was head of the Indian affairs.  And he brought my father out to teach on a reservation.  And my father was the first black man to teach on an Indian reservation.
Speaker 1: This is--ready?  This is Gertrude Jeannette on my own motorcycle.  I had learned to ride and I had--my husband had bought me my own motorcycle.  You see me with my belt on.
Speaker 2: This is 19--what is it, 1942 or something?
Speaker 1: No, that was--must have been around 1935, around in that area.
Speaker 2: Now this is in our tavern.  My husband and I owned this tavern.  You will see a lot of celebrities up over our head there.  People that--on Broadway and I think you'll see Van Heflin up there, you'll see Todd Duncan, you'll see Max Glanville.  And I think if you look further down, you'll see Cab Calloway.  They would come through our, stop at our tavern, that's our tavern.  And I don't know these people, most of them--they were there in the bar.  And that's my husband with a white jacket on peeping out over behind there in the background.
Speaker 1: Out on the reservation.  The grand lady in between the two girls is my mother, was my mother.  Her name was Salley Gertrude [Crawford Hadley].  My father used to call her SG because--for Salley Gertrude.  And my father's name was Willie Lawrence [Willis Hadley] and she would call him W.L.  And when we--I think I was five years old I thought my father was named W.L. and my mother was named S.G. because that's all I heard them call each other.
Speaker 2: And this is you, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah that's me there, and my sister over to the left.  And we out--that picture was taken out on the--in Oklahoma on an Indian reservation.
Speaker 2: This picture was also in the '30s [1930s].  And that's me, that's the way we dressed in those days.  A lady didn't go out without gloves, hat, pocketbook, and you didn't walk out in the street in those days and consider yourself dressed up.  That's my dear friend, you're not ready yet are you?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: That's my dear friend Sidney Poitier.  We have been friends since first time he auditioned for the American Negro Theatre.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: That, it was in--this picture.  This picture was taken at [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee's fiftieth anniversary.  We both were at that celebration, and we had our picture made there.
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture [New York, New York].  American Negro Theatre had a meeting.  All of us who were left.  And that was 1995 or something like that.
Speaker 2: Well, well, well.  This was 1942.  That is the--one of the days that I was out with my cab.  As I said in my interview, I made all the papers in town.  First woman cab driver.  I didn't know I was the first woman until I went to get my license.  I was told, you're the first one.
Speaker 1: Well, well, well.  This is also out on the reservation.  Those are my first cousins, those two young boys.  And on the front, that's on the front row.  And that's my grandmother Caroline that you saw in that picture that I showed you earlier.  She was 105 years old then at this picture.  And that's my Aunt Ozelle [ph.] standing in the background on the left.  And that's me standing there on the right in the back.
Speaker 2: Well that's me down in Tijuana, Mexico.  I don't wanna talk about this because I don't know, I think I had a little tequila.
Speaker 1: Well that's my husband before I met him.  Joe Jeannette, II.  And he had retired when I met him.  But that, that picture was taken back when he was a fighter.  Joe Jeannette, II.
Story_ID: 298029
Speaker 1: My husband [Joe Jeannette, II] used to train fighters.  And this was up at one of the training camps.  That's my husband there on the left and that's the manager of the fighters, and that's me on the right.
Speaker 2: Next please.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my mother [Salley Crawford Hadley] and father [Willis Hadley].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my mother and father.  We have, I have--had a lot of pictures of them, but they were not that big--that house that they're standing there, five-bedroom house.  There was a swing back there with my little nephew sitting in.  You know they had those swings on the porch in those days.  And that's my mother and father.  That was taken I think--well he died in 1941.  It was taken shortly before he died.
