Story_ID: 88131
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Dr. Charlene Drew Jarvis, C-H-A-R-L-E-N-E, middle name Drew, D-R-E-W, last name Jarvis, J-A-R-V, as in victory, I-S, as in Sam.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born July 31st, 1941, in Washington, D.C. at the old Freedman's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the president of Southeastern University in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday the 13th of June, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my office at the Southeastern University in Southwest Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 88132
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we get into depth, there are five lightweight "People" magazine-ish-type questions that we are compelled to ask.
Speaker 2: [Clearing throat]--okay, let me just--got it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: All right, sorry.
Speaker 1: So these lightweight questions only require a brief answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right. Now the first question is, Ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food?  Well, recently I've had a real hankering for sausage (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --fixed any way, in, in spaghetti, Cajun, in a soft roll with green peppers and unions, a little mustard.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite colors are Leo colors, bright colors, yellows, and oranges, and limes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring; I like the, the rebirth of the trees; I like the weather; I like being able to sit on the porch at my beach house in the coolness of the spring before the hot summer comes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I go to Highland Beach in Annapolis, Maryland.  That is a small, but very historic beach, where Frederick Douglass built a home in anticipation of being able to retire to the beach.  And my family, my siblings, my parents went to the beach every summer, and we stayed for the entire summer.  And my children, my grandchildren now enjoy the same Highland Beach with many of the same families that we knew there many years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Let's just get it done.
Story_ID: 88133
Speaker 1: So tell me something about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's side of the family we trace my mother's family to Nassawadox, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: No, but I can get it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, Nassawadox.
Speaker 2: Nassawadox, Virginia.  My sister, Sylvia, has been to Nassawadox, Virginia, to see if she can identify the family associated with my mother there name was Robbins, R-O-B-B-I-N-S.  So we've not been able to go farther than Nassawadox, Virginia.  On my father's side of the family we've been able to go much farther.  My--even very far back to some origins in Scotland.  We are not able to identify the line that may have been in slavery.
Speaker 1: The African side of--
Speaker 2: The African side.  We're not able to identify whether, and how, and when.  We had family who may have been in slavery.  We are able to say that historically there was mixing of the families in ways that we know, but we can't tell the circumstances of that.  We just know we go back five, five generations that we can easily identify.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know the condition of the people, if they were enslaved or not?
Speaker 2: We don't know the answer to that.  We, we haven't found the answer to that.  And now we're of an age where we really wanna know the answer to that, so we're beginning to do the history a little bit more.
Story_ID: 88134
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any stories that are passed down about your ancestors, any stories, or songs, or any printed materials that come down through the family?
Speaker 2: Well, not very far back.  I can go back to my grandmother, who grew up in a family in Foggy Bottom in Washington, D.C., who was a graduate of Howard University and became a teacher.  But I can't go further back than my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is on your, your mother's side of--
Speaker 2: This is mother father's side.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--okay.
Speaker 2: Now my aunts could.  So if you had my 87-year-old aunt here, she could tell a lot about the history of the family beyond my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Now your grandmother, did she go to Howard--was this is in the 19th century that she was--
Speaker 2: It would have been in the 19th century, yes.  My father was born in 1904, so actually it could have been before the turn of the century, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She would have been one of the first Howard students in that first group, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when the first generation of students that went to Howard.
Speaker 2: Yes, she would have been a very early graduate.
Speaker 1: I mean Howard was established in the--what, 1880s or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So chances are, she was probably (unclear) that first, from the first twenty years of Howard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What we, what we believe we know about my grandmother is that she was the daughter of a Senator.  That is being, that information now is being traced.  And that was not a birth that resulted from a marriage.  We know that, and we're continuing to delve more into that history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be like a white Senator in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, not one of the Reconstruction Senators.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, so, do you know which one, which one?
Speaker 2: Well, we believe we know which one, but we're, we're also in--part of the family now is trying to contact relatives of that Senator.  And I would be loathed to step on that development of that relationship until, until there's some acceptance of what we believe is really the history by that family.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you know it's all speculation.  If it--if you say it's speculation, then it remains as such until you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I really honestly have to find the name--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --from the member of my family who's doing that research.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, can we assume then that--or, or, or it wasn't--as far as you know, was she then, in her family, I guess her mother, taken care of by this Senator in terms of financial--I mean financially taken care of and so forth?
Speaker 2: Yes, we believe that's how she was able to go to Howard University, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is the case in a lot of, in the lives of a lot of people, you know, black people that, that circumstance (unclear)--their--they do have at least financial support from the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --father, who's a, who was outside of their race.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Nora Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so she went Howard University.  And did she become a teacher?
Speaker 2: She became a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's usually the case if--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --in those, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the women especially, 'cause it's, you know, there weren't any other--many other options I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a schoolteacher here in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 88135
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father was born in 1904?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: June 3rd, 1904.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So he would be a hundred years old next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's just talk about--can, can you give us his full name and spell it for us?  It's just for the sake--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --sake of historical (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Sure.  My father's name was Charles Richard Drew, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, D-R-E-W.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was he like and what did he do?  Now I already know, so it's, it's for the benefit of those who watch this.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, my father, as a father, was a very hard taskmaster.  He was very demand of academic excellence.  He was a very strict disciplinarian.  He was a constant teacher.  Every moment was really a teachable moment, from, from his perspective.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us a little bit about how he was raised and how, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My, my father was born on E Street, Northwest, in the family home.  At that time, many women did not go to the hospital, but rather, were assisted in their births by midwives.  My father was one of those born of a mother at home.  And the family lived on E Street in Foggy Bottom.  They used to call that the Bottom.  And my father, as a youngster, sold papers on the corner in the Bottom.  He was a very industrious kid.  He was a very adventuresome young man.  There are lots of stories of him swimming in the Potomac with his brother, Joe.  He was a very athletic young man.  And he and his brother, Joe, became lifeguards at the old Francis Junior High School pool.  He went to Dunbar High School, and from Dunbar High School went on Amherst College.  Dunbar High School was a school that was tremendous academically, and it was because of the paradox of segregation.  Because many of the teachers, the staff at Dunbar were people who were highly trained, who when they finished their degree at many of the finest schools along the East Coast, couldn't find an avenue for employment within the job market that was non-minority.  We, therefore, in the public school system in Washington, D.C., benefited from the strength of the academic training of those teachers.  And Dunbar High School was the school that had a particularly high density of those well-trained teachers.  The students then who went there had tremendous exposure and tremendous expectations of them in terms of academic excellence.  My father benefited from that, as did many of the other students at Dunbar High School at the time.  My father went on to Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts], and he went to Amherst College with Montague Cobb, who was also a product of Dunbar High School.  He went to Amherst College with--I'll have to come back (unclear).  Okay, (unclear)--I'll start that sentence over.  My father went to Amherst College, along with Montague Cobb and Bill Hastie.  Bill Hastie became the first African American in a federal court.  Montague Cobb became the head of the Department of Anatomy and an expert in anatomy at Howard University Medical School and also the editor of one of the most widely read publications of the time.  They went to Amherst College.  My father was a tremendous athlete, as well as a good student, and he was a four-letter athlete at Amherst College.
Speaker 1: That means he played everything.  He was involved in every--
Speaker 2: He, he was involved in football, swimming, track, and hurdling, and he was an excellent athlete, and he was awarded many honors as a result, including the Mossman Trophy in his senior year.  Nonetheless, because this was a time when African Americans were not permitted in many places of public accommodation, when the team went to play, often my father found that he was staying in one place, and the team was staying in another because of the restrictions that existed at that time.  Nonetheless, he was not daunted by that ever in his, in his history, and that theme of exclusion was a theme that he encountered often in, in his life.
Story_ID: 88136
Speaker 1: He [her father, Dr. Charles Drew] went on to McGill University to medical school in [Montreal] Canada and was successful as a medical school student.  And I recently was given information by someone who was doing research at the Julius Rosenwald Fund that his last two years in medical school were supported by that fund.  That would have been 1932 and 1933.  Years later, in 1948, when the Julius Rosenwald Fund was essentially closing its doors, he wrote a letter to them and said that the value of a benefactor, and I'm paraphrasing, is not to be underestimated.  And that because of the support that they had given, given him in medical, he was committing himself to the care of the sick and dying, and to try to bring joy and not pain to the lives of people that he touched, and to also teach, to expand the knowledge base of those who would come behind him.  And he had an opportunity to do that after he went to New York to the Columbia, Columbia Presbyterian Hospital and earned a Doctor of Science degree, which is essentially a PhD, from Columbia Presbyterian--from Columbia--having done his research at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York, where he did his thesis on banked blood.  That thesis was the origin of the identification that we now have with Dr. Drew, that he discovered a way of preserving blood in the form of plasma, which saved many thousands of lives, and particularly in the Second World War.  Because of the work which he did, he was asked to head the Blood for Britain project.  That was after he had left Columbia Presbyterian Hospital and Columbia University and had come to Howard University, where he took on the role of the head of the Department of Surgery.  In 1941 he was asked to head the Blood for Britain project to make sure that plasma was getting to the battlefield to make sure lives were being saved.  And of course, whole red blood requires refrigeration and it deteriorates; and of course, it goes without saying that there's no refrigeration on the battlefield, at least there was not then.  There was also no need to type blood, so it was not necessary for the donor and the donee to have a compatible blood type in order for a transfusion to occur.  Plasma, therefore, was a really important lifesaving substance, and it came as the result of the research which my father did of course with mentors at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York.
Story_ID: 88137
Speaker 1: Now there's a political aspect of this that I don't want to escape us, that he was placed in charge of the Blood for Britain project.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the United Kingdom.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: During World War II.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He wasn't asked to be in charge of such a project in the United States.  And, and is there, is there--what's the political analysis of this?
Speaker 2: I think it was because we were in the middle of war, and because the United States was losing, and the allied forces were losing soldiers on the battlefield.  And the plasma was really an essential way of saving lives on the battlefield, and they though who better than Dr. [Charles] Drew.
Speaker 1: Yes, Ma'am, I understand that, but that I was saying like why Blood for Britain and not blood for the United States?  I mean, this is a British project--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that was sent--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's, that's the--that's--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: --what I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: --that's your question.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know the politics of that.  I know, what I do know is that the United States Army and therefore the Red Cross, which was the major organization collecting blood, had a policy of segregation of blood.  And the Army did not relinquish that policy until well after the war was over.  So there may have been some politics in back which reflected the, the segregation policy in the health care delivery systems of blood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just raised that 'cause I--he appears to be at the time a leading expert on the use of plasma--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so that the British rec--recognized and were, and, and had not problem putting him in a position to utilize his talents for the United States.
Speaker 2: What I do not know is--what I think is that this was a United States project, not a British project.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: It, it might have been a collaborative project.  And history does not serve me well, but I believe that he was appointed by the, the Army--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --the U.S. Army--
Speaker 1: All right, so maybe I'm off track (laughter).
Speaker 2: --for the Blood for Britain project.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, so it was an--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --American project in the locales of Britain--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but not a British project as such.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay--(unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  He did object to the segregation of the blood of white and black Americans.  He did not believe that there was any scientific reason for the segregation of blood, of donors.  And that actually became an issue for him that was strong enough for him to disassociate himself from the American Red Cross, because of that concern, keeping in mind that the Red Cross policy was being driven by the U.S. Army policy at the time.  And he severed his relationship, went back to Howard University, resumed his teaching and his administrative duties as chairman of the department and his surgical duties as a, as a surgeon.
Story_ID: 88138
Speaker 1: He [her father, Dr. Charles Drew] spent a lot of time with his students.  He wanted to make sure that his students had been exposed to the very best.  He demanded a lot of them, and he held them to a very high standard.  When his surgical residence went off to take their national surgery boards for the first time, because this is now the first cohort that he had an opportunity to work with, my mother tells the story about Dr. Mordecai Johnson, then president of Howard University, calling my father and saying, Charlie, we've gotten the results from the national surgery boards.  You'll be delighted to know that one of your students placed second.  He said, you'd be more than delighted to know that one of your students placed first.  And that, my mother said, was a tremendous highlight because he put such stock in the excellence of his students.  And he did not believe that any obstacle, not race, not condition of birth, not gender, would be an obstacle to success and academic excellence.  And that outcome simply confirmed that for him.  In addition to that, once his students go into their internships and their residencies, many of which were done outside of Howard University, and that's what he encouraged, they came back to Howard University with a mandate to bring the very best skills back to this community to treat this community of African Americans.  I happened to meet a physician from Seattle [Washington] once who was a student of my father.  And he said every day in the work which he does, even now, as a person who is approaching seventy, he says to himself, what would Dr. Drew have done in this case?  So he made a tremendous impact on his students.  He imbued them with a sense of excellence for their patients and constant learning, constant improvement of their own skills, and his students remembered that.
Story_ID: 88139
Speaker 1: Dr. [Charles] Drew liked to have his interns and residents experience much of the medical community.  He was traveling in 1950 to Tuskegee, Alabama, and was taking his residence there to a medical convention.  Before he got there, there was an accident in Burlington, North Carolina.  Dr. Drew fell asleep at the wheel of his car and was very severely injured.  He actually was very tired, and my mother had encouraged him not to start off as he did on his trip, but rather to rest before he went.  But my father was a very high energy hard driver.  And he did fall asleep at the wheel.  Mercifully, his residents were not injured.  His injuries were very severe.  There--much of the body was crushed, and there was tremendous brain damage.  He was taken to the local hospital, where he was treated by the Brothers [Harold and Charles] Kernodle.  There is a myth that has surrounded Dr. Drew's life.  And the myth is that he was denied admission to this all-white hospital, or that he died on the steps of the hospital because he was denied the very lifesaving plasma that he had been able to identify, and himself had been able to save lives using.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this is a well-known story.  It is a, it has gone around the black community over and over again.  And so you're about to tell us something I think that's gonna shatter one of the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: One of the myths.
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the most well-known stories in our history, so go ahead (laughter).
Speaker 1: The, the myth of Dr. Drew's death we believe, we believed at the time arose, and now there is some certainty about it in a book that has been written by a Ph.D. student at Duke University, which is called "First Blood."  There was another gentleman who was in the [U.S.] Army who was injured on the same highway about a month later.  The evidence is that this gentleman did lose his life as a result of the failure to treat him properly, but at another hospital, not at the hospital in question.  And there is a view that the confusion of the circumstances of the two deaths is what created the myth.  But the myth I think had such credence because the circumstances of my father's death could have been those that the myth outlined.  This was a country with a very separate health care delivery system for African Americans.  That was a hospital where blacks were treated in the basement of the hospital, and where his residents were treated.  But because Dr. Drew was with his residents, because the news got around very quickly in North Carolina about what had happened, there were many people who knew Dr. Drew.  And we believe that that focus of attention was what helped him get the care that he got.  Without that focus of attention, we're uncertain that that would have happened, although the Brothers Kernodle in later interviews, of course, assert that the care given him would have been given to anyone who came to the hospital.  He was too severely injured to be transported to another hospital, or they tried, in fact, to transport him to another hospital.  But because of the severity of his injuries, he was not able to survive that possible move.  My mother was very much aware of the circumstances surrounding my father's death at the time.  Not my mother, nor the rest of us, felt after the myth began to grow that we wanted to proselytize about its myth.  We would correct it whenever we were asked to correct it.  But in point of fact, the health care delivery system was a very segregated, a very disparate one, and we had no need, or no interest in relieving the South of its guilt for the care that was given to African Americans.  And it was really only much later and later in my life when I thought it became critical to try to dispel the myth.
Story_ID: 90792
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us some information about Dr. [Charles] Drew that we can't read anywhere?  And you were starting to tell us what kind of a father he was and you know.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm really sorry that I did not bring that book.  My, my--I'm sure you will edit this out.  My aunt, Eva, the sister of my father, recently at my urging wrote about him and about her relationship to him, and to Nora, and to Joe, and to Elsie, who was his sister that died at thirteen from tuberculosis.  She told a lot of tales about their growing up, tales that I did not know, and amusing stories about how my father wanted to rid himself of these two sisters who were younger than he, and that his mother would require him to be generous in his time with, with his sisters, when he really wanted to go out into the community and be with his brother and the other guys in the neighborhood.  So they were amusing stories of that kind of relationship to his sisters.  They were stories of his, of his entrepreneurial adventures.  He was, as I said, a, a paperboy, that he was always looking for a way to bring pennies and nickels into his pocket, not for his family, but for himself, as a fairly clever, young entrepreneur.  They told stories of him swimming in the Potomac, as I, I just indicated, very good swimmer, and that, that he taught the neighborhood children how to swim.  He was a, a young man who went to the YMCA in Washington with many of his other colleagues.  And I have pictures of him where they were going fishing, and the kids had their fishing rods; they had on their knicker pants; they had on their large hats and their brown loafers, going fishing with the YMCA, very connected to the Y and learned a lot I think about values from the YMCA.  And I said that as a father he was really quite demanding.  I remember once when we lived on the campus at Howard University that I was outside without shoes, which was a prohibition.  I cut my foot, and I cut my foot rather badly on a piece of glass.  My mother came out and saw how serious this was.  She wrapped my foot tightly in gauze.  She put me in a little red wagon and intended to take me Howard University Hospital, Freedman's Hospital then, which was only a block away.  My father had also cautioned my mother against having the children outside without shoes.  So I was fearful not only because I would get in trouble, but because I had not worn shoes, and my mother would get in trouble.  I, I looked down the street, and I saw my father coming down College Street.  His white coat was flapping in the wind, and his tie was flapping and had practically landed on his shoulder, he was coming so rapidly because of my mother's call.  And I thought if the fear could just stop the bleeding then I could at least not be a further problem, which is this is a really serious cut.  I really have to get her to the hospital.  She really has to have some stitches here.  And my father was really an awesome figure.  He was more gentle than I imagined, given the fear of having transgressed.  He was a tremendously compassionate, gentle man.  And when he began to look at my foot, began to look at the bleeding, make a decision of what, what had to be done, the fear really turned to gratitude because he mout--made me feel at ease.  I was afraid; I was afraid that I had done something wrong; I was afraid that this was really serious; I was afraid of the blood.  And in spite of all that, my father made me calm.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a beautiful story.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 90793
Speaker 1: Well, can, can you tell us about your mother?  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother was Lenore Robbins Drew, L-E-N-O-R-E, Robbins, R-O-B-B-I-N-S.  My mom was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She was the product of a family that had African American, Indian, white, and potentially Italian white heritage, but we've not been able to really find that out.  Her growing up in Philadelphia was the growing up of a family in a restricted community.  She was not, however, in an African-American community.  She was in a community where there were, there were Jewish families; there were Italian families; there were African-American families.  So there was a greater diversity in her growing up in Philadelphia than there had been my--in my father's growing up in Washington [D.C.], where there was an African-American community in which he grew.  My mother was the third of the three children.  She had brothers who were very intimidating in terms of size.  One of them was six-six; the other was a little shorter than that, very big stock.  My mother's mother was a writer.  Being a writer was not something that was acceptable to my mother's husband.  And my mother used to tell stories about my mother writing.  And then when my, my grandfather came home, she hide her writing and get to the duties of being housewife and, and mother in that family.  Her mother was a very introspective and quiet person.  My mother was very introspective and quiet person, but she had a steely determination.  She was quite a heroine to me and to our family, because when my father died, she was a young mother with four children who ranged in age from four to nine.  She didn't know how to drive a car.  She was not the person who handled the household matters.  She did not buy the refrigerator.  She did not do those kinds of things in the household.  My father was very much a participant in those, though he was a very busy man, and he was not at home as often as she would have liked, nor probably as he would have liked.  The benefit was that home was on the campus of the university, and he was able to come at odd hours between his surgery, between his teaching, and between his speaking engagements, because by then his achievements were known, and he was highly sought after as a, as a speaker.
Story_ID: 90794
Speaker 1: And so when my father [Dr. Charles Drew] died, my mother [Lenore Robbins Drew] had to learn many things.  She had to assume an independence that she had not in her marriage.  And she was quite determined that her children would do well and prosper.  She was greatly aided by a group of physicians and other people who loved and cared about my father and his family, who actually bought us a home off of the campus of the university after my father's death.  There were many wonderful people who supported our family in many different ways after my father's death.  But my fa--my mother was really quite an independent woman and was very determined that she was going to see her family through and into college.  And all of us went to college, and half of us went to graduate school.  And when she didn't know where she would get the money to support our education, she simply reached out.  When I was going to Oberlin College, my mother reached out to those who had been in my father's Amherst graduating class.  And I was supported in my early years at Oberlin with that kind of help that my mother had really made a determination that she was going to get for me.  When my younger sister, who went to Vassar College, was going, she, my mother was just very daring, went--wrote a letter to Eleanor Roosevelt, and indicated to Eleanor Roosevelt that this was a young woman who had been accepted to Vassar College, and she needed to have support to continue.  And Mrs. Roosevelt was able to be helpful.  So my mother just reached out very wide to help her children succeed in, in their careers.  I actually think that the loss of my father drove my, my mother into a depression.  I think that the only thing that really continued to help her overcome that was the drive she had to see that her children succeeded and that they did well. My mother had one of the most wonderful senses of humor.  And she had wonderful sayings that I remember now and that my siblings remember now.  My mother said: "Every pot has to stand on its own bottom."  And, and that was a lesson she said for us about independence, and that's a very important lesson for a parent to teach.  She would say--I'm coming back.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: My mother would also say, many a slip between the cup and the lip, which meant, you know, don't really anticipate that you will have closed the deal, gotten the success, many a slip between the cup and, and the lip.  Or she would say, the proof is in the pudding.  And I say that all the time: the proof is in the pudding, which means let's see the results, let's see the outcome.  She was a very wise woman.  She had a, a way of looking at the world that was simply very wise, and she was a constant counselor.  And in her life she spent time teaching at Morehouse College.  She was trained in home economics.  And in fact, the story of her first meeting with my father is a very interesting one.
Story_ID: 90795
Speaker 1: Now did, did she go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] too, just to backtrack (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, she, she didn't.  My mother went to--there, there's a teacher's college in Pennsylvania, African-American teacher's college in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Cheyney State.
Speaker 1: Cheyney.
Speaker 2: My mother was a graduate of Cheyney State in Philadelphia.  She went south to Atlanta to teach at Spelman College.  And there was a young man who came to Atlanta in 1939 to speak at, at one of the universities within the Atlanta complex.  Somehow they met, and my father was very entranced with her, and described in the most wonderful way in letters that he sent to her, which we've sup--subsequently seen what she was like.  He wasn't able to stay and chat with her at the time.  He said he would be back, and indeed, he did come back at 11:00 that night and knocked on the door of the cottage at which she was staying.  The person who answered denied him admittance; it was too late.  And he wouldn't be deterred. He went in and somehow she was summoned, and he had a conversation with her.  And very shortly thereafter, within a matter of months, they were married.  My father's love letters have been included in a number of volumes.  They are most beautiful love letters.  And he had also a very beautiful script.  And so this beautiful script and this beautiful flowing emotion that came from his letters is something that, as I said, has been memorialized a number of times in medical journals, in, in several books now if you, I mean, look.  I'm gonna see if I see if I see one of (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, we--(laughter), well, we should just go on and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, I was just gonna look--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --to see 'cause I would have read one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, maybe during the break we can find one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sorry.
Story_ID: 90796
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on, on childhood, and, and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C., as I said, was a segregated city.  We lived in a community in which we could not go downtown to eat.  We could not go to the theaters.  We were restricted from the retail stores, trying on clothes.  This was really segregated Washington.  And yet, we lived in a very insulated community, where achievement was value, where family was strong, where teachers knew parents, where anyone who had an in, information about misbehavior of a child would community that to the family, where on the same block, in the same community, you might have the physician and the postman; you might have the lawyer and the deliveryman.  So there was an economic integration in the community, which was beneficial in, in the community.  The schools were segregated.  As I said, they were, some of them quite good because of the demand for excellence and because of the insulation of the teaching population from large, jobs in the larger community.  My uncle, Fran Gregory, who was married to my father's sister, Nora Gregory, was top in his class at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], could not find a position within the larger community, became the principal of Armstrong High School, and, and then the superintendent of what were called Division Two schools, which were the schools for colored.  And those were--that was the way the maps listed schools in the District of Columbia; they were listed as schools for colored; they were listed as schools for white.  Somehow, because of the richness of the community, because of the environment of Howard University, because of the academic opportunities on the campus, we did not feel the sting of segregation in the way that we might have.  We were youngsters who had the opportunity of going to take piano in the School of Fine Arts as, as kids.  I took violin from Louie Von Jones at Howard University when I was a youngster; we took fencing lessons in the, in the gymnasium; we took swimming lessons in the gymnasium at Howard University.  So there was a richness of the culture that--and tremendous supports within the community that did not allow us to be injured we believed by the segregation of the time.  As an adult, I can very easily see that that wasn't in fact true; that we felt the restriction, and it narrowed our scope about what we could do and what we would not be able to do.  But my father always said, there's no obstacle; whatever your circumstance, there's no obstacle to your success.  And I certainly adopted that as part of my own mantra, and achievement became very important to me, and evermore achievement became very important to me because that was very important to my father and, and to my mother.
Story_ID: 90797
Speaker 1: The public schools in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] desegregated at the time of the Brown v. Board of Education decision.  Schools then were integrated.  It was not easy.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: That was 1954.  It, it was not an easy time.  We were not easily integrated into the public school system.  There was resistance from principals and from teachers at previously all-white schools.  There was less resistance from students themselves, but there was an uncertainty on the part of the black students and the white students about how to interface with other students with whom they had not been in contact previously.  So it was not an easy time; it was a difficult time.  And the schools quickly resegregated after about three years or so, and there was considerable flight from white families from the District of Columbia, or moving further north and, and west in the city.  Public accommodations, segregation was ended here in the city in 1950.  Even during the time of segregation, however, my mother found the places that we could easily go, and they were places of culture.  So we went to the art gallery frequently, and the art gallery cafeteria was not segregated.  So I can mem--remember many instances in which we went to the gallery.  We had lunch after we had seen the paintings.
Speaker 2: This is National Gallery of Art.
Speaker 1: This is the National Gallery of Art.  There as another place that was not segregated in, in its public accommodations, and that was Union Station.  So from time to time, mother would take us there as well.  Now this is, of course, after my father's death, and she's learned to drive, and buy the refrigerators, and become very independent.
Story_ID: 90798
Speaker 1: How old were, were you when your father [Dr. Charles Drew] died?
Speaker 2: I was nine.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I was eight, and my sister was nine when my father died.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950], April 1st, 1950.  And this just takes us back a little bit.  My father died on April Fools' Day.  Dr. Mordecai Johnson and his wife came to our home, which was very close to where the president's home was on the campus.  I opened the door, and there as the president and his wife.  And I called to my mom upstairs and said that they were there.  And because we had been playing April Fool jokes on her all day, she thought that I was telling yet another April Fools' joke, and she didn't come immediately, and then she did come.  And then the--my father's colleague, Dr. Burke Syphax, who became the chair of the Department of Surgery, came to the door at, at the same time.  And my mother looked down from the banister, and she said, "Charlie."  And I think she really--and Mickey nodded his head.  And that's how I remember the news of his death being conveyed.  And I also remember the huge outpouring at the Howard University Chapel and the huge outpouring within the community.  And when I went back to school, one of the kids said to me, was that your father who died?  And I said yes.  She said you know, I stood on the corner, and I counted 250 cars.  And I, I thought, I didn't know this; I didn't know my father as somebody who was revered.  I, I knew him as somebody who, you know, required a lot of me, but I didn't understand him as that kind of a, a public figure.  But my, my mother was very heroic, and she was a wonderful wit.  And that's really what I recall most about her.  She became unfortunately a victim of Alzheimer's and died in 1992.  But even through the, what is a terrible disease, she maintained her elegance and her wit in spite of what was an awful disease.  And those are wonderful memories of, of, of her.
Story_ID: 90799
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what were you like when you were a little girl?  What did, what did, what, what did you like to do in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, well, first of all, I think of the four children.  And there's Bebe, Roberta, who was named for blood bank because she was born at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York.  My mother and father had not named her, and the nurses called her Bebe as a nickname, and that's what stuck, Bebe for blood bank, Roberta.  My mother's father was Robert.  I am Charlene, which is the combination of Charles and Lenore.  Sylvia, Rhea Silvia--my, my father liked reading Greek literature, and she was the mother from (unclear) Remus, and that's my sister's name, Rhea Silvia, and Charles Richard Drew.  Of the four of them, I think that I was the most rebellious and also the most--also the one that felt the greatest level of responsibility for the family.  Somehow, as a youngster, I took on a role of responsible and thought that my mother really needed me to help her with the family.  I don't know why I wore that mantle.
Speaker 1: You're not the--
Speaker 2: Not the oldest.
Speaker 1: Not the oldest, okay.
Speaker 2: But I--we loved to play in the community on College Street with the other kids who were children of family--I'm sorry--children of Howard University family.  We lived on a dead end street, and we could climb the railings at Howard University during a time when the--in the spring when the forsythias were, were blooming.  And my little sister never knew how to pronounce that name, so she was say "fosythia," and today we tease her about that.  There were three boys who were the children of the Lawson family.  And Dr. Lawson was a very esteemed head of the Howard University choir, and they lived in the neighborhood.  And we would often play ball in the street with the Lawson family.  And then there was the Clark family that lived very close by, and Mr. Clark was the chief financial officer of the University.  He had three children, and we use to go to their home.  And they had a, a girl and two boys, and the boys made fun of us.  And we played nicely with, with Ann.  And we, we had a tremendous time in that little community.  I remember once we were bathing in a little swimming pool out in the backyard, and the three of us, the three girls, had decided that we would disrobe.  And the three boys, who were the Lawson boys, came into the backyard because they were just really coming to play.  And here we were, these three girls who were disrobed, and all of the screaming and the yelling and these three little girls.  And my mother looked out the window, and she was a little bit bemused by it, and brought us the right attire to clothe ourselves in and go back into, into the house, but many good, many good kinds of activities that we had--
Story_ID: 90800
Speaker 1: Now I remember that because we lived very close to the Griffith Stadium, which was the stadium at which the baseball games were played.  There were a lot of cars that parked on the days of the games.  And there were little kids who came from some developments a little south of where we lived who would say to the people, "May I park your car, Mister, park your car?"  And they'd get a quarter, and I saw that.  And I thought that'd be a good thing to do.  And so I was busy "parking cars," in quotes, and having people give me nickels and dimes, when my father came along.  And of course that became another very clear, you know, issue, another no-no.  My father [Dr. Charles Drew] was rather stunned that I was do that--doing that.
Speaker 2: Did you actually park a car?
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't actually parking them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What we were doing is--
Speaker 2: Just pointing to a place.
Speaker 1: We're pointing to a place where a car could park.  And we were given a dime or a quarter because we pointed out a parking space.  And that got me in a lot of trouble in the, in the--with, with my dad.  We had wonderful Easter egg rolls on the campus at, at Howard.  And we would take our baskets and you know, mom--I don't actually remember my father at Easter egg rolls, roll the Easter eggs.  And I remember wonderful experiences at Christmas, because my father would put us in the car and take us down to see the Woody's windows, which were very well known.  They were extraordinary windows filled with moving figures with a Christmas theme.  And we had streetcars, and I remember that car riding along the streetcars as we looked at the windows at Woody's.  That was very precious time because my dad was not at home as often as we would have liked him to be.  I do remember times at Highland Beach when my, my father was there.  And I remember once when he, a very, very good swimmer, went into the Chesapeake, and he swam and he swam until there was just a little bob of a head.  And I was terrified that he was not going to come back because I just saw him going out and out and out and out.  And of course he came back, and he swam, very fine swimmer, and taught us to swim as well.  So we had many very good memories.
Story_ID: 89148
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about school?  What, what grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended Mott, M-O-T-T, Elementary School, which was half a block from my home on the campus at Howard University and just across the street from the old Freedman's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Lucretia Mott School.
Speaker 2: This is Lucretia Mott School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, now how did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school, and I had a great need to do well in school.  And I think that was a great need to please my father.  And I, I studied hard.  I was very conscientious.  I was not a cutup.  I was not a rebellious student.  I, I was a very steady student who could be relied upon to do her work, and to answer the questions, and to be prepared.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I think English was my very favorite subject in school.  I liked to read.  I went on to Banneker Junior High School.  That's Benjamin Banneker, of course, and, and then to Roosevelt High School after desegregation, and that's Theodore Roosevelt High School.  And I can remember spending a lot of time in the summer reading.  And I read, as I got older, I read many of the classic novels, the classic romantic novels.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you like the romance novels.
Speaker 2: I like the, the, the classic English romantic novels is what I was reading.
Speaker 1: Things like Jane Eyre and--
Speaker 2: Yes, mm-hmm, Charlotte Bronte and--
Speaker 1: Wuthering Heights--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I didn't like math.  I was afraid of it, and I remained afraid of it for a very long time until I discovered that I could do it, and that I had simply blocked the ability to do it because of fear, which is not an uncommon thing with girls, at least in that generation.  I'm not sure it's a common thing with, with girls now in this generation.  And so I always found algebra and geometry challenging, but important, because math abilities really opened up other avenues, being able to solve theorems, very important.  And I've come to understand how really important it is for student to have algebra, you know, in their sixth, seventh, and eighth grades now.  But math I was afraid of--had good teachers, and they were very patient with me.  I liked science.  And of course my--I wasn't sure if science was the thing that I would do as an adult when I was in junior high school or, or high school.  And in fact it became the thing that I did as an adult because I earned a degree in neuropsychology, the study of the relationship between the brain and behavior, and did research on the brain for the first ten years of my professional life.  But I wasn't clear that I was gonna do that when I was a student in the public schools in Washington.
Speaker 1: What--did you take advantage of the fact that you had a genius father at home (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have him at home for long, because I was eight years old when he died.  And I, I had a tremendous opportunity before that to sit at his feet.  But very frankly, I--one of the reasons I worked so hard is that I didn't really wanna get the lessons when he came in because he was fairly unyielding.  So if I said I'm having trouble with geometry, I don't where these countries are, instead of saying: here is where it is, and this is where you wanna look, he would put down everything, and it would be an hour long geography lesson.  And for an eight year-old, I wasn't clear that that was the best use of my time.  Now, of course, had I been older, I would have been grateful for that.  But at eight, an hour long lesson with your father, who is demanding, was something that I didn't look forward to, so I tried to do my work.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't wanna unleash all that power--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at one time, you know.  Okay, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 89149
Speaker 1: What are some of the teachers at school that you remember that, that were particularly helpful to you, or who tried to mentor you, or who were interesting people?
Speaker 2: In my elementary school many of the teachers knew my family, and they were in clubs with my mother.  And so sitting with those teachers and being in the room with those teachers were like being in the room with my mother and, and father.  But they were very nurturing, and they had high expectations of, of me and of the other students.  I remember once in the second grade, students were telling--it was kind of show and tell.  And I didn't have anything that day, and I, and I actually made up something.  And my teacher, who, who was my second grade teacher, and again, a long-term Washingtonian--her name was Mrs. Shade, and her lineage can be traced back to the opening of the first African-American hotel in Washington--she said to me, Charlene, I know your family, and I know that's not true.  So, the environment in that community was such that we just simply knew one another.  Another time, a very wonderful English teacher was calling the roll.  And the students were to call out the grades that they'd made on their English test, and it was April Fools' Day.  And so we had gotten together as a class and decided that we would all tell her that we had failed.  So she began at the A's, and she called the roll.  And the students gave failing grades.  And after about the third or fourth one, she really was getting very agitated with, with the class.  And she got down to C's, and there was a student who was a very fine student and she was not going to participate in that.  And she gave her the answer that she'd gotten on, on her test, which was a very good answer.  And then the whole class erupted in laughter, so it never got to me.  But, you know, I remember those kinds of, of instances at school.  It was a very homogeneous, good group, not the kind of concerns that you have about violence in the school, fear for safety of your kids.  That was not the environment in which we were raised, although there were kids who were tough, and there were kids for who were from the projects very close to the school.  And there was always the fear that something would erupt.  I always seemed to be the peacemaker, so that if there were students who were--looked, looked like they were going to clash, I, I was the one who often tried to make peace.  And so I felt aligned with growth--both groups, and I was never the target of, of anybody's enmity, as, as a result of that.  But again, it's an indication of my, my very early sense of responsibility that I had to care for, nurture, protect, and I'm not quite sure where that came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, that's a good trait to have, regardless of where it comes from I guess.
Story_ID: 89150
Speaker 1: Now tell, tell me about high school.  I mean what was--well, you, you went to middle school at Benjamin Banneker.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Benjamin Banneker was, again, a school, very good school.  And now I'm a teenager, and now there are loads of things happening in the teen years and the, you know, the hormonal drives, and the boyfriends, and the dating, and the trying to pay attention to school when all these things are going on.  And I was a little bit precocious in that regard because I, at the age of twelve, met the boy, who was sixteen, who I was actually destined to marry.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And that was not, that was not a relationship that my mother encouraged.  I was twelve years old.  And it was a proper relationship, in, in, in the sense of I didn't transgress rules, but she just didn't think that I was old enough.
Speaker 1: Yeah, four years in those days were a lot of, you know, years--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --when you're a teenager.
Speaker 2: Right, so there, there was a lot, lots of conflict.  A sixteen year-old drove.  My mother said I was absolutely not to get in a car.  And so we had those kinds of problems that arise when you are a teenager, but we, we made it through.  We made it through those years and went to, to high school--very serious in high school.  And of course this is now one year after the Supreme Court decision, so we're handling other things, other than academic issues.  We're handling the integre--issues of integration.
Speaker 1: So was Banneker integrated?
Speaker 2: It was a segregated junior high school.  It is now a high school, and it's an honors high school, but at the time it was a segregated high school.
Speaker 1: Now, but, but when you went to Banneker, was it, was it segregated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and see, in '54' [1954], you were where in--
Speaker 2: What, how old was I?
Speaker 1: No, what school were in, in 1954, when the Supreme Court decision--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Banneker, in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were in the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you went on to high school that next year--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In 1955.
Speaker 1: So you didn't see Banneker integrated.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This is also the age of rock 'n roll and all of that, was starting to become popular in the mid-'50's [1950s].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so we, we went to parties.  And we had rules about parties, which, you know, about what lights would be on, and about how many inches you had to dance away from your partner.  And so these were, these were the teen years.  And--
Speaker 1: They actually had rules about--now, who would give you those rules?
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the, and the, the mother and father of the people at whose home the party was held.  And so, you had, you had the sort of distance police monitoring what went on.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of those kinds of rules.  That, that's--okay.
Speaker 2: Well, but you weren't a girl.  And I--so, and, and, and then because I was often a little bit younger than the people at the parties that I went to.  Because I had a sixteen-year-old boyfriend, my mother would do the thing that was most embarrassing.  She would come to the party to get me, and she would stand, or she would have the mother or father of the person who had the party stand at the top of the steps and call for me so that it was clear to everybody that I was: a) being picked up by mother, my mother, and b) I was too young to be there.  So, those are the sort of tough times that you go through when you are a teenager.
Story_ID: 89151
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt High School [Washington, D.C.].  That--was that a segregated school?
Speaker 2: That was a segregated school.  It was the school that I would have gone to because it was in boundary.  Had there not been segregation, I would have gone to Dunbar High School.  And as I said, the integration of the schools did not go easily because the principal, the staff at the, at the schools really made it more difficult than need be.  Even our prom was a segregated prom at the end of three years.  And my mother was involved in that because she was not happy with the unhappiness of those of us who were seniors.  But again, I had a, a good learning experience because I was very focused on the learning experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how many blacks, what, what percentage of the school were--was black when you went to Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Oh, in the first year, I--maybe 25 percent.  And by the end of the third year, that--those numbers had almost changed to 25 percent white.  It was a quite dramatic difference.  And I had good relationships with the students in my class.  I never had any real interaction with students at the university.  And I came to know that white students had as hard a time in the integration process as did black students, or African-American students--Negro students I guess we were called then--because they were unsure of what to do, and we were unsure of what to do.  And it wasn't so much unsure in the classroom; it was external to the classroom, so that--I, I remember very clearly a, a young man that I had worked with in, in, in the class, very smart young Jewish student, and we did a lot of studying together.  And when I saw him on the street outside of the school on 16th Street one day, maybe on a Saturday--so it's not at school time--he crossed the street.  And I, and I later thought, you know, there is a real uncertainty there.  It's okay in the classroom with a question of what do you do on Saturday when this is more of a social connection was one that troubled the both of us.  And so it was not easy.
Story_ID: 89152
Speaker 1: But I, I was very focused.  I wanted to do well.  I wanted to be admitted to a good college, and was admitted to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio].  And that was a very competitive school, and I did well, and I studied most of the time.  I spent most of my weekend in the library, most of my days in the library.  I, I just really worked very hard and was determined to do well.
Speaker 2: Oberlin College is a college with a history of activism around race and stuff--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) in Oberlin, Ohio--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --founded by--had an abolitionist kind of beginning.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: John Brown's father being on the board of Oberlin way back when--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --and stuff, so.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: What was Ober--how did you find--what kind of school was it for you?
Speaker 1: Well, the Oberlin experience was a very broadening experience for me.  And I didn't have a feeling of exclusion, though I think that, then as now, African Americans tended to group and to separate themselves.  And I never found a reason to do that because I never felt that I had to be in the company of people within my own race to feel that I could be successful.  And that I've put directly to my father's influence.  And so I made some tremendous friends among African-American students.  And I probably integrated more with non-minority students, but I didn't develop the same level of friendships with those students as I did with those who were minority students.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, can--are there any professors there that you remember in, in particular or administrators?
Speaker 1: I majored in psychology and had decided that I wanted to do some sort of research, but by--then didn't really know.  I was interested in the brain, but hadn't really formulated my next steps.  But I had a, a professor who was Mr. Ralph Turner.  It's very interesting - at many, at many universities that, where you find high achievers, the faculty didn't address themselves as doctor; they addressed themselves as mister.  So Mr. Turner said, every generation feels that it's gone--that's it's falling off the precipice, that the, the situation in the world is such that it is so dangerous that the generation feels that it's just falling off the precipice.  Every generation feels this.  Do you feel this about the generation that you are experiencing?  And somehow I always remembered that.  Because today I, I, I would say, you know, absolutely yes, we're falling off the precipice because of the global world events and the decline in the culture.  But I always remember that as a comparison.  So every decade or so I think about Mr. Turner and whether we are--this is the decade in which we're really falling off the, the precipice.  I also remembered my zoology teacher.  I had classes--we had classes in his home.  And Oberlin was a kind of community where that kind of interaction between faculty and students was very common.  And that was a benefit because there as a breaking down of the barrier between the students and the faculty that made learning easier.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What kind of activities were you involved in, in college?
Speaker 1: I sang in the Oberlin College choir--no, that's not true.  The Oberlin College choir was the one that had very high entrance levels, if you will.  I sang in the student union.  That, that was one where there wasn't quite such a demand for excellence.  And we are at a university that has the Oberlin Conservatory, wonderful reputation, and so many of the people in the choir were people in the Conservatory.  And I was not a particularly good singer, but I liked it.  And I liked doing the passion of St. John's and the "Hallelujah Chorus," and I, I, I liked classical music.  My mother had liked classical music.  And that was one of the things that I did.  I didn't play sports.  I didn't go to sports.  I studied.  I studied.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I spent a lot of my weekends studying.  I went to some of the productions 'cause they're wonderful productions, "The Pirates of Penzance," for example, those kinds of productions; I did do that.  I didn't venture from the campus very often though.  A group of us did go into Cleveland to see Ray Charles.  And Cleveland [Ohio] was not the city that it is now.  It was really not an exciting city to go to, so we didn't do that anymore.  We, we stayed within the, the context of the university.  I graduated from college in 1962.  That was really at the cusp of the '60's [1960s] generation.  So, if I had come in as a freshman, I probably would have been very much involved in the '60s [1960s] movement, the anti-war movement, the hippy movement.  But I was getting ready to graduate and in fact, had graduated in, in a, in, in another way as well.
Story_ID: 89153
Speaker 1: At the end of my sophomore year in college, this young man that I had been seeing all of these years, I became wed to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm very young.  I'm eighteen years old.  It, it was not a marriage that was provoked by anything in particular, except that I believed 18 was old enough.  And my mother, of course, was very upset by that, and she tried to get the marriage annulled, and she tried to send me to Europe.
Speaker 2: So you got married kind of on the sneaky--
Speaker 1: I--when I--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --when I came home from college, my boyfriend and I went to the Justice of the Peace and we got married.  And I went home and my younger sister told my mother.  And this was a devastating thing for me because I had not seen my mother cry since my father died.  And I said, oh, my gosh, what have I done here?  And she said, I want you to, essentially, forget about this.  I want you to go back, and I want you to finish your college education, and I want you to keep focused on what it is that you need to do.  And the thing that made that a little easier was that my husband was then called to the, to the Navy, and he was in the, in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.  So that made it very much easier to do what my mother had asked me to do, and now I'm in my junior year.  And then in my, in my senior year, and at the end of my senior year, just after I graduated in June, I gave birth to my first son, and then a second son.  So I made it almost to the end.  Almost a fully two years after I had foolishly gotten married at age 18 that I became a young mother.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Okay, so you and your husband were reunited I guess in a couple of years, right, after you got married?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, now we saw one another.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, we saw one another.  But we didn't live together until after I finished college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but where did you go then?  Where did you all eventually live?
Speaker 1: We lived in a, in a little apartment that costs $66 dollars a month right, very close to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and that was our first apartment.  And then I think after my first baby was born we moved in with my mother.  My mother helped us get the down payment for our first house was, which was, again, close to Howard, a $3,000 dollar down payment on a wonderful brownstone.  And we lived there for a few years.  I was teaching at Howard University.  And then we used the equity in that home to buy another home and another home and--
Story_ID: 89154
Speaker 1: Kids grew up, and I continued to--I finished my Ph.D. degree, went to the University of Maryland and finished my Ph.D. degree after I had left Howard, where I did a master's degree.  So I went from Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], had two babies while I was in school doing my master's degree, and then went to the University of Maryland to do my PhD degree.
Speaker 2: And your, your Ph.D. was in neuropsychology?
Speaker 1: Which in neuropsychology.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what is neuropsychology, and how does it differ from regular psychology?
Speaker 1: Oh, psychology is the study of behavior.  Neuropsychology is the study of the relationship between the brain and behavior.  So I--
Speaker 2: Seems (laughter)--pardon me for saying this, but it seems like it would be self-evident that the brain would have something to do with behavior, but--you know, in the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, let me give you an example.  In psychology you study visual perception, and you want to know what factors affect visual perception or visual memory.  For example, do you tend to remember better something that you've just seen, which is recency, or do you better remember something that you saw in the past?  That's visual memory, visual perception questions that are psych--psychological questions, right.  If you wanna study those from the neuropsychological perspective, the question is where is the locust in the brain of visual memory?  And if I remember that part of the brain, how do I affect visual memory?  If I record from single cells in the brain while--an awakened performing animal is performing visual memory tasks, how do those cells respond?  Or, if I wanna know what the anatomical pathway is from the eye through the brain, through the midbrain, through the, the cortex, I can study that anatomically using biochemical (unclear) procedures.  And those are the things that I did.  So on the one hand, you are defining the visual memory experience as it may be affected by variables that you change in the environment.  On the other hand, you're asking what's the locust of that behavior?  And so, I studied the visual system, and I was interested in the question of what a particular brain structure did in non-human primates.  So my PhD thesis was on the avian brain, and my research at the National Institute of Mental Health was on the non-human primate brain, the rhesus monkey.  And I was in a laboratory at the NIMH, where it was becoming clear that there were two visual systems, one system that processed it--processed where is it information, where is this visual stimulus in space; and another part of the system that processed where--what is it.  Am I seeing--where am I seeing this triangle, and is this a triangle or a circle?  So there's a where is it system or what is it system.  And I was studying a part of the brain that seemed to be in the advanced part of the visual system where there were what we called grandmother cells.  That was a, a nomenclature given by another research, which is, if you analyze the visual system, if the brain, as the brain, analyzes the visual system into lines, and angles, and colors, and movements, when I'm looking at my grandmother, I'm, I'm not seeing lines, and angles, and direction of movement.  I'm seeing my grandmother.  And the question is where does that synthesis occur in the brain?  And that was the part of the brain that I was studying.  So you can see grandmother and know her to be familiar, but if you put a hat on grandmother, obstructing, you know, part of what is a very identifiable part of her face, or if you put picture of grandmother upside down, what is it those cells are doing that are analyzing, then synthesizing this information?  That's what I did.  It was very exciting work.
Story_ID: 90482
Speaker 1: So, neuropsych--well tell us about your career in neuropsychology.
Speaker 2: I worked with non-human primates in an effort to identify the locust of this higher order synthesis of visual information.  What we knew is that single cells earlier in the visual system responded to lines and angles.  What we didn't know is where in the brain or how--where, where specifically in the brain we had cells responding to, as I said, the grandmother.  And that was the work which I did.  I, I did it by training animals to perform certain tasks at which I could make certain conclusions either before removing part of the brain and looking at the behavior afterwards or actually recording single cells from the brains of awake and performing animals who were doing visual tasks; or we could do biochemical studies in which we would first sever the connections between the two halves of the brain, creating a, a brain half which saw and a brain half which did not see, and could track by symmetrically across the two halves to see where there was uptake of radiated substances.  And in that way we could track the visual system.  So on side, you'd have a very dark, dense nucleus.  On the symmetrical other side, you'd have a very pale nucleus, and you could see that through the entire pathway.  And so we were able to tell where these stimuli were going.  It was a real learning experience for me because I was in a laboratory that did ablation or removal.  That laboratory had not had electrophysiology, and I had to go and learn electrophysiology and bring it to the laboratory.  And, and it was a challenge, and I was able to do it with good help and, and support.  I also didn't know the tritiated or radiated methods of studying anatomy, and I went to another laboratory and learned that.  So I had the benefit of studying under some very extraordinary people at the National Institute of Mental, Mental Health.  And I did that for about nine years, almost ten years.  And I felt every morning when I left my home in Washington, D.C., and drove out to Bethesda in this beautiful environment with a very insulated and highly competitive academic environment that I was probably not paying enough attention to what was going on within the city of my birth.  This is now ten years after the riots, following the death of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].
Story_ID: 90483
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when you heard about [Reverend]Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I do.  I was living on Girard Street, Northwest, teaching at Howard University.  I was 22 years old.  My kids were very young.  We'd dropped them off at nursery school.  And I heard about Dr. King's death.  And the shock of, of, of that was immediately followed by just an outpouring of grief, but also the riots that ensued.  And I remember thinking that I needed to go to the bank, and wasn't connecting that the bank was in the middle of an area that I had heard was already subject to riot, and went to that corridor and looked down that corridor and saw hundreds of people belching out of stores with, with clothes and equipment.  And, and a police officer standing right near me who said to a looter, "You dropped something."  The looter picked up the merchandise and kept going.  And police were instructed by then Mayor Walter Washington not to shoot looters.  And Mayor Washington, to this day, credits that requirement with avoiding death and injury during the riots.  I was very afraid because I didn't know where my children were.  And they'd been taken home by their nursery school teachers.  And I, and I was very afraid until I found them because I just didn't know what happened to, to my kids.  And I could stand on the roof of my home on Girard Street after the looting and see the fires that ensued, the fire belching out of the, of the stores and, and rising sky high.  It was a frightening time because of the riots there and all over the country as a result of this.
Story_ID: 90484
Speaker 1: And in ten years, there was almost no rebuilding of our neighborhood commercial corridors.  And I was very concerned and felt somewhat guilty that I was in this ivory tower environment while our, our city had not been rebuilt.  And I thought, well, at the very least, what I could do is be involved in the politics of the city and help to elect people who cared about that and would begin really to focus on that rebuilding.  So I got interested in the 1978 mayor's race.  It was a very interesting and tight race.  And the eventual winner by a very, very slight margin was Marion Barry. Because I had gotten very interested in the substantive matters of government, the production of housing, the economic revival of the city, and because I had been able to articulate and speak on behalf of the candidate, and because during that election also, Arrington Dixon, who was the chair, rather who was the head of the ward, Ward 4, went on to be chairman, there was a vacancy created.  And there were a number of people who came to me and asked me if I would consider running for public office, and I said no.  I've spent 10 years training, and now I have spent another ten years at NIH [National Institute of Health], and no.  But I really thought about it.  And I really thought, well, do I waste my scientific skills just because I don't do what I originally intended to do in terms of the visual system.  And I decided again no, that science is a discipline that addresses in a very systematic way the solution to problems.  And I was interested in addressing in a very systematic way the solutions to these problems, so I thought I could really transfer the skills that I developed.  So I decided to do something that was very risky, and to run for public office, having never run for public office before, and, and in a field of about fifteen candidates, in a community in which, you know, I was certain to be castigated for wanting to jump to the top, if you will, without having gone through the discipline of a local grassroots politics.  It was an interesting and tough race.  I had the support of Arrington Dixon and his wife, who then became mayor of the District of Columbia, Sharon Pratt, and won the seat, and in a year was named to what was a powerful committee, the chair of the Committee on Economic Development.  And so I had a chance to do exactly what it was that I intended.
Story_ID: 90485
Speaker 1: Who were your constituents--
Speaker 2: Oh, what were the issues?
Speaker 1: --and, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What were the issues?
Speaker 1: --like, 'cause the ward in Northwest D.C., right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were the issues and what were--who, and who were your constituents?
Speaker 2: I ran for the position of council member from Ward 4.  Ward 4 was a conti--considered to be an affluent ward of African Americans predominantly.  And there were a number of issues that were part of the platform in 1979.  One of them was that a major health clinic was closing, and that became a real issue for me because: a) of my interest in health care deliver; b) of the notion that citizens were being deprived; 3) because constituents said it was a problem, and they could walk to a clinic, and now they weren't gonna be able walk to the clinic.  And so a major part of my initial platform was about health care, health care deliver, health care policy.  and another part of the platform was job creation, economic development, but not the same level of interest then that I grew to have as the chair of that committee.  I was concerned about the rebuilding of our neighborhoods, about housing, about job creation, about businesses, about small business, and minority businesses.  And that became a part of, of the, of the platform.  I got a lot of resentment from people who felt that I was using the platform of my father's name to advance my interest in political office.  That was disturbing to me because it had honestly not occurred to me that that would be a criticism because I had learned both from my father and my mother, who often said every pot has to stand on its own bottom, that the independence that was important to them was important to me as well.  It was the beginning of my understanding that I would not be shielded as a public official from those kinds of personal attacks.  In 1979 those personal attacks never rose to the, to the '80's [1980s] and '90's [1990s] attacks on national figures.  But that required me to be a little bit tougher because I really didn't realize that I was gonna be subject to those attacks.  There was also another issue that became a very personal one, and that was that you people in the upper part of, of this community are high--more highly educated you are, more affluent, and therefore you look down on people who are in the lower part of this community or the Southern part of this community.  And that was also something that never occurred to me because, as I told you in my very early years, I was always the peacemaker between groups.  And I saw myself always as being the person who could go into any group and, and be accepted.  So that, again, was something that I didn't expect.  I did not expect that kind of criticism, and that I would inherit from part of my constituencies a real resentment that was the product of how I saw other people acting, but not me because I had always felt that people should be judged on their own accord.  And that's what I was told as a kid growing up.
Story_ID: 90486
Speaker 1: So I had to face those problems. And then on the [Washington, D.C. City] council, Arrington Dixon was the chairman of the council.  He did give a very powerful committee to me, and that became an issue because we didn't have a seniority rule.  Other members who had been there longer greatly resented that, and that was the origin of the seniority rule in our legislative body.  I think had a chance, as the chair of this economic development committee over the years to really put in place a foundation for rebirth of the city.  But I was an elected official during the twenty years or so of the flight of businesses and of whites from the community, and and abandonment of buildings, of homes, and a, a growing underclass within the community as a result of that flight.  It was very difficult during those years to stitch together the foundation for what would be the rebirth.  And it was a very political environment, and one in which, you know, the, the politics even got more accentuated because I decided in 1982 to run for mayor.  I did that because there was this notion that [HM] Marion Barry had done well in his first four years and was very weakened and would not do well.  And I was again encouraged and decided to essentially get my feet wet, and did--did not win, but made a, an impression on the political established that only caused me problems in the years ahead because they--there were those who saw me as a potential successful rival at another time.  So, while I had garnered very few votes, I got a lot of people who unfortunately just began to watch my activities, and put myself in the position I didn't really have to be in so early in my, in my political career.  And the, and the mayor and I sparred a lot over those years.  And he was a very clever politician, despite all of the destructive things that happened to him, which many of which was self-inflicted.  He was a very clever politician.
Speaker 2: Now that's--he's an interesting person in that regard, as people, other people would ask about him.  They--he seems like the people of D.C. really, they saw him as a hero at one stage, someone who brought a lot of jobs to people at the lower level--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --of the economic status (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: On the other hand, he's seen as one of the poorest decision makers in the history of politics, I mean just making bad decisions, with personal decisions and others that just seemed to--that could be devastating.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that the biggest enemy of Marion Barry was Marion Barry, and that's the tragedy of the opportunity lost--
Story_ID: 90487
Speaker 1: What were the, the major issues of contention that you had with him [HM Marion Barry] in city council?
Speaker 2: Well, the legislative body and the executive branch in governments had different roles.  And the executive branch, of course, is the branch that implements laws that are put into place by the council.  And the council has a balance of power obligation, which means that their role is to check the executive, not in a way that suggests that there is wrongdoing, but in a way that suggests to citizens that the council is good stewards of the taxpayer dollar.  And that is the fractiousness that occurred between this council and this mayor and occurs between many councils and many executive branch officials.  And I was building a power base from the committee that I happened to have really the privilege of chairing.  And I began to build that power base, and I began to understand how to use that power base in the interests of the community.  For example, because I had banking as a part of my oversight, and because the federal government permitted the District of Columbia to act like a state for the purpose of mergers and acquisitions, we were able to make a recommendation to the comptroller of the currency about whether banks should be able to merge.  Having that authority, I said here is an opportunity to overcome the redlining that occurs in communities and that occurred in neighborhoods after the riots where banks did not invest, and new investors did not come.  And I said maybe this is the chance that we can right that wrong.  And so the statute that we wrote said that if you wanted to acquire or merge with banks in the District of Columbia, and you came from outside of the district, you had to have a community development plan; you had to target more of your lending to small and minority businesses and neighborhood commercial corridors; you had to have more men and women--I'm sorry--more minorities and women on the boards of your banks; that you had to put bank branches in underserved areas of the city that were not being served by banking interest.  And I learned how to use the leverage in my office to create the kind of outcomes for citizens that were important, that's building a power base.  That's disturbing to people who already have a power base and who see their power base as being affected by your ability to, to use yours.  And so, over the course of my years on the council, there was always an attempt to reduce my, my ability to use that base by breaking up the committee.  So I had lots of fights in which I fortunately prevailed, and, and reducing the, the number of agencies over which I had oversight.  And a member of my staff said to me once, you know, I think--she said what folks don't really understand is whatever it is that you have, that you have a responsibility for, you're gonna figure out how to use it maximally.  So, if you've got 10 agencies in your oversight, and it's reduced to five, you will find out how to use your authority with respect to those five agencies in a way that had not been done before.  And so you will now have taken this to a different level.  And the history of my career politically was that I would take, you know, the apply that hadn't been shined up and nobody would have picked it up, and made it into a beautiful shining apple that people envied.  So I constantly ran into that problem in my political life, and it really was as the result of hard work.  It was nothing other than hard work and understanding something about the political environment.  But I often won by sheer dent of the fact that I did the work and the fact that people who were opposing me on a political issue hadn't always done their homework.  And that is a product of what I learned as I grew up, which was to work hard and do well and to master your subject.  So I was, I was being very consistent with what I had learned, very consistent with my history as a scientist, which was really to understand all the variables.  And the difference between science and politics is that I had to then martial those facts to win political arguments.  The difference also was that scientists are very highly regarded people who don't seem to have a hidden agenda.  Politicians are people who are assumed to have hidden agendas and where, you know, the, the reputation of politics is sort of with used car dealers.  So I was fighting to gain credibility for myself as a politician, but in a profession that wasn't very highly thought of in the, in the general public.
Story_ID: 90488
Speaker 1: And I continued to build programs and to work hard.  And I continued to try to run for public office from my ward seat.  And in retrospect, that was a mistake I made in my career, that if I really wanted to be mayor, what I should have done was to go for my ward seat to my--to an at-large position where I had to gain votes citywide first before going for the office of mayor.  And, and in retrospect, that was a mistake I made in my, in my, in my political planning.  The good thing about my history on the council was that we were able to lay a foundation for the rebirth of Washington, D.C.  And that--and to see that happening was really exactly why I had come into office.  So building the MCI Center, the home of the Wizards, building the $800 million dollar Convention Center, which is going to be responsible for huge new revenue impacts in the district, which then would stimulate the location of hotels and restaurants in the neighbors, and already has, that's really what I consider to be my legacy in, in public service.  But it was very clear to me all the while that I was in office that the kinds of opportunities that we were able to create in terms of economic development were not in inuring to many of the people who lived in this community.  If I had in my office a group of developers who were interested in cities assistance in building an office building, housing development, etc., very seldom did I find someone of color to be a part of that team.  If we wanted to identify minority business or women-owned business that could compete for these large projects, very seldom could we identify minority businesses large enough to compete, and so we required joint ventures.  And for the development projects, if, if the developer wanted to do X, and we had a need for Y, which might be housing, then I used the leverage of my committee to insert that housing component into that development, right.  And, and it became clear to me also that there was a mismatch in terms of the jobs available in the city and the people who were here and trained for them.
Story_ID: 90489
Speaker 1: Education then became the answer to those problems.  I said I cannot from my legislative seat work to improve the educational level in a direct hands-on way, which is the reason that I then chose to come to Southeastern University.  Why Southeastern University?  Southeastern, founded in 1879 by the YMCA, was a school where pragmatic education was valued, that is you learned something, you take it into the real world.  And then I was attracted by that YMCA history to the university about the fact that its focus was on business.  And my focus was on producing entrepreneurs, especially among young people, and especially among young people who had learned entrepreneurship, but it was in an illegal drug industry; and to redirect them to legal entrepreneurial ventures at which they could use those skills to assist and support minority and small businesses in marketing in inventory, in financing, in taxes, in packaging for being bankable, because many small businesses knew their craft, shining shoes, or making shoes, repairing shoes, hair, doing hair, making wonderful wedding gowns, but they didn't know the business of business, and they didn't survive, as most small business didn't.  So I wanted to be able to create a place where those businesses could come and learn those skillsets, and that's exactly what we've been able to do.  We've got a business management, public administration, computer science focus her.  And I wanted very much to help bridge the digital divide that has now been done at a national level fairly successfully.  We don't hear the same depth of disparity in the use of computer snow because the younger generation is being taught in the, in the classroom.  So I wanted to bridge that educational divide, and that's why I came to this university.  And frankly, without a background in higher education administration, which meant this was, again, a, a new learning experience for me that required me to understand much about the operation: a) of a business; and b) of a business that happens to be an institution of higher education; and c) the relationships that exist in an institution of higher education with faculty where there's shared governance, which is what I did as a councilmember, shared governance.  Citizens came to me.  They said here's what want.  I said let me figure out how we'd make it happen.  I could transfer some of those skillsets to the academic community.  The thing that I wanted to overcome was the slow action of institutions of higher education.  They're very measured and slow about processes and decision-making, and I wanted to be very nimble and very entrepreneurial.  This university has given me a chance to that and to really make real this pragmatic education by sampling what's in the marketplace and getting our students into the, those curricula.
Speaker 2: Now you came here in 1996, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I came in 1996, and that role overlapped my role at the council.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I really had two full-time jobs.  I took this position in July of 1996.  And very shortly thereafter the chairman of the city council passed.  And because I was the president pro tem of the council, I moved in the interim, until there was an election, into the role of the chairman of the council.  I was the chairman of the council.  I was the chair of the key committee on economic development.  I was the councilmember representing the constituent interests of those in my ward, and I was running a university.  And it was a punishing schedule.
Story_ID: 87834
Speaker 1: We were talking about--you, you were trying to do both jobs, and they were--it was tough, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: My schedule, as the president of a growing university [Southeastern University, Washington, D.C.], and one that, that I was really tasked to turn around administratively, and the [Washington, D.C. City Council] council duties in a city in which economic development is taking off, just created a punishing 18-hour day for me.  And I was able to do it, that is I had the stamina, I had the drive to do it.  I went home at 10:00 at night, 9:30, 10:00, after my duties in the community.  And I had on, on one side of my desk the bag from the university, and the other side of my desk the bag from the, the council.  And I had to master the issues, on the council particularly, at the time that I was the interim chair of the council.  And I had to master the issues here at the university at a time when my learning curve is tremendous.  And I really got a task of really doing a very quick turnaround and getting us growing again, which I was successful in doing.  But I gave up a lot to do that.  You give up a personal life.  You, you give up the opportunity to go and sit on your porch at the beach and look at the water and read a book.  You give up the ability to see your family as often.  And that was a, a situation also where I believe the wear and tear on my physical self was beginning to tell.  I developed high blood pressure.  I had not had it before.  And I had been always in very good health before, though always struggled with, you know, pounds here and pounds there.  And I began to get very concerned about that, but not concerned enough to, to choose, if you will, and gratefully, the citizens chose for me.  And I say gratefully because on the day of my election and on the day of my defeat, I couldn't stop smiling.  And I think it was an autonomic nervous system response, that my body was evidencing the potential relief from such a demanding schedule.  And I kept getting calls from people who said, Charlene, why are you smiling?  You know, you, you have just lost an election after twenty-one years in office, and it must be just a terrible blow to you and a real, you know, blow to your self-esteem.  And I said I can't tell you how relieved I am, just in terms of my own personal day-to-day experience.  And I also have to say that I'm proud of what I've done.  And there's no time that actually would have been better to leave than then, because I came for that twenty-year period and worked hard to lay the foundation for what was then occurring, which was a real renaissance in Washington, D.C.  A new mayor came in.  This mayor put in place an administration that knew economic development that could carry out the implementation tasks.  I was not feeling that I was the only person driving this from the legislative side during the period of time when the government was in collapse for many reasons: because of the leadership issue from Mr. Barry, because of the control board.  So the new mayor came in and brought a team of people who could carry out these economic development initiatives.  And I felt so relieved that that happened because then I could say okay, it's not resting here with me now, and there's somebody who's really gonna take this and, and make the revitalization of the nation's capital a reality, and that has happened.  The mayor came in.  The federal government intervened with some help in, in our budget.  The council really reduced the, the expenditures tremendously, and the marketplace in the District of Columbia really revised.  And I could feel very good and without guilt leaving city government and public service and coming into the new world of education.  And I now realized that just in my job--as in my job, when I was a kid where I felt that I was the responsible party when my father died to help my mother take care of these four children, I was still feeling as an adult that I was the responsible party for holding up this economic development ball until somebody could come and take it, which really happened.  So it's very interesting when you look back over a life how you can see personality peeking through in the decisions that you make and how interwoven personality issues with what your professional outcomes are.
Story_ID: 87835
Speaker 1: What, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I'm very concerned that in the black community there's a growing underclass; that many have been able to go on to good schools, to good educations, to good vocational training to some avenue of success that enables them to hold a job, to feed their families, to pay the rent or to buy the house, and to aspire for their children.  I'm very concerned that there is a growing underclass that has not been able to avail itself of those opportunities that is more and more isolated and that resorts to the underworld of business, which includes drugs, in order to survive within the community, and that many of the children in our community who are a part of that underclass are insulated in certain communities, and that there is not enough support for them.  And I think that's changing to a certain extent.  And it's changing, not for really altruistic reasons frankly.  It's changing because the job market requires everybody in the job market be, because the economy boomed.  And even though we're in a period in which there's some job loss for a while, businesses were looking for every able bodied person.  And then business owners turned to minority communities and said well, okay, now we've got room for you, but they didn't have training.  And that same community had never turned their attention to that community until it became necessary for the generation of jobs to support their business, their businesses.  And so I fought a system of separation and racism in this country that only began to be looked at by some because everyone became valuable in the job market.  Now that's not true of all, all.  And certainly the divisions among race are changing because the younger stu--younger community is changing and because they find it hard to identify themselves with any particular racial group now, many, many of them, because they're into marrying.  But my concern is about the ones who have really been left behind, and how we're going to get job training, education.  We've got a literacy--an illiteracy rate right in this city of almost 37 percent.
Speaker 1: Gee, that, that's going backward, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes--of almost 37 percent.  That is an issue which the mayor is trying to address and many others are trying to address.  But you can't get into the job market if you cannot read.  You cannot get into the computer arena if you've not got reading at least on an eighth grade level, and that's a real concern.  So here at Southeastern, while we are focused on higher education, we are also focused on civic engagement, which means that if we can in some way support literacy efforts, if we can support job training efforts that are vocational and not higher education, that we believe that universities ought to be involved in the economic development of a community and in economic health of a community.  And so we used some of resources to augment the work of hundreds of nonprofits in the city and in the nation who have turned their attention and have continued in their work to really rai--raise all boats.  So I'm very concerned about that.  We really gotta be in the position of raising all boats.  And the ones who are not in the job market who are, stopped looking, who are unemployable, have to be lifted so that they can become part of the community that can hold a job, feed their families, buy a house, and look to the future of their children.
Story_ID: 87836
Speaker 1: Looking back on what you have done so far--I know you're still working--but what would you consider as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: I really consider my legacy to have derived from my years in public service, and that is to have contributed to the foundation of the economic rebirth of the District of Columbia; to have put together programs and public involvement in stimulating reinvestment of neighborhood commercial corridors; and helping in the economic rebirth of the city.  I consider the single most important project that I worked on, the Washington Convention Center, the new $800 million dollar convention center, because that effort was thwarted by very ferocious opposition, or there was an attempt to thwart that effort by very ferocious opposition.  And on the council I was the one that was really able to, to lead the effort that was successful in moving that convention center forward.  If there had not been a vote of support, we would not have been able to continue.  There were many, many other people who contem--contributed to its success.  But I had the role of being able to marshal the support that was needed in the, in the legislative body.  So I consider that the contribution to the economic recovery of the District of Columbia as part of my legacy, and that it was a place where I wanted to be twenty years earlier.  I also thing that as I talk to young people and young women, that I have with them a legacy of somebody who just persevered.  Because I have a young--a lot of young women who tell me, I, I've been following you since I was in junior high school.  And every time you ran into a problem that was a difficult one you figured out how to solve it, and you just didn't let anything get you down.  So I think that I have inherited a, a, a, a legacy of never quit (laughter), don't stop, because obstacles, and particularly to young women, have become an example of what they can do, which is to put one foot in front of the other, as my mother [Lenore Robbins Drew] used to say, and continue down the path that you have set your goals on.
Story_ID: 87837
Speaker 1: Okay, now one last question we always ask 'cause it's slightly different from legacy is, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who was willing to see the need of others and try to serve that need, and that had a level of empathy that made me able to stand in the shoes of people, no matter their situation, and help devise solutions that would bring self-confidence, self-esteem, re-entry, and make it possible for people to become contributing members of the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay, thanks.
Story_ID: 87838
Speaker 1: This is former Secretary of Commerce, Ron Brown, at a party at his home the year before he lost his life tragically in the airplane accident.
Speaker 2: That's not 19-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a Rose Garden celebration of the signing of the Family and Medical Leave Act.  This was the first act that was signed by President Clinton in the Rose Garden at the White House.  And I'm shaking hands with Hillary Rodham Clinton and Senator Daschle.  I had worked very hard, both on the Family and Medical Leave Act in the District of Columbia, and had worked very hard on the campaign of Bill Clinton.  I had become a, a national co-chair of his campaign.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  That's not [Tom] Daschle, is it?  Isn't that [Richard] Gephardt (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it is absolutely Gephardt.  Let me--do I need to go back?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  No, no.
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  We go it on tape.
Speaker 2: This is an event at the Women's Business Center that gave me an award as a visionary in the field of business for support of women.  I'm standing to the right of the mother of the mayor of the District of Columbia, Mrs. Williams.  And next to her, the chairman of the board at Southeastern University.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: That is about 19--that's about the year 2000.
Speaker 1: --from "Washington Post," taken--sorry--this is a picture and an article in the "Washington Post" on the day following my defeat in the ward for election.  The picture is of a group of religious leaders, who are meeting on, on an issue that affected Planned Parenthood and the Catholic Church.  And I had a 9:00 meeting the morning with this group of religious leaders the day after my election.  And as you can see from that picture there is a woman who has a big smile on her face.  It is just that smile that was an indication from my body that this was a long overdue hiatus.
Speaker 2: This is perhaps the picture that I like the best of all that I have had taken in my public service history.  I was the "Nineteen Ninety-Nine Washingtonian of the Year, had been name by the "Washingtonian" magazine as among the 50 most power women in Washington and again as one of the 100 most powerful women in Washington.  And this was Washingtonian of the Year.  And the quote from me is that I spent 20 years trying to revive the District of Columbia, and it's happening.  But the picture is of a person who is sure of herself and on top of her game, and I like this particular one.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken with President Bill Clinton at a time when he was visiting a small business in Northeast Washington.  I had more enthusiasm for the--for Clinton during the presidency than in any time before, because I really felt that this was a president who understood, and very intimately understood the problems in minority communities, and that he was so smart that he could articulate on--most any issue.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my two sons.  And we are at our beach home.  The son to my right is Peter, and the son to my left is Ernie.  And they have been tremendously important to me in my career, even though sometimes I think they'd be better off with a mother who was not so much an activist.
Speaker 1: These are my two grandsons.  This is Jacob Drew Jarvis and Ernest Drew Jarvis, and they are the children of my older son.  Being a grandmother now has put a different perspective on how I spend my time and how I protect my health because I wanna be here for a long time.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the members of the board of a company called MVM, Inc.  It's owner, Dario Marquez, is a graduate of Southeastern University.  And he has achieved remarkable success in his business.  He's got a business which is almost $150 million dollar business now.  And this is the kind of student that I talk about when I talk about the university.
Speaker 1: This my father, Dr. [Charles] Drew, on the right side of the picture with Elsie, who died at the age of thirteen from tuberculosis.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the family at home on College Street on the campus of Howard University.  The baby is Charles Drew, Jr.  My two sisters are looking toward my father.  And I am in the middle looking sad.  That one--that's about 1944--'45' [1945].
Speaker 2: This is my father Freedman's Hospital with a group of interns and residents, talking about the patient and the patient's condition.  And he's probably quizzing them.
Speaker 1: --of, of the Rex Club at Dunbar High School.  My father is the person who is seated in the front.  He was president of the Rex Club, which is a, an academic scholarship club at Dunbar.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father at his desk at the hospital, where he was the head of the Department of Surgery at Howard University Hospital.
Speaker 1: This is a formal por--portrait taken of my father by Scurlock.  Scurlock Studios was the African-American photographer who chronicled the history of this city by just this kind of a photograph.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my sisters, Bebe on my right, Silvia on my left at the Celebrate the Legacy dinner that occurred after my defeat in election in 2000.
Speaker 1: And you're still smiling (laughter).
Speaker 2: And I'm still smiling, yes.
Speaker 1: This is my father delivering a speech in one of the facilities at Howard University.  These were colleagues of his at the medical school.  And as you can see, he is a man who was very comfortable on his feet and with an audience.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture at the Celebrate the Legacy dinner that includes from the right: my sister, Silvia; my brother, Charles; my father's sister, Nora; behind her, Fred Drew Gregory, who was the first African American to be the commander of a shuttle to space; and in the front, the widow of my father's brother, Joseph.
