Story_ID: 8992
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the History Makers.  Videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is William Jefferson.  That's got to be the easiest name to spell in America.  "W-I-L-L-I-A-M J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N".
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 14th, 1947 in Lake Providence, Louisiana, East Carroll Parish.
Speaker 1: Lake Providence, okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I serve in Congress now.  But professionally, I was a lawyer before I got here.  I can't serve anymore since this is a full-time job.
Speaker 1: And you are the first black congressman in Louisiana in 114 years, right?
Speaker 2: Well since Reconstruction one hundred and four--when I was sworn in on January of 1991, I was the first African American to serve in the Congress from Louisiana in 114 years.  There had been two men who had won this seat before me during the Reconstruction period, one in 1868.  I believe his name was Edward Menard, "M-E-N-A-R-D" [sic, John Willis Menard, the first African American to be elected to Congress], and the other one in 1874 and his name, I believe was Charles, I think it's Drew [sic, Charles Edmund Nash].  But these--the first man, Menard was not seated.  The leadership at the time on the House floor said that Congress wasn't ready for a Negro congressman and then he was sent back home.  The second gentleman, however, was seated and served two years, from 1874 to 1876 and was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 10th, I believe 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Washington, D.C. sitting at the congressional office that's been loaned to me for a while.
Story_ID: 8993
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard question, but probably some fish dish I suppose.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well when we had children, it was always Disney World.  Now, of course, it's Africa for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess for me it's the summer, because it's baseball and it's fishing. But, of course, I like to hunt in the fall. So perhaps somewhere between the summer and the fall.  I hate the winter (chuckling) I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't suppose I do.  I just remember the handful of things my father used to read to me when I would come home from college.  And I suppose I could adopt--adopt those.  One of them was, "A man born of a woman is but a few days and those days are filled with trouble."  It kind of let you know that things aren't always gonna go right and you might as well accept the fact that that's the way life is and go on with it.  And the other, of course, I suppose one from my mother when she said, "Don't worry, don't hurt, don't forget to smell the flowers."  She gave me that when we had children.  And she said, "You think you're busy and you're important and you have things to do, but the children are the most important.  You should always make sure you take time to give them the proper nourishment."  And so that's what we tried to do.
Story_ID: 8994
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your family history. How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Not all that far.  On--my father [Mose Jefferson] is ninety-three years old.  And believe me he has a hard time remembering much past his grandmother.  And he is still alive, although he is very ill right now.  But his grandfather, a man named John Frederick Weeks I guess we have the best record of. Because he served in the Co-in the Union army.  New Orleans was the first major city in the south to fall to the Union troops back in 1862.  And so John Frederick Weeks was thirty-one at the time and joined a platoon of freedman to fight in the union army.  And the reason we know something about him is because he applied for a pension from the army for twenty something dollars a month when he was eighty-one.  And to establish his eligibility for it, he had to tell his story about who he was and where he had come from.  And so he takes it all the way back to Prince George's county in Maryland where he was--when he was thirteen years old, he was sold to a plantation owner in Bayou Goula, Louisiana.  And that's how we ended up in Louisiana.  But he was my mother's--my father's mother's father.  And so he was born in the early 1800s I suppose, somewhere around 1830.  Now we, of course, tried to search the records here in Maryland. But before 1867, there were no records of African Americans kept anywhere. Because they were simply mentioned as chattel on somebody's property and not as individual human beings.  And so there's no way to find anything beyond that.  And he had--He did not have to establish anything beyond that to make his case.  So--but from that, we know where he came from and what church he was married in, who the witnesses were to his marriage. Ultimately where he was buried, went to the graveyard where he was buried, all that.  But there's no record beyond that period for him.  On the other side, it's about as much of a stop as you come to, somewhere around the early 1800s in every case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories passed down through your family about your ancestors and what they were doing or the struggle that they faced?
Speaker 2: Well the struggles that they faced were pretty common, if they lived in Louisiana.  My mother's father, a man named Oliver Harris came from Indiana, ended up in the South.  So he had kind of a enterprising, entrepreneurial kind of aspi--attitude about life that wasn't that present among many others in our area, and he owned a cotton gin and owned farmland and that sort of thing.  And he was kind of an enterprising individual.  Most of the people who I've known as my ancestors were farmers. All lived on farms, were tenant farmers or sharecroppers or owned small plots of land themselves.  And so it's a Southern agrarian history that I have.  And I grew-I myself grew up on a cotton farm in Northeast Louisiana, a tiny, tiny little place. Twenty-five acres which is no farm at all.  I remember when I first ran for office in the State Senate I was making a speech, trying to let folks know how humble my beginnings were.  And I said I had grown up on a twenty-five acre farm in Northeast Louisiana.  And when I left the speech, my campaign manager at the time said, "Man, don't ever say twenty-five acres in New Orleans. That's bigger than City Park."  Well for me in the farm, it was nothing.  But in the city of New Orleans, of course, it's a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah,  twenty-five acres for a farm is nothing.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  It's nothing.
Speaker 1: I mean acreage (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, oh no.  it's absolutely nothing.
Story_ID: 8995
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's another easy one Mose Jefferson, "M-O-S-E" Jefferson.  My daddy was born in White Castle, Louisiana in 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a jack--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He is retired now.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was a jack of all trades.  My daddy was a farmer.  But he never was really that dedicated as a farmer.  He was more a person who did plumbing and built houses and in a very small way, on a very small scale.  He worked for the U.S. [Army] Corps of Engineers toward the middle to the end of his working life, as someone who puts mats out on the [Mississippi] River.  In fact, he'd worked on the river for a long time, off and on as a part-time responsibility.  And when the spring came and the river waters were swollen, there was always a need to try and beat back the river from overflowing into the farm lands, either underground or on top of it.  And so there was always this mighty struggle to resist the river.  And so every spring there was--men were engaged to do that.  My daddy did that a lot.  And in the end, he ended up driving a big machine to put down the mats and keep the water back.  And so Daddy--Daddy was a very bright enterprising man who taught himself to read and write, only went to the second grade, but could master almost any kind of technical skill that there was out there.  So he was a machinist.  He was a--he was a plumber.  He was a carpenter.  He was a pipe fitter.  He did all the rest of it.  And he drove this heavy equipment for the U.S. Corps of Engineers.  And he was a farmer of sorts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was he like?  What was he--? What was his personality like?
Speaker 2: He was a funny man, absolutely a witty man.  And I don't know where he got all his jokes I would say, but he seemed to always have--be full of fun.  He also was a--had the responsibility of keeping us close to church.  He was the superintendent of the Sunday school.  He opened the church.  He closed the church.  We lived close to it. So we had to kind of clean up. He was the guy who made the church ready.  We dug the graves for people who died--the cemetery was right next to the church.  It was a stone's throw from our house.  And so he became the caretaker for it.  But he was also, as I said, the superintendent of the Sunday school and the deacon of the church.  And, therefore, it was his responsibility to make sure that you went to Sunday school on Sunday  morning and church in the midday and prayer meeting during the week and join the choir, even--if you couldn't sing. Sing background if you couldn't sing lead.  You had to kind of be there.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Sweet Canaan Missionary Baptist Church.
Story_ID: 8996
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your mother?  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Angeline Harris--Jefferson, of course, in the end, she married my daddy [Mose Jefferson], but Angeline Harris.  She was--she was the strongest person I've ever known.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1914 in Lake Providence [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: April 23rd, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So go on now.  You were getting ready to get into it.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) She died when she was seventy-eight.  But as I said, she was the strongest and most extraordinary person I've ever known.  She was totally dedicated to her children and was totally committed to our education.  She and our father, I guess, played this--My mother was a religious person.  But she drove us to not miss a day out of school. To work hard on our school work and everybody had to--had to finish school period.  And we weren't gonna drop out and work on the farm.  When I was coming along, got to be about thirteen or fourteen and you were a boy, well you went to work, pretty much.  And nobody thought about finishing high school or certainly never thought about going to college.  You would simply go to work. And a lot of the girls, same thing.  But more girls finished high school than boys did.  But still many of them didn't finish at all.  They would go to work, get married, do whatever.  But they would not-They would not finish or attend it.  That wasn't gonna be the case in my mother's house.  She had herself wanted to become a school teacher.  She had--her mother had fallen ill when she was 14.  She finished eighth grade and went to work in a laundry and never went back to school.  And she made a vow to herself that wasn't gonna happen to--with her children.  And it didn't.  All of us finished high school.  And all ten of us finished college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you reflect back on growing up?  Give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Chuckling).
Speaker 1: Of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up in the country in northeast Louisiana.  And a lot of dirt roads. A lot of hunting and fishing. A lot of pecan trees and pears trees and little streams through pastures.  A lot of farm animals and a lot of work.  So I grew up in that environment just as country as you could image. Segregated schools from the time I started out. Always eager to go to school though.  But we went to a school the first one was called the East Carroll Parish Training School for the Colored [Lake Providence, Louisiana]. Not quite a predictor of where you might end up going.  It simply was a place to send "colored children", as a requirement of the law. But there wasn't a lot to support us except we had dedicated teachers. And, therefore, things happened there.  But when I first started, we didn't have school books in the first grade.  We got them somewhere toward the end of the second grade.  And they were hand-me-downs from the white kids who had used them and were done with them.  And so we got them old.  But the first year, I was in the first grade, we read from a newspaper, the 'Pittsburgh Courier', that was shipped down there, and we kind of went through that.  And the teacher made words on the board and made little things and gave them to us and had to write them. 'Cause there weren't any mimeograph things in the school to speak of.  But she just made a lot of copies of it--or we did.  But we learned to read and to write, largely because of our teachers and our parents.  My mother was also head of the P.T.A. [Parent Teacher Association] for twelve years.  And she was completely and totally dedicated to us and other--other children.  I'll tell you sometimes a little bit later, if you ask me about what-how she did that.  But she was absolutely an amazing effort between parents and teachers in that parish.
Speaker 1: Hmm. Okay.  So what kind of student were you in school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I always did well in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your mother really pushed and supported you all in terms of--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Doing well?
Speaker 2: My mother--not only us, but every other child that she could get her hands on.  She was a P.T.A. president as I said to you. And you would have women who would come down and say, "Mrs. Jefferson, I don't know how to help my child.  I don't--I can't read.  I can't--I don't know anything about math or science and I can't help them."  And she would say, "Well if you go to the doctor, do you know what's in the doctor's medicine bottle?"  And they would say, "No, ma'am."  "And do you know anything about the doctor's medical books?"  They'd say, "No, ma'am."  Say, "But if he tells you to give the child the medicine three times a day or at breakfast or at night time, you can do that can't you?"  And they say, "Well yes, ma'am, I can."  Say, "Well look. What you do is, you go and ask the teacher how long a child needs to study for math or science or history.  How much homework he should do?  When the test come, how much more time should they apply to that? And when the projects are there, the science projects, the other projects, how should they prepare for those things? And then you support them in that."  If I was studying at my house and I would tell my mother, "Mom, I'm finished with whatever the subject might be."  She would say, "How long you been doing that?"  I'd say, "twenty minutes."  She'd say, "No, the teacher said thirty-five minutes. You sit right there."  Well it actually helped me to review what I had done. And it helped me to do better in school.  But that's all she knew is what the teacher said we should do.  But she strictly made us do that.  And it was a kind of a teamwork that produced results for our family.  And most of us did very well in school.
Story_ID: 8997
Speaker 1: So what kind of a kid were you coming up?  I mean what did you like to do as a--?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, we all had to work hard all the time. In the--during the spring of the year, school was built around the requirement for children to work.  In fact, we had some--summer school time built around the requirement to go out and chop cotton.  We had the fall system built around a break that we had to go out and pick cotton.  That's how the school was put--the school schedule was put together.  It wasn't just start in September and finish up in whatever.  You start in August when the cotton had been--chopping had been laid by and you would quit sometime in early October.  You go out and pick cotton.  You go back in November, and the same thing was true in the spring.  It'd  have some kind of a schedule built around the requirement to work in the fields.  But we--I enjoyed going to school.  I looked forward to it when I was coming along.  In fact, my birthday was in March. And when it came time to--When I became six years old, I was ready to go. Said, "No, you have to wait until September."  So I-But the kind of child that was full of a lot of love for my parents [Mose Jefferson and Angeline Harris Jefferson].  My older brothers and sisters teaching me and standing in place of my parents to make sure we did the things they wanted us to do. Full of going to church every Sunday and all during the week. And full of I guess a lot of pulling for each other, for everybody in the family to try to make sure people had a chance to succeed.
Story_ID: 8998
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: There were ten of us born to my mother and father [Angeline Harris Jefferson and Mose Jefferson].  My father was married before he married my mother when he was twenty-years old.  And he was divorced years later.  And so he had a son in his first married. End up-ended up eleven of us actually.  But we only knew the ten.  The other boy was in California, and we only saw him once or twice in our life.  But the rest of us were there.  There're nine of us now. One of our sisters that we lost her in the early part of the '90s. [1990s]  So but everyone else is still around and still working at one thing or the other.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm number six.  I like to say I'm the start of the second half  and the better half of the ten, or if you count eleven right in the middle.
Story_ID: 8999
Speaker 1: Who were your mentors in school?  Were there any teachers that stood out, and took a particular interest in you or who--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was guiding you?
Speaker 2: Yeah. There was a teacher in the fifth grade [at East Carroll Parish Training School for the Colored, Lake Providence, Louisiana].  Her name was Mary Shorter [ph.].  She truly believed in me.  And she took me aside, I can't tell you how many times, to talk about what abilities she thought I had and what talent she thought I had. And how I needed to comply myself and how I was gonna make it through book learning as she said and not a lot of other ways, and how I needed to make sure I stayed in school and all the rest of it.  I was a studious young person.  I was respectful of the folks who were over me, the older people and my parents.  And I didn't do everything everybody wanted me to do. Of course, like no child does.  But I worked at it hard.  And I tried to keep it in the frame work of the authority that was presented to me in the form of my parents [Mose Jefferson and Angeline Harris Jefferson] and teachers and the folks in the church.  And I think that's what kind of held us together.  Most of us did that in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: A place called G.W. Griffin High School, same place, Lake Providence [Louisiana], of course.  My-Mary Shorter stayed--was born on the same day I was born, March 14th.  But, of course, many years earlier. And she's responsible for giving me my middle name, which is Jennings.  William Jennings Jefferson.  My mother was gonna name me William after her brother's-her father's brother.  And she didn't have a middle name for me.  And since I was born on the same day as Miss Shorter, she heard that Mama had a child.  She came down from the church to see me, the new baby.  And the-My father and my mother told me. I thought they were making it up, that she looked at me and said, "Look, I want-Let me put something on this boy's name. Because he's gonna do some unusual things," she said.  And so she gave me the name of Jennings because of William Jennings Bryan who was a favorite of hers and he was in presidential politics, as you know.  So anyhow, that's how the story went.  Well later on, I thought they told me this to simply encourage me to continue with my work and to try and do well, that sort of thing.  But later on here just a few years ago, I asked my daddy, "You remember Miss Mary Shorter, Daddy?  Tell me what happened and how she came over to give me the--?"  So he told me the same story all over again.  So I have to give it (chuckling) credit now.  But in any event, she stayed with me as a constant throughout my life, all the way until I was ready to go to college.  And one of the things I regretted most, when I did graduate was that she wasn't alive to share in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what kind of activities were you involved in high school?  I mean you---I know you're doing hard work it sounds like a lot and--But did you get involved in any high school activities or were there any to get involved with?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I played baseball.  I was the president of my class from the time I was in the fourth grade to the time I was in the twelfth grade.  So I was always involved in student politics.  And we had debate clubs that I was a part of.  And we had the academic competitions that I participated in, in biology and in English.  And--we spent the time--I wasn't much of a singer, but I was in the choir and we-I did that.  But I tell you, a great part of our time was taking up all the time with the work that we did.  And in school, I did these other things.  In the summer times, because there were so many of us and because our place was so small, we could finish up our work rather quickly.  And then we would get up at 3:30 in the morning.  We'd be in a cotton field.  We'd catch a truck at somewhere around 4:00, be in the cotton field at 4:30, worked nine hours until 2:30 in the afternoon for $3.00 a day, thirty-three and a third cent an hour.  And we'd come home and give mama $2 to hold some kind of a way.  And we'd use fifty cent for lunch and try to hold on to the other fifty cent ourselves some kind of a way.  At the end of the summer, we'd go shopping to the Howard Discount Store or Bill's Dollar Store to buy some sort of a cheap jeans or whatever we could buy and things we could wear to school.  And that's how the summers went.  As my sisters got older, we would pick a bale of cotton for my sister Barbara to pay her, $136 or whatever it was at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] .  It was very cheap, but for us, it was a lot.  That was a whole bale of cotton, $136.  And we'd pick it on a half. Because cotton was--500 pounds was a bale of cotton and thirty cent a pound.  So 150 bucks was the whole deal.  And so we'd do that and pay for Betty. Then Barbara went to--I mean for Barbara.  And then Betty went to college and that's how we did to pay for Betty.  When I got there, student loans were around.  And so we had another way to get ourselves going to go to college.  But back in the day when my first two or three went to school, it was always working for them to pay for it.  That's what I mean how we were all pulling together and pushing each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were in high school, what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have any idea of what you wanted to do, you know? What kind of career you wanted to pursue?
Speaker 2: I thought I wanted to be a journalist or I wanted to be a lawyer.  That later crystallized as I saw Thurgood Marshall in the Civil Rights Movement.  I wanted to be a lawyer to come back to Lake Providence and try to open things up. Early on in my life I thought I wanted to be a physician.  I knew I didn't want to be a school teacher.  That seemed to be the top of what we could do back in those days.  If you were an African American in Lake Providence and you wanted to have a kind of decent life and you were a man and you wanted to wear a suit every now and then, you were either a--an undertaker, a minister or you were a school teacher.  There were no bankers, no business people, no judges and lawyers, no-none of that kind of thing.  There were certainly no politicians, 'cause you couldn't vote.  But the-So my mother had this idea, we should all be teachers.  So we could all have a nice life and contribute something.  And that was the highest obvious thing we could be.  I never wanted to stop there.  I wanted to do something different.  And I really wanted to start at the beginning and interest in medicine.  But I quickly, I kind of lost that when we started in the labs.  I didn't enjoy it very much.  And so English was always my favorite subject, anyway.  And so I turned to that.  But I did compete in science courses in the competitions that we had.
Story_ID: 9000
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along, did the Civil Rights-you know, did the Civil Rights Movement started up I guess in '57. You would've been in grade school?
Speaker 2: I'd've been ten years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, did it--did any parts of the Civil Rights Movement hit Northeast Louisiana when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Not much.  By the time--My mother [Angeline Harris Jefferson] was very involved in voter registration. She and a fellow named Reverend [Francis Joseph] Atlas and Reverend John H. Scott.  He was our leader.  He was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] head.  They were the first five black people to get on the vote-on the voting roles in Lake Providence [Louisiana].  My mother took the test, the so called literacy test, I don't know three or four times. And later on taught it at our house in our little front room there.  The literacy test was, of course, as an obstacle, an impediment to voting.  It wasn't meant to test anybody's literacy, 'cause nobody passed the thing unless the guy wanted you to pass it.  And so all the school teachers failed, everybody failed who was bold enough to go and take it.  Most folks weren't bold enough to take it anyway.  My mother took it over and over I guess six, seven times.  And then they put so much pressure on the literacy test business till finally in 1962, she and these other three, four folks were put on the rolls.  And she was told she had passed it.  Now the literacy test has certain features I remember, because I remember my mother teaching it in the-in the-in our house.  And the old folks who were illiterate had a hard time with it, as were the old white folks who were illiterate would have had too--they didn't have to take it, of course.  But they couldn't--They had to recite the preamble of the [United States] Constitution.  They had to recite the [U.S.] presidents in order.  They had to be able to compute their--compute their ages with the year, the month and the day, all of which they did.  They labored with great difficulty in trying to figure these things out.  And so I got involved with my mother, with these people in our house and this little instruction.  You got to remember up there, parents were deathly afraid of us--children getting involved in anything.  They'd beg us, "Please don't do this.  Please don't go here.  Please don't go to the wrong window.  Please don't go to the wrong place in the movie house.  Please, please, please."  Because they knew the consequence. Whether you got run out of town, or you got killed or something. You know, something happen to you that was awful. There was no recourse and there was no appeal.  You were just done for.  And so you had these horrible stories about young men who were--from Emmett Till to all the rest who were killed or run away.  And so there was this great fear on the part of the parents.  Well my mother would do all these things.  But she wanted us to just really stay real close to her.  So I remember going with her to the school board, to the P.T.A. [Parent Teacher Association] where she would raise-just raise hell about school books and conditions and teachers and pay for the school teachers as a part of her responsibility as NAACP head.  But the other part was on the Civil Rights voter registration.  My mother was always there, which is why I think I got this interest in public service.
Story_ID: 9001
Speaker 1: And we were talking about Reverend [John H.] Scott.  Can you tell us something about him, the Civil Rights leader?
Speaker 2: Reverend Scott was a tremendously courageous man.  He was a wisp of a man. I guess about (chuckling) 5'3",  120 pounds, a little bitty guy.  But he had the heart of a lion.  And he was courageous to a fault.  And he led our Civil Rights efforts in Lake Providence [Louisiana].  And we all lined up behind whatever he did.  And the biggest efforts there was for voting rights.  And in North Louisiana, you had three or four people who were just outstanding leaders. In our parish Reverend Scott.  And right down the road in Tallulah was Zelma Wyche.  And over in--down in Bogalusa was A. Z. Young.  And then you had so many people in every parish that was somebody who was involved with, with doing something along the lines we're talk--folks you never heard of.  But who were just absolutely committed, involved in taking risk. 'Cause they lived in these places.  It wasn't like coming in and leaving town and making a speech and going away.  I mean every day they had to go to bed there, and had to go through the routines of what happens if somebody comes to your house at night. And how do you protect your children and all that sort of business.  So it was a tough-a tough deal.  In fact, by the time when I was fifteen my father [Mose Jefferson] was already telling us how, you know, if somebody encountered you here or there, how you oughta handle yourself and how you oughta beg folks to--for your life and for this and that. You have to kind of find a way to fight back on things in order to--And this is what you had to talk to the children about.  Because when you got old enough to walk away from your house and leave your parents, there was no telling what would happen to you.
Speaker 1: Now did you--Do you remember stories of lynchings or harassment of people down there?
Speaker 2: When I came along, I don't remember anybody being lynched.  A lot of people beaten. A lot of guys run out of town for looking somebody in the eye, for saying they looked at some white woman, who was in the store, was not talking to her right. That kind of craziness.  My mother's-My mother [Angeline Harris Jefferson] told me about a lot of cases of people being lynched or shot dead for these sorts of so called infractions.  But the most serious one that I remember was a black physician who was in town.  His name was Dr. Green--before I was born who'd come there. And he had, you know, a new car and he had an office.  And he looked like a professional man.  And he was for that reason told to leave town.  And they didn't want him there, giving black folks the wrong idea about--ideas about what they might be able to do.  And he didn't leave.  And finally, they burn some office or whatever.  He decided to--Well he needed to get out of there.  And he got his things and went to the depot and was shot at the train station. Shot dead in daylight.  They told us that a thousand times.  But you could image if you were somebody's mother or father and you were worried-you were concerned about your child, whatever.  You would do everything you could to keep them from getting involved or taking a chance here or there. Because they would take a chance, but they didn't want you to take a chance.  But, of course, we did anyway.  We pushed the issues. 'Cause young people do that.  But we were--there were--Reverend Scott and the rest didn't-They did things themselves.  They were very careful to keep us from doing it.  Unlike in Birmingham where when things got going, a lot of kids were asked to get involved.  That--In our part of the country, it was quite different.
Story_ID: 9002
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school, was it in '65?
Speaker 2: '65.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And had you decided where to go to school or did you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well unless I was gonna be Medgar Evers or somebody or James Meredith, we had--we were gonna go to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana], Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] or Xavier [University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was segregated at the time.  Every white school in the state was segregated.  And all my sisters had gone to Southern except one had gone to Grambling.  We don't know what happened.  She got off the track there. But everyone had gone there.  So I went to Southern, where we had-It was a wonderful man, Felton [G.] Clark [President of Southern University] down there.  And I'd gone in competitions with for-as I said for English and--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The debate team?
Speaker 2: And biology.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: And state competitions down there.  So I become familiar with it.  But in any event, that's where I went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you like Southern?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed Southern a great deal.  The first semester, I didn't know this.  If you--at Southern, your first semester and you made all "A's", you got to go to the president's house.  I didn't know that.  But I did. And so I was invited to the president's house. About thirty of us.  And so President Clark would get you at his house. And we were all awed to be in the president's presence.  I was anyway and everybody was I believe. Because he was this brilliant man who had gone to Columbia [University, New York, New York] in 1927, Phi Beta Kappa and every thing else. And just a tremendously erudite prepared individual.  And who was just known as a great scholar.  But the embarassment was it fell to Dr. Clark to keep the school going, had to go down to the [Louisiana state] legislature with his hat in his hand and looking down at his shoe tops, talking about Southern and lowering himself as much as he could to all these illiterate white folks in the legislature, and he was head and shoulder above them in education and everything else.  He told us once that they put us on this bluff-sat us on a bluff overlooking the river.  "They don't expect us to do much here," he said, "But our job is to fool them."  And so he--every year, he would say, "We're gonna fool them in this way and we're gonna make something out of this thing."  And so that's what he set out to do. His father [Dr. J.S. Clark] before him.  But he was the real scholar in the bunch.  But anyhow, we went to his house.  And he made this speech along these lines. "You are the talented tenth, the W. E. B. [William Edward Burghardt] Duboises.  You are the leaders of tomorrow."  And he went through all that and told us what a chance we had and what we needed to do, how we had to stick to things.  And then he went around the room and asked everyone what they wanted to do.  And he got to me and I said, "I want to become a lawyer, I believe."  And so he said, "Well then English is the best preparation for law.  Then you have to hook up with the English Department head. And what else do you have an interest in?"  I said, "Political science."  So political science was Dr. Jewel Prestidge.  And so that is how I came to spend my time at school in English and political science.  And it was like that all the way through. All the way through school, there was someone there to nurture you. Someone there to see what you wanted to do and where you wanted to go.  And toward the end of it, I sat down with my department heads and with the Dean of Student Affairs. And they were looking over things and suggesting where I should apply to and thought by then, LSU might be a--or Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] might be a good place to good or something like that. Because they all kind of opened up [to African Americans] by the time I finished school or starting to open up.  But I wanted to leave Louisiana.  I wanted to go, you know, some place else.  And so Dean Harver [ph.] suggested I should apply to Stanford. Because I'd done well enough on the LSAT and the grades and all.  And others suggested I should apply to other places.  And so we applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and applied to middle schools in between and applied to some safe harbor schools on the end of the thing just to make sure somehow or other I'd end up going.  The first school I heard from was Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  Right away, almost (unclear).  So I went--I was thinking about the Northeast anyway. So I thought that was a pretty good result.  And I was waiting to hear from Harvard down the line.  But I knew this one thing, if you got in, you got a fat envelope.  'Cause I knew a lot of folks who didn't get in to where we were going.  They got little skinny ones that said, "I am sorry.  I regret to inform you," that kind of a deal.  So it wasn't until April that I heard from Harvard.  I went to the post office,. And the guy said, "There's a letter here from Cambridge, Massachusetts."  So I was kind of holding my breath to see whether it was a fat or skinny (chuckling) envelope.  And he gave me this fat one. So I knew before I opened it, that I'd been accepted.  But the reason I got accepted to Harvard more then anything else is because of what they did at Southern. And all the work they did to make sure that I stayed on focus, that I-that I had all the support behind me there.  And all these people encouraging me and keeping me on course and trying to make sure that they--Not only me. But they found other students who they thought had some ability.  And they guided them to where they hoped they might end up going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Southern was a wonderful experience for me.  And I had a chance to get involved in leadership there.  I was the sophomore class president, the junior class president.  I was student body president my senior year.  And I was in ROTC and in military science leadership and all the rest.  So it was a chance to exercise leadership, a chance to get involved in some scholarship, a chance to have people who cared about you and followed you through.  And it was for me a great experience at the time.
Story_ID: 9003
Speaker 1: Had you been out of Louisiana before--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I had-.
Speaker 1: At this time?
Speaker 2: I had probably gone to Chicago [Illinois] because I had sisters there.  But I hardly been anywhere.  I'd gone to Chicago I know to visited my sisters. And when I--you mean before I went to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Before you went to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh, before I went to Boston, yeah.  Because during the summer I went to work at Montgomery Wards and all that and stay with my sister Betty.  I was just trying to make some money during the year in the summer--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In Chicago.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In Chicago.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But that was about it.  I hadn't been anywhere else.  And when I got to-I--When I was student government president, I went to some of those student meetings. And I went to one in Atlanta [Georgia].  I went to one in North Carolina. But that was about the limit of my travel.
Story_ID: 9004
Speaker 1: So you're going to Boston.  How did you find Bo--Cambridge [Massachusetts] and Harvard [Law School]?
Speaker 2: It was entirely different.  I'd never gone to an integrated school, to school where white people were there before.  I didn't know what--how I would make it. That's why I was very concerned about making sure I worked hard.  And I wasn't--I didn't wanna go back to Mama [Angeline Harris Jefferson] on the farm. So I had to kind of stay after things.  And there were only--in the fourth year class, there were four African Americans out of 500.  In the third year class, there were nine.  In our class we had the biggest class.  We had twenty-one or so.  So that was a big class. But it was out of 500 still.  So it was tiny, tiny percentage.  But in any event, at the whole school, there was less than thirty African Americans out of 1500 people.  And so it was a different kind of environment for me. A different kind of experience.  And it was cold in the northeast and cold in a lot of different ways, not just the weather (chuckling).  But it was a place that I-that I worked at and became very confident as I worked through my experience there.  But it was a place where I started out with a lot of questions, ended up with a lot of confidence.  And so I--it too was a good experience for me looking back over it.  I had a chance to collect it all.  I got married my second year that I was there.  So that, of course, changed things for me.  I wasn't living in a dormitory any more.  I moved to student housing.  And we--we were-I was in a different setting altogether.  There were a few other married folks we came to know.  And so it made it a little more bearable.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet your wife in Cambridge or--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I met my wife [Andrea Green] at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was from Marrero, Louisiana.  She didn't tell me quite exactly where she was from, because my--in the yearbook, it said, New Orleans, Louisiana.  But when I went to visit her for the first time, it was Marrero which is outside of New Orleans, Louisiana.  And there was a cotton--a cow pasture across the house--first from the house, right.  I told her and her father after some years, after I got enough courage to tell them that I--that they had a bigger cow pasture across their house than I did.  And I thought she was a city girl.  But I met her. She was Miss Southern when I was student body president.  And I got to escort her around. And that's how we ended up going out on dates in the rest of the year.  After we graduated from college, she went to Rutgers [State University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] to get a masters degree in New Jersey.  I was at Harvard.  And so we weren't that far apart. But first we didn't have any money.  It was kind of like a world apart.  But in any event, she was still in that part of the world.  And that summer after I--my freshman year in law school, we were married.  She moved to Cambridge and went to work in the school system there for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until we finished.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now was there-Did you develop any kind of relationship with any of the professors at Harvard or was it just really kind of cold?
Speaker 2: Well Derrick Bell was the only African American there at the time.  There was only one African American on the faculty.  And, of course, we became--all of us became close to him.  There were a number of people in the administration who were African American. One or two who were in financial aid, a place we always had a lot of occasion to go to talk about how we could, you know, make it through the year and do things.  And--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This is 1969?
Speaker 2: 1969.  Yeah. I was married in 1970.  But I met my wife at school and as I said, through the escorting that I did.  And she turned out to be a person coming from a eleven--let's see, eleven in her family.  And she was the second oldest.  And so we both had big families.  And she had a great father.  He didn't start out that way.  He didn't, you know, he made me pay my dues to get to know him.  But he was a great man.  And her mother is a wonderful lady.  And we've been blessed. Now being married for this June, thirty-three years, 2003, June 13th. Actually it's Friday, thirty-three years we been married. And we have five children.  And so it's been a wonderful life with her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Archie Epps at Harvard? Let's see in admission?
Speaker 2: Arch--No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just thought I'd ask that.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But okay. So law school, it was a--You felt you were well prepared and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I didn't know whether I was well prepared.  I wondered whether I was.  It turned out I was.  But I didn't know that.  'Cause it was a whole new experience for me. Going to a school with a reputation like Harvard and coming from a school that was a little black school in the south.  I mean I didn't know what to expect.  And in the-Most of the African Americans who were there were from other places.  They were from  Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and places like that. One or two from Harvard undergraduate school.  And I think that year I was the only person there from a predominantly black school who was on the--in the class that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was--did--? Well--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now there were other professors, that you asked me that--there was a professor [Frank] Michelman from Louisiana who I found to be a person who took an interest in me.  There was Warrenberg [ph] who was a criminal law professor. Oh,  I took criminal law from [Alan] Dershowitz, but Warrenberg  was a warmer, more involved individual then Dershowitz was with us.  And I remember I met Thurgood Marshall there for the first time.  He came through for a moot court experience.  And I had a chance to meet this man who I idolized who actually was the reason why I thought about law school in the first place, in my--at the end of my first year.
Story_ID: 9005
Speaker 1: So were you thinking of making a contribution in the Civil Rights Movement as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: I thought that's what I would do.  I thought that I would go back to Lake Providence, north Louisiana and practice law there.  There was no African American lawyer in that part of the country.  And that is what I thought (chuckling) I would do.  And that is what I planned to do.  But when I got to my third year [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a fellow from New Orleans [Louisiana]  came up to look for law clerks.  And the federal judge--I'd never even thought about that.  I had a plan to go to New York [New York] to serve as an intern with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And that is the only plan that I had.  I'd been-I didn't wanna work for a firm in Boston [Massachusetts] or New York.  I'd never looked for a job in any of those places.  I was going-always going back to Louisiana.  And I thought I was going back as a lawyer who would be an NAACP-trained and -thrust lawyer out there into the world and so on.  So I applied for it and I was accepted for that.  And then this judge comes along in October or so a year--and I got a call from Dean Saks who was the Dean of law school then, who said to this Judge [Alvin] Rubin, he told him he should talk to me. Because I was from the state and I had a pretty good record. And I should talk to him.  And he thought I would be a good fit for a clerk-a law clerk.  So I interviewed with Judge Rubin and his wife Genise.  They were there and were seeing other folks.  And so he told me that he made his appointments around Thanksgiving, and he would let me know.  Well he called me up and said, "Look, if you will accept the job, I'd like you to be my law clerk."  Well it turned out that I was the first African American law clerk in the federal system in Louisiana period, which I didn't know either.  But it was a big deal at the court house.  And I ended up taking the job and that's how I got to New Orleans actually through the Judge Rubin clerkship.  And that's what got me kind of off my path to go back to North Louisiana.  Well once I was down there, Judge Rubin was an excellent teacher, a wonderful man.  And taught at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] at night.  I drove up with him on occasion and he taught taxes and a course, called negotiations.  And he was a wonderful teacher during the whole process of the clerkship.  He would talk about why juror X was picked over juror Y.  And he'd talk about arguments that lawyers had made about the briefs they'd filed. Which was any good and bad, effective or not and arguments and discussed those.  So it was a wonderful experience for me with him.  He was a great teacher and he loved the work that he did.  And I enjoyed being with him.  And we were friends from then on for the rest of our lives.  So that's how I got to New Orleans.  Now after I'm there, [John] Bennett Johnston wins a [U.S.] Senate seat in 1971 or -2 I think it was [1972].  And he was trying to get his staff together, and came down to see--Al Rubin had taught him when he was at LSU. And he asked Rubin, he said, "I'm looking for some folks. Wanna have an integrated staff for the first time in Washington.  And I wanna get some folks up there.  I wanna get a good LA [legislator assistant]."  And Rubin said, "There's no guy--nobody better than this guy that I have."  And so he had Bennett Johnston meet me.  So I ended up talking to the folks in north Louisiana.  I said look, "I still wanna come back with you, but I got this chance to go work for John--What do you think about that?"  And Zelma Wyche and all the rest of them who were up there said, "Well, you know, Bennett just won.  I think it's a great chance to go and you come after that."  Well they kept letting me go and I ended up never going back. But I went to Washington [D.C.] to work with Bennett Johnston as a legislator assistant for two years.  And that was my first experience up here in Washington on the [Capitol] Hill.  Way back in 1973.  So I was there from '73 to '70-sometime in '75 [1975].  I worked for him.  So--but I got--ended up never getting to do the Civil Rights practice that I had anticipated, and going back to, to New Orleans after I finished with Bennett and starting a law practice with a fellow who had been to law school with me.  And I did, however do some work for the NAACP.  I did appeals cases for them for a good while, death penalty cases in the fifth circuit.  And I did a few teacher displacement cases for NAACP.  And I represented the Bogalusa [Louisiana] teachers.  I represented the what was then called the Louisiana Education Association, Association for Black Educators who were being-principals were being thrown out when the system was being integrated.  And I did that sort of work for the NAACP. But I never went into the kind of practice that I anticipated when I was in law school. Going back to north Louisiana, opening an office there and working through all that.  I had my practice developed in quite a different way after I was in New Orleans.  But that's how I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened next (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So when I was in New Orleans I-after I finished my work with Bennett Johnston, went back to New Orleans to practice.  But since I'd been with Bennett, I was involved with every political person down in New Orleans.  I'd go there.  He'd have me go to north Louisiana, to mid-Louisiana, to southwest.  I went to make speeches representing him, to carry out my responsibilities.  So I got all over Louisiana. And I was bitten again by this interest in politics, that I'd had when I was in college.  And college, I was, as I said, in all the student government roles. We were involved in at the time, it was voter registration was a big deal for us. Getting black folks elected, when I was in college the first City Council in Baton Rouge. The first this and the other.  So we were very much involved in that when I was in college. And student demonstration of all stripes and descriptions for everything you could image in Baton Rouge that I was leading as a part of a college effort.  And--But since I'd gotten out and gone to law school, I said to myself.  I wanna be a lawyer.  I don't really wanna be a politician.  That's what I wanna do.  I really think I can be a lawyer, maybe be a federal judge and all that.  That's what I had in mind to do.  But after I worked with Bennett and I got involved with the other, the political stuff, that interest developed--came back to me.  So now I'm back in Louisiana, after two years.  I wanted to go back and practice law.  I saw a--well I tell you how I got to Washington a little bit.  This is a Derrick Bell story.  And I think it's a good story and a good lesson in life.  Derrick Bell was a-as I told you the first--the only  African American at school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I wrote him to tell him that I was in this dilemma.  I was thinking about going to North Louisiana to practice law.  And I'd had this-I'd had this offer from Bennett Johnston. And I didn't know quite what to do about it.  And I needed his advice.  And I told him that Bennett Johnston told me that this job in Washington could be a stepping stone to some other great career move.  And I didn't know what it was. But with this company or that company,  I could do that.  And so Derrick wrote me back. And he said to me, words that I think are good words of advice for anyone.  He said, "I can't tell you what job you should take, but I'll tell you how you should think about it."  He said, "First of all, look at whether you have the aptitude for the job that's at hand. So that you can adapt to the job easily and do the work with some proficiency.  And the second place, see whether or not you might develop yourself professionally on the job and whether when you leave there, you'll be a way more professional than you were when you went.  And third of all, try and see whether or not you would enjoy this job day in and day out. Because you don't take these things in months and years.  You take it day in and day out.  And if you decide that you have the aptitude for it, that you will enjoy it day in and day out, and that you can grow professionally on the job, then take it even if you don't know where it leads. 'Cause the worst thing you can do is take a job that you don't have the aptitude for, that you don't grow in and that you don't have any real development in and find out--as a stepping stone--and find out in the end that you didn't lead anywhere anyway.  So never take a job considered a stepping stone."  And so with that I analyzed the job with Bennett Johnston and I took it without regard to his stepping stone argument. And so (chuckling) I ended up without (unclear) Bennett stepping stone argument.  And with regard fully to what Derrick Bell had said.  And so I made my move here.  And I went back home because I wanted to practice law.  Because I saw some old guy whose senator had died.  And Bennett encouraged me to stay here, stay here.
Story_ID: 9006
Speaker 1: But I had a little army service to do in between.  And I figured I'd better get that done and then go back home.  So--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Where did you serve?
Speaker 1: I-When I finished ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], I had a two-year obligation to go into the military.  And I had a deferral to go to law school.  And I really wanted to go into military at the time, but I was told by the law school it would only defer me for one year and not for two years.  I'd have to compete again.  And everybody advised me, who knows what happens in another competition whether you get in or not get in.  You better take your chance now.  So I went to law school.  So I went to JAG [Judge Advocate General] school at Charlottesville, Virginia down at the University of Virginia.  And I spent the rest of my time at Fort Gordon, Georgia where I thought I would spend a good period of time.  But it turned out at the time, I only spent about a year. Because the army had a growth of officers, too many officers.  And they wrote us all and said, "Look, all you guys who are officers now, if you wanna cut short your obligation and start your careers, you can do it.  Send us a note and say so."  Well I'd been there for a year.  I sent them a note and said, "Okay, I wanna go to law practice.  I wanna get-." So they just said, "fine."  I look back on it.  I did enjoy the army experience.  I wish I had--over time I think I wish I'd finished it out.  But at the time, I was eager to get into my practice. So I did.
Story_ID: 9007
Speaker 1: So I went home and joined a--put together a law firm called Jefferson, Bryant and Gray, (unclear) Jefferson and Bryant at the time.  One of the guys was in school, a year ahead of me in law school.  A guy named Trevor Bryant.  And we started a law practice.  And I did that for four years.  And we grew our practice quite considerably in the next fifteen years.  But I did that for four years before I got involved in elective politics.  So four years after I'd been there and after we represented various folks and build some sort of an establishment, the State Senate job came open and I ran for it and I won.  And that started my formal, political career in the Louisiana State Senate.  I won that job in 1979.
Speaker 2: What was the toughest part of running for office?
Speaker 1: Well I was from the outside.  I wasn't a local guy from the country, north Louisiana, in the city running for a spot others had run for and lost.  I was running against a seven year incumbent, a white guy from the Irish Channel [Irish neighborhood in New Orleans, Louisiana] named [Frederick L.] 'Fritz' Eagan.  And--it was tough. Because everybody was against me except the people in the district. But the leadership was--the leadership was the senate, the labor leadership, everybody was against us, all the political establishment.  They were for the guy who was there.  He was chairman of an important committee.  And--so I started working in April of the-of that year that I wanted to run.  I worked all that October.  I went door to door and met everybody I could.  And over the course of time, I made inroads. And by the end of the election period, I got forty-nine percent of the vote and he got whatever it was, forty-four.  I was 300 votes short of winning outright.  And I thought perhaps he'd quit and I had a chance to go in--but no, he fought all the way through.  We had to try to keep raising money and keep begging support.  And in the end, at the end of the day, I ended up winning fifty-seven to whatever the percentage was for him.  So I guess--forty-three.  But I won a seat kind of as an outsider. And the toughest job was just being an outsider and not getting formal support and getting--and the next toughest job, of course,  was getting--keep piecing the money together to run the race, it was very difficult.
Story_ID: 9008
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the History Makers.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Jefferson, William Jennings Jefferson (chuckling).  "W-I-L-L-I-A-M J-E-N-N-I-N-G-S"-.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And what is the--?
Speaker 2: "J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N".
Speaker 1: I am sorry.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 11th, I believe 19-- 2003.
Speaker 1: And we're continuing the interview we started yesterday on the 10th.
Story_ID: 9009
Speaker 1: Now, sir, you were discussing--we were talking about your running for the Senate, the State Senate in Louisiana [representing District 6 in New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yes, in 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you--you served five terms in the State Senate?
Speaker 2: No, I served three terms, of the four year terms.  And frankly, in the middle of my fourth term--my third term, I won the job here [in the U.S. House of Representatives]. But I served there for ten and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the highlights in your State Senate career?
Speaker 2: State senate is quite a different place from the [United States] Congress.  First it's a part-time job.  It was three months out of the year.  That's the official time--of course we spend more time then that for special sessions, that sort of thing.  But it is a whole lot less than full-time.  And one was able to carry on a career.  And I was a lawyer.  So I was able to stay in my practice and do that.  But I ended up on the Finance Committee and chairing the Senate and Governmental Affairs Committee before I left there.  And so my work was in reapportionment. And I did the first--I did reapportionment in 1980 and in 1990 for the State legislature.  We did the enter-first enterprise zones for our State.  I worked a lot on fiscal issues when our state got in trouble with the oil--price of oil dropping to next to nothing in the early '80s [1980s].  I chaired a committee called the Budget Stabilization Committee for the entire legislature, appointed by the speaker of the house and the senate president.  And we worked for eighteen months or so to get our budget reformed, restated.  And that was important work I'm proud I had a chance to do that.  And we passed a landmark legislation in connection with that to make sure that our budget process was, was permanently fixed--though nothing is permanently fixed, (chuckling) in politics or in public policy.  But we did a pretty good job of, of fixing some of the major problems.  And I worked in the areas of criminal justice a great deal. Because I was on the Judiciary C Committee as well.  So my work revolved around working to make sure that we provided leadership and support to our leadership structure.  The Senate [and] Governmental Affairs committee is the one that confirms all the appointments for the pre-that are made by the Governor that does reapportionment. As I said, it does all kind of constitutional amendments and the things that deal with rules in order of the Senate.  And that is where I spent a great deal of my time, apart from the other issues I just mentioned to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You represented the--basically the black community of New Orleans, basically?
Speaker 2: The district was a majority African American 'cause New Orleans is majority African American, but the district I represented was about fifty-seven percent African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And you worked on reapportionment, that's important I mean in Louisiana, I think,  is a struggle at that time was probably trying to get representation for the people that--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first reapportionment that was done was done in 1970 that made any real difference.  There were no African American persons on the school boards, the police juries around the state, in the legislature there was one person in 1970s.  After that reapportionment was done, there were probably six or seven African Americans in the-in the [state] house and one in the senate.  When 1980 was done the reapportionment, there were five or so senate opportunities in the senate and they did blossom out.  And there were-We did a great number of additions in the house all to--gee, I think about twenty-seven.  So when we finished up after the 1980 elections after the reapportionment effort, we had five or so members of the senate and twenty-seven, twenty-eight members of the house.  It was quite a long way we'd come in ten years.  And in 1990, those numbers were added to--there were nine or so in the senate and thirty-two I believe or thirty-three in the house, something like that.
Speaker 1: Now do those numbers now represent the percentage of black people in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: More or less.  Louisiana has about a third of the state that's African American.  And the senate has thirty-nine members.  And so I suppose some number like thirteen would be exactly the right proportionate number, if you will.  And there are probably nine or ten members of the senate.  So I suppose somewhat short of what you might say is a reflection of the population specifically.  And in the house, the house has 105 members.  And it's somewhere around thirty.  So it again it's close, but not quite there.  There are some districts that are majority African American, which are still occupied by white legislators.  And that hasn't changed for various reasons. For reasons that candidates haven't been able to mount good campaigns, or there wasn't enough resources--or because the white candidates have been responsible over the years and the black electorate hasn't decided to make a change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Now this is your first elective position, right, state senate?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Correct.
Story_ID: 9010
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to run for Congress?
Speaker 2: Well I never thought I wanted to serve in the Congress, 'cause I'd worked in the legislative--Senate legislative assistant role for [John] Bennett Johnston for two years and I'd seen how the Congress folks had to travel back and forth and back and forth and run every two years.  And I really--I said I wouldn't have an interest in doing that.  And I never really focused on it as a place I wanted to go.  I was enjoying my dual responsibilities as a member of the [Louisiana state] senate and as one who practiced law.  And frankly, those are the two things I love doing best professionally--practicing law and working in the public policy, political arena.  And I was able to do both of those.  And so I wasn't looking for this job.  What happened was I came up here [Washington, D.C.] in 19--89 [1989]. And [Corinne Claiborne] Lindy Boggs was occupying the last African American majority seat in the whole United States.  And so there was a lot of interest in the African American community, trying to get to--having folks get to Congress.  A fellow named Israel Augustine had run who was a popular judge and lost to Lindy [in 1984].  And there were others, John Johnson, others who were in the state senate, others who were mounting campaigns and looking at the, the seat.  Well because I had no interest in coming in the first place and because I thought Lindy was a wonderful representative in the second place, I told her while I was here that, "Look, you may hear, because I'm on the stage and folks may mention I'm going to run for Congress but I have no intention of running.  I'm not gonna run against you in any event."  And I never knew that meant anything to her. I always thought she'd win anyway.  But in her mind, it was important.  So in 1990, when she apparently decided she wasn't gonna run, she called me.  It was in July--we were just finishing the state senate session. Asked me to come to her house and bring my wife.  And so I didn't know what that meant.  I called around to some of her friends, and they told me that she was running.  And so I went to her house thinking that I had that intelligence already scoped, and I knew what she was going to say.  Well she came down the stairs in her house, without any political people around her, just met us and had us come in and sit down.  And she told me that--she told me--she started talking to my wife--and she said something like this.  "Fifty years ago when [Thomas] Hale [Boggs, Sr., her husband, to whose congressional seat she had succeeded, after which she was re-elected eight times] and I went to Congress--." Hale had been here thirty-two years before he died.  Lindy eighteen years after him.  So fifty years they had served in the Congress.  She said, "A congressional wife had to wear a hat and a veil and sit just so and be just this and the other.  But it is not like that now, honey,  you can do X and Y. and Z."  So she went through a long--so I'm thinking that because I knew what was--what she was gonna do because her friends told me--I thought she was saying, "This is my last time.  I hope you support me," and whatever and so on.  Then she turned to me and said, "The Bible says, there is a time for everything.  And it's not that my daughter's dying that leads me to this conclusion.  But I've got my health.  I'm seventy-four years old.  I want to do Hale's archives and my archives." And so I'm thinking now.  Goodness gracious. She's about to say she's not gonna run.  And so she kept talking like that.  And then finally she said, "So if you want to make a bumper sticker or a sign for Congress, honey, I won't be mad with you."  That's what she said to me.  This is her way of telling me that she wasn't running.  And she was letting me know first.  And she said, "I haven't told my family.  But you've been so nice to me, I thought I would tell you first."  So there we were now having to think about this and having kind of the inside information.  And this was only ten days before qualifying.  There were already two people running, John Johnson had announced and Marc Morial . [Ernest] 'Dutch' Morial's son.  The son of the former mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] was already running.  And I found--so she told me also that some folks who were supporting her, her campaign people, her pollster and other folks really wanted to work for me and if I wanted to hire them or talk to them, they'd be available.  So I did talk to her pollster and then I found out why she was grateful to me.  Because they'd taken polls which showed that while nobody really beat her completely smartly that I did far better than anybody else.  And I had the best chance to win against her [if he had run in the previous election].  And I wasn't even looking at it.  I didn't care about it.  But she gave me great credit for that, because she knew I would be more competitive than the rest of them.  And I wasn't giving her any trouble.  So we went out to the lakefront, my wife and I, and sat there for four hours trying to figure out what in the world to do with this.  We just had a daughter who had just been accepted to Harvard College.  I was making a very good living in law practice.  In fact, for the last three or four years, we--everything had just taken off with my law business [Jefferson and Bryant].  (Chuckling) I figured that this was the wrong time to go anywhere.  I had a wonderful partner [Trevor Bryant] with whom I had not even argument in fifteen years of practice.  And I enjoyed going to work every day and working with him.
Speaker 1: You all had the highest rated law firm in New Orleans--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We'd grown our practice from the two of us, starting out to twenty-one lawyers.  We'd gone from one secretary when we both started to sixty people working for us as paralegals or as secretaries.  We had the largest African American firm founded by black lawyers in the South.  And we were rated [by Martindale Hubbell] "a. v." which is the highest, as high as you can be rated. Not that others in the state weren't rated that high.  But we were rated as high as you could be rated.  I was in the red book, doing bond work.  And we had really--really set up a very nice institutional practice there, representing a lot of different companies and a lot of local folks and a lot of entrepreneurs and just a firm that I enjoyed every day.  And so I had to think about-think about that.  But that day it was about our family, our children going to school, other was coming just after this one. The expenses to be incurred with that.  And all those things which are the things which are the things that-and then Washington instead of New Orleans--would we have to move?  What would all that be like?  And what about our children growing up here instead of down there with all the grandparents and aunts and uncles and cousins and all that?  And so--and then--we finally came to the conclusion that if--I didn't wanna look back over my life.  And we didn't wanna look back over our lives.  We had to kind of think of it together.  And end up at seventy-five and say, "You know what.  But for the fact that I wanted to make more and more money, I didn't--wouldn't have given myself a shot to make a difference on some things.  And if it doesn't work out for us, if we can't do the things we need to do for our children, our family and all the school business.  And if we can't do X and Y because of some money issues, then I can always leave and do something difference.  So it's not as if I'm gonna be tied up to the extent that I can't quit the job.  But because Lindy had been here fifty years, we knew it wasn't something that comes around every other year, so--.  You get there, you're pretty much are gonna be there for the duration of my professional--the core of my professional time to be involved as a public official.  So--in Congress--so we decided that we'll talk to a few other people.  And we were then bent toward trying to do it.  And I was--I still hadn't, up to that point, and through that discussion--the first time we'd ever given it any real consideration--so I got together with a few people who I thought were closest to me who I should talk to, and I talked about it.  And the next--Monday--word started leaking out that Linda might not run.  By Wednesday, she-It was firmly established she wouldn't run.  On Friday she announced--She came home and announced she was finished.  And that Wednesday following was time to qualify.  You had to put your name down to run.  So that was no time.  The others were already out there going.  But because I had the head start I didn't know I already had, I ran first in the primary the entire time with thirteen of us running.  I was beaten up by all the other twelve the entire time.  And by the time I got to a run-off, it was Morial and me.  And that was a tough fight because his father had been the mayor, who was very popular.  And as I said, I was--although I had been in the legislature Senate ten years, I wasn't born in New Orleans.  And every campaign stop that Marc would make, he would start off saying, "I'm a native New Orleanian" as if it were, you know, the ultimate qualification.  I couldn't match that--and I had to talk about other things.  So--but in any event, we won the race and ended up with a chance to come to the U.S. House of Representatives.
Speaker 1: Now this is while Dutch Morial was still the mayor?
Speaker 2: No, Dutch Morial had died, which made it even tougher in a way--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: I was kind of running against the ghost of his memory.  And it was a tough thing. Because when people pass away, all the hard edges go away.  And you only remember the good things.  And you remember he was the first African American mayor.  He was fighting hard for this and that.  And so I'm really running against this image of this man.  It was his son who was inviting folks saying, "Little Dutch," and all that.  And there I was trying to deal with that.  It was very hard.  I--and there was no chance that you could criticize him or say anything bad about him.  You simply had to keep putting your own image forward as best you could.  His wife was still there, of course.  And she's a formidable campaigner.  And that didn't make it any easier.  But it was a tough--it was a tough race.
Speaker 1: How much did you win by?  You know?
Speaker 2: I think the race was-I won by I think fifty-three to forty-seven [per cent], something like that.
Speaker 1: It was a close race?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah.  It was close.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The opportunity-you're right.  If you hadn't take the opportunity you did, you may not have--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh there's no way I would have been here now.  He would have come.  And he would have stayed.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: As I have done.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: It wouldn't have been opened for anyone else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've had challengers since that time.  Two people here, three people there.  I've always won quite handily, except last time, I had five people run.  And the way our system works, you have to beat everybody at one time or have a run off.  So it is not a Republican, Democrat primary that ends up with two people.  That's not how it works in Louisiana. So called "open primary".  So this is the only test--first test I've had in--I've had since I'd won the first time.  But I beat everybody sixty-five percent against all five of them.  And so I think they thought I was a little rusty or a little something or other.  But (chuckling) it didn't work out that way.  So I think that should keep the field pretty unimpressive for the next few times--in--for the next few races.
Story_ID: 9011
Speaker 1: Now you were elected in what year?
Speaker 2: This is my thirteenth year in the Congress.  I was elected in 1990.
Speaker 1: 1990.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My seventh term.
Speaker 1: So when you were elected George [H.W.] Bush was still the president. The Congress and the Senate were both Democrats.
Speaker 2: Don't mention it.  It was happy times from that point of view.  When I first came here, [Thomas Stephen] Tom Foley was the Speaker [of the House of Representatives].  And George Bush was President as you say.  And we had majorities in both houses.  And we had a huge majority in the House. Oh something near sixty-sixty vote majority.  And it had been that way for forty years.  And it was almost an after thought that we should contemplate that there would ever be any change there.  And so nobody in modern times ever thought about, "There's a possibility really."  But we managed to do it (chuckling). Some kind of way.  We managed to give away the majority.  And it was all a lot, because of the way we did a lot of internal things with post office and banking scandals and all sorts of things with campaign issues, campaign finance issues.  But on the outside, it was how we handle the issues of guns and a lot of social issues that we didn't handle quite well.  And we compelled a lot of our members--
Speaker 1: [Announcement from off camera:] GOOD MORNING THIS IS THE HOUSE DEMOCRATIC CLOAKROOM REMINDING--
Speaker 2: --our members to make tough votes that put them in hard positions back home.  We lost a lot of Great Northwestern seats, a lot of Southern seats in 1994.  And that took us out of the majority--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well for instance, give me an example of an issue here.
Speaker 2: Well one issue was on the guns.  A lot of guys in the South and Great Northwest including the Speaker of the  House had never, ever voted for a--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Guns?
Speaker 2: An anti-gun position or a gun control position.  We had the Brady Bill.  And we had an automatic weapons bill.  And the issue was whether the President was gonna put that-- those two--that bill on a crime bill or whether he was gonna let it be a free standing gun bill and the crime bill without the guns attached to it.  [Charles Ellis] Chuck Schumer and a lot of folks from the area said, "Boy these are, you know, very nice issues.  All the issues should be together.  We should take the stand as Democrats against guns, guns and such and such and such."  And a lot of folks kept telling the President and others that it's a mistake.  We can't do that.  A lot of--the gun issue is so predominant in Southern areas, it's gonna be a problem--and in the great hunting--hunting areas in the Northwest--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now this is when [Bill] Clinton was president.
Speaker 2: When Clinton was president.  He kept these things wedded together.  Some of our members made these courageous votes to vote for the whole package together.  And they lost.  Tom Foley lost the speakership over that issue.  Jack Brooks lost in Texas--he'd been here for God's know how long--over the gun issue.  Republicans capitalized on it.  And that was one set of issues.  The other was as I said the House--things were out of control.  And the other issues I guess had to do with how we handled some of the abortion questions and that kind of--But the guns were the real, real big issue that year.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And really the guns, as some said, no pun intended (chuckling), "It really killed us."  And it really did as much as anything else.
Speaker 1: But had they been part of the overall crime bill, they may not have been--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The trouble was they were part of the overall crime bill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If they had a gun bill sitting out there as a stand alone bill.  So members could've voted against it if they didn't want to.  And still could've voted for the great things in the crime bill--the cops programs--that would have been the answer for them.  They could have voted and said they were fighting crime, but they weren't gonna try to do gun control.  As it was, the President put them all together.  So to vote for one, had to vote for the other.  So those who wanted to vote to fight crime--crime was a rampant issue you might have known back then--had to also vote on the gun reform issue. That was a problem for many of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was-Crime was a--especially gun violence was a major--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's a big issue.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--issue in urban centers around the country.  I mean that was the major issue, especially in Washington, DC.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Many people--I was from an urban area.  But a lot of these folks from rural areas--I grew up hunting.  I understood the issue.  I understood how important it was.  I voted to do the gun control issue.  I voted for gun control.  But I did understand why it was a big issue in the rural areas.  And why people weren't gonna buy the argument that--that if you--that it's okay to do this little bit and you won't ever do anything else.  Folks really felt that you would start now, then there would be another little domino effect and another one, and before you know it, you'll have everybody with restrictions on guns they had at home, hand guns and on rifles and shot guns and all that.  All of it, you might say is illogical and I might agree with you.  But nonetheless, it was a pumped up issue, a whipped up issue.  And it was a problem for us as a party.  And we didn't recognize it nearly fully enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What other issues--have any other issues you--?  That was the major one?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That one. Plus the way, as I said, we weren't-The house was in real disarray under Foley's leadership.  The postal clerk issue was here.  The bank issue had gotten real crazy.  We didn't seem to run our House very well.  The Republicans were throwing all sorts of charges at us.  They had a "Contract for America", if you remember, all got together on a plan to bring back the country.  And we didn't have one.  And a lot of our folks just didn't vote.  Because they didn't see us doing that much. Didn't see our leadership carrying them--carrying them anywhere.  And we didn't recognize the extent of our-the trouble we were in either.  I remember on election day in 1994.  I was headed to Lake Charles, Louisiana.  I got a call from a fellow who worked for Richard Gephardt.  I think his name was Tom-Tom O'Connor.  I believe was, that was his name. Asked me where I was gonna be the next morning.  I said, "I'll be in New Orleans [Louisiana]."  He said, "Look, the Speaker [Tom Foley] is losing in Washington State.  We've got all the polls.  And it shows he's not gonna make it.  So I was part of a team, about fifteen other who were working with Dick Gephardt on the one day he might be speaker plan, you know.  He wasn't gonna challenge Foley.  But he was always kind of waiting in the wings and hoping it might happen.  So--hoping an opportunity might come up.  So this fellow said, "You need to come to Washington. Because we gonna work on-We gonna have to work on transitioning to the speakership. Because Foley is gonna lose".  So I said, "Well how are we doing in these close races that we have out there?  How are we doing with [Larry] LaRocco in Idaho?"  He said, "Oh we have four or five points."  What about [Richard] Dick Swett up in New Hampshire?" "Four or five points."  Jack Brooks in Texas--everywhere we had four or five point.  And that was accurate polling.  The trouble was the folks didn't show up.  The four or five points showed up in a poll.  But that doesn't matter if that little preference doesn't show up at the polling place on the day of election.  So we had close races.  We didn't realize how bad off we were.  And we didn't take our--we didn't do what it took to get our vote out.  And therefore, we lost the race.  So that was how this thing ended up.  So the--the House was lost because of our not appreciating what trouble we were in.  Of our having made real internal mistakes about how we ran the place.  And looking like we were in disarray, and we in fact were.  And by taking some critical issues like the gun issue and not making the right decision on it for the folks who were in trouble around the country--and that could have made a difference for us to keep our majority.  And we lost it because of that.
Speaker 1: And talking about losing election in '96 , did you start to really lose before '96--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The election of '94 is when we lost.
Speaker 1: '94?
Speaker 2: Election of '94.
Story_ID: 9012
Speaker 1: Now I'll tell you one thing about [Thomas] Tom Foley--though he was a nice man with a great sense of history about the--about Washington [D.C.].--the first time I came here, not just me.  He took the twenty-nine of us who had come that time, twenty-nine Democrats that year [1990]--took us on to the floor of the [U.S.] House [of Representatives].  And he said, "Now this House is a much criticized place as is all of government right through here.  But I want you to understand what a special place you're standing in and what a special opportunity you have."  He said, "if you look back over the history of this county, perhaps a billion people who've lived and died have been able to call themselves Americans. Out of that, only 12,000 have ever served in the U.S. House.  And you can't get here by appointment.  The government can't appoint you.  And no one else can appoint you.  You have to get elected by the people.  There's no such thing as a special appointment to serve here.  And out of the 250 or so million people now living in the United States, only 435 have a chance to serve in the House here in the country.  And every parliament in the world has been fashioned after the U.S. Congress.  And so when you hear people complain about the Congress and you find yourself also kind of getting down about the institution, remember that it's a very high privilege to have a chance to serve here.  And keep reminding yourself of how unique your opportunity is.  And how special it is to be in this place.  And so that ought to keep you going.  It ought to keep you inspired."  And he made this talk to us.  And I think it--every time now I'm on a plane going back and forth or things aren't going right here, I recall Tom Foley's talk.  And I do thank God I have a chance to serve in this place as one of a handful of people in the whole country who do.
Speaker 2: That's unique.  And it's historic.  So what have been the highlights of your activities in the House?
Speaker 1: Well getting on the Ways and Means Committee was the first goal I set for myself.  I got on it in the second term--my second term.  So I did a kind of unthinkable effort for someone like myself in a small state who hadn't spent much time here.  I worked at it very hard.  I worked hard-I was a whip for the freshman class.  Got to go to leadership meetings.  Got to meet the leadership. Got to really work with them and for them.  And that's how I made an impression that got me a chance to serve on the Ways and Means Committee.  Which is where I wanted to be because of the trade issues that are involved--I have a big port in my area--and the tax issues.  And it was, of course the most important committee in Congress, having jurisdiction over taxes and trade, over Medicare and Social Security and over the pension funds of the country.  It's where the private sector and public sector intersected a great deal.  And a place where I wanted to work.  Because I thought--I think it takes that kind of partnership to move the country.  I wanted to be in position to work on these issues.  Now I thought that once I'd gotten there, I'd simply have to bide my time and work for many opportunities.  And we'd [the Democratic Party] be in the majority forever.  It didn't work out that way.  I-But--So the first thing was to get on the Ways and Means committee.  I guess the second--having gotten there, I had a chance to sit and work on trade issues.  And finally end up on the trade subcommittee and work on the AGOA [Africa Growth and Opportunity Act] legislation for Africa [2000]. Which I think was a real highlight for me.  Five or six of us shepherded that legislation through the process.  And that was, I think a critical piece of legislation.  I also worked on the enterprise zone issues with the president [Bill Clinton]. that he first put forth on it through our committee--we were able to work on those.  And on the New Markets issues that were done towards the end of President Clinton's career. That I was a principle person in having then [1996] gone to--gone back to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and gotten a Master of Laws and Taxation,  I became something of an expert on how to put these tax bills together.
Story_ID: 9013
Speaker 1: You were talking about your career and the-your activities in the kind of things you were working on.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh things were--.
Speaker 1: --you were talking about the enterprise zones and (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  I was saying I'm now Chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation which is the think tank for the Black Caucus.  And which does research in other issues and which does a lot of reaching out to the community.  Which gets the Caucus out on town hall meetings and that sort of thing.  And I've been doing that now for the last three years.  Which is an important part of my work here.  I chair the Africa, the African trade and investment Caucus.  I chair the Nigerian Caucus.  I chair the Brazil Caucus.  And I work on issues that deal with Africans in the diaspora who we're trying to uplift and re-and connect.  And I'm working on an issue now to make Africa a strategic part of the United States to make the Gulf of Guinea an area of vital interest and importance for the U.S.  We treated the Gulf States as vitally important to us.  And we've overlooked a lot of things that are happening in that part of the world with Saudi Arabia and other countries, that have absolutely no freedom. No human rights. Nothing. Don't even talk about democracy, at all.  And African countries are struggling and maybe falling back and moving but struggling to reach a democratic outcomes--are closer to us--are more in view with the western--values--great quality of oil and by and large, very friendly to the United States.  And we've kind of ignored these countries as important to us.  So we are trying to establish that link to make Africa more important then it's ever been.  Also in east--in the eastern part of Africa now to fight the terrorism issues, we could have the forward placement of troops right across in Eritrea or  Ethiopia or Djibouti.  These are just right across the Red Sea.  And why would we go to Yemen and try and service our boats--our ships I should I say, and have them blown up; when you can do it in a friendlier place that's right across the Red Sea in Africa.  And, of course, if there's one place we can reinvent our relationship with Muslim world it's in Africa where you have 350 million Muslims, who're largely friendly toward the United States, largely having a decent view of the western world and particular out of the U.S.  So Africa offers so many opportunities as a new strategic part.  And the other thing is we should think there are only oh forty billions barrels of oil proven reserves in Africa, oh just five years ago.  Now there're more than 100 billions barrel of oil that have been proven in Africa.  Which makes it a much more steady resource.  And what--what is going on is that the technology for finding oil in deep water has just really, really changed, just in the last five years.  And an example, there have been eight million, I'm sorry--billion barrel finds in the last year. Eight billion barrel finds. Seven of those were in Africa.  Which means there will be more and more and more of these finds as there's more looking for them.  So Africa is gonna become a real resource for the United States with respect to importing oil.  And because of that, it gives us a chance to reach a new partnership with Africa over human intelligence in, in the Muslim community, over the forward placement of troops in East Africa, over oil in West Africa.  And for that, we oughta really engage Africa in communications and transportation and debt relief and in, in helping to develop the country.  And having them build the value-added resources they need, the manufacturing sources to really make them the economic powers they ought to have become over the years except for exploitation.  And so we're working very hard in this area to revitalize the relationship between the United States and Africa and to make Africa a strategic partner going forward for the U.S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What country in that, those eastern Africa countries would you consider the most friendly towards the U.S.?  And I ask that in light of, you know, the movie, 'Blackhawk Down' showed U.S. soldiers in Somalia and they didn't seem to be very well received.  And I think the public perception is that that's not the friendly part of the world so--.
Speaker 2: Oh I wouldn't think that's true.  Eritrea, Ethiopia is friendly.  Djibouti is very friendly.  Somalia is in disarray.  It doesn't have good leadership there.  Tanzania, Kenya--all those places are friendly to the U.S., there aren't any--. Generally speaking across cou-Africa is that sort of attitude about the United States.  It's a very healthy attitude.  There's some places where the United States has sanction like in Sudan.  Libya is not a sub-Saharan African country.  But you know, there is obviously--trouble there.  And even in the Northern Africa with Morocco and Egypt and all the Western Sahara countries, all those countries up there are fairly friendly to the United States. Algeria.  I don't see the hostility and particularly on the east it's not there.  I mean we've had some terrible incidents of, of terrorism, as you know in Kenya and Tanzania.  But the countries themselves have been very friendly and very supportive of the U.S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the residents of countries were victimized as well--
Speaker 2: They were victimized more than the Americans. They had twelve Americans to die in the explosion in Kenya and 200 Africans.  That's terrible.
Story_ID: 9014
Speaker 1: So why do you suppose that we had this Republican take-over [of Congress in 1994]? The--What can be done to--You know, for the Democrats to get back in power?
Speaker 2: Well that's a very tough proposition you proposed (Chuckling). Now look at it in three different ways.  The [U.S.] Senate is easier to get back in control of.  Because you're working the whole state. There aren't any discrete districts that have advantages for any particular party or other.  And the presidency--it's a divided issue over the presidency and has been for the last so many years. And the same in the Senate, where the country is almost fifty-fifty divided on these questions between the Republicans and Democrats.  Which means that a slip by President [George W.] Bush, a further slip on the economy, the issues of credibility on the war [in Iraq] now. About whether he compromised the intelligence agencies? Whether they told us the truth or not? Or whether they failed to know what was going on.  Either way, it's unflattering for the President not to have the right information or to not give it to the American people.  That is gonna come back to be an issue for him.  Maybe now while people are still afraid and angry, still perhaps somewhat euphoric about having won a war. Those things get blurred somewhat.  But you will never, ever, ever have people forgive a government for lying to them once it's established.  And if that is established as I think it probably will be, how the intelligence communities were manipulated, then I think people are going to lose some faith.  They need to know that the Democrat who comes along is gonna reassure them over how tough they're gonna be against terrorism.  And how they're gonna protect the country on Homeland Security.  And dif-how tough they're gonna be with the governments outside of here that are going to present threats to the country.  But once the Democratic candidate establishes that, then Bush has no advantage in that area.  The question is gonna be whether this person gonna tell the folks the truth, tell them straight, because if you don't, you really can't solve the problems--you're fooling people and putting them under, under, under wraps.  The second thing is that the, the Democrat establishes on the economy that he or she can do a far better job than this president in getting the economy going again and getting our budget deficits under control and not mortgaging the future of our people,  I think we'll have a much better chance to, to win.  I say that because the Senate and the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] operate differently in elections--they're [the Senate elections] state-wide and that's a very different experience than the House.  The House--reapportionment may have hurt us a great deal.  We have Republican legislatures that drew districts that was tailor-made for Republicans.  And that made it difficult for Democrats to win.  So we'll have to overcome--We lost oh I guess eight or nine seats just through the reapportion experience.  We already were down six or seven for various reasons.  And so now we're down twelve seats.  And the question is whether we are going to be able to overcome the reapportion problem that we just went through and still win seats.  You saw what [House Majority Leader Thomas D.] Tom DeLay was doing in Texas, a little bit ago.  He knows how important it is to get your seat strong, so your party has a chance to continue winning.  After reapportionment in Texas, he, he was going back to try to get another bill drawn.  You know, reapportion in Texas was done by the judges in Texas, not the legislature. There're two ways to do that.  The legislature failed to do it so the judges did it.  He was coming back saying, "Wait a minute.  Let us give it another try since they have the right kind of majority in Texas senate and house.  Let's give it another try now to see if we can't get this thing better organized."  So that's why you saw the House Democrats take off and go to Oklahoma.  I guess it was to avoid being drawn into a vote, a vote they couldn't win over reapportionment.  So this fight about reapportion is still going.  It is the major reason why we're in the majority-in the minority today. Because they did a better job of, of winning legislature seats leading up to 1990 than we did, and therefore, a better job of drawing maps.  So it puts the House in a very tough position.  But we've gotta distinguish ourselves some sort of a way here as against Republicans on, on the domestic issues.  But I don't think people get to the domestic issues until they have a level of comfort on the anti-terrorism issues which I think are the ones that are most on people's minds today.
Story_ID: 9015
Speaker 1: What do you think about the black candidates running for president [for the 1984 election]?  There are two right now (unclear).  And do you have any ideas about--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't think--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --(unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't think they're--They aren't serious contenders right now.  There might be African American candidates who could be, should be. You know.  Some of the people who have been big city mayors.  Maybe some of the people who have been in Congress, who want to take a shot at it, who understand the system and who know how to deal with the issues.  But good intentions aren't substituted for preparation for this.  And I think Carole Mosley-Braun comes the closest to have been prepared for it.  But having lost a bid for re-election [to the Senate], it does stain the argument that she says that she--it's a natural move to run for the-from the Senate to the, to the Presidency.  That, of course, overlooks the notion--the real fact that she lost her re-election.  If she had won her re-election, she would be a, I think a reasonable candidate to run.  As reasonable as any of these other people running--but since she didn't.  And since she performed by most standards not really great when she was in the Senate, it's a tough pull for her.  And for--and [Rev. Al] Sharpton, of course, to me doesn't have any credentials for the job at all.
Story_ID: 9016
Speaker 1: Now what do you think about reparations, is that an issue on (unclear)?  What--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well reparations is a, is a real issue.  I don't know how it gets addressed.  I know that the, the, the country isn't ready to deal with it and probably never will be.  It's a distant sin.  Generations have come between now and then, at a time when it perhaps should have been (unclear) properly dealt with.  'Cause it was easier before there was all--so many other-so much progeny from the, those who've gone on- who--who were actually slaves.  And the number of people involved has expanded.  Folks have had all sorts of relationships with other people in the country between now and then.  Some of the companies that benefited have died away and gone.  The banks who were involved in transactions--don't know where they are.  And the government has--can say it has engaged in a lot of actions to uplift the African American community in various ways through education and health policies and God knows what else.  So it's a hard argument to get through.  But it doesn't make it illegitimate that it's hard.  In--in--to the extent that it can be determined as to exactly how to pay the, the, the price, if you will, or the consequence of the enslavement of people for three hundred years in this country.  The capital was built on the back of, of the slavery of Africans. The southern prosperity and agriculture was built on that.  The eastern mercantile relationships were built on, on the slave trade.  If you make--If you start a country today, and you have all the labor free, and you're at a time when labor is the real thing that drives the capital output at the time.  I mean it was labor and capital.  But actually it relied more on labor because you were dealing with an agriculture-based economy as much as anything else so it relied on labor.  And--and you don't have to pay for it.  You essentially get it for nothing, except for throwing bits and scraps, so people can eat and stay alive.  But that's all you have to do.  You don't pay wages.  You're soon to get ahead in the world.  That's what happened in the American system.  And it's worth something.  It has real value to companies who got rich to the country that did well.  But how you pin it down and, and how you come up with, with a solution for it that's acceptable to, to the majority of the folks in this country, is very hard to do.  I-We're searching for ways now.  I think it's probably clever that what has happened with the lawsuits, where they're pinning-pinpointing countries-companies that have survived ever since the slavery days who are-who prospered then, who are still around now.  And that's the most direct link they can make.  And I think there that that probably holds some opportunity for a yield there.  But it's an issue to keep talking about.  Because it's important for America to respond to the needs of the African American community. Which is largely disabled by legacy from the slavery issues of all stripes and descriptions. All the way from the diets they still consume to--and therefore leading health issues--to just deficits in confidence and the capacity to move forward as a community and the belief in themselves.  All these things are difficult to overcome.  The, the, the disappointment people suffer because of racism and therefore, drinking and drug abuse, all are related to people who, who suffer depression and frustration in their lives. All legacies of this old horrible institution.  And so it's just an issue that has never been remedied, may never be remedied but it's one that it's important to keep talking about because public policy may end up making some addressing of it over time but--that it hasn't quite made-- if we keep the arguments on the front burner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One attempt to try to repair damage and some of it would have been affirmative actions. And now it's under attack and is being dismantled, pulled apart.
Speaker 2: It doesn't seem to have a bright future.
Speaker 1: What're your thought about affirmative action?
Speaker 2: Well again affirmative action, as you have pointed out is, is an attempt to provide some remedy.  The notion is if you start off behind in the race you'll stay behind, unless you do some affirmative things to bring people up to the starting line a little more evenly.  And that's what has been happening in some par--walks of life.  But it's harder and harder as the Supreme Court knocks down one or another effort in that area.  It was the grandest effort the country was making to try and do this catching up between African Americans and the majority of the folks in the country.  But it is, as you know, it's being put down now by arguments by some white students at school saying, "Well I missed the slot.  I didn't have a slot, because some black kid got it. I did have my qualification", which is arguable.  In the Michigan case, you got a 150 points to get (unclear)-to get accepted.  Twenty points go for if you're an African American or another minority.  Twenty points go, however, if you're just poor and disadvantaged and, and, and you're white.  Michigan really looked at the whole thing about how they got a diverse student body.  So many points if your mama or daddy went to school at Michigan.  So many points if you're an athlete.  They got a lot of---and--but you gotta score somewhere near a 100 points on other just raw scholastic stuff, before you even get to these other ones that you can talk about whether or not you at some particular class of persons who Michigan thinks is valuable enough to have there because they say that in the educational community, they want a diverse community where people can come out of there able to deal with the world that really is diverse.  We get--in this country, we lose the, the perspective that you have African Americans, Hispanics and Asians who are minorities here in America.  But they're not minorities in the world.  And the world is involves all these folks you have to deal with out there who are in majorities. And the Asians are in the majority for sure. Indians. Africans-There's 700 million Africans in sub-Saharan Africa.  A billion--folks just in China.  I guess 2 billion or more Asians.  If you count the Indians on the continent of Asia, 3 billion.  That's certainly--. So out of the six billion folks in the world, the vast majority are what we call 'people of color'.  And it's important for this country particularly since our population as a, as a percentage of the population in the whole world is going down and down every year, we make up, I guess three and a half or four percent of the world's population.  We own twenty percent of the world's wealth.  If you have any chance to hold on to any kind of wealth position in this world, you gotta be able to deal with all these people out here in the rest of the world.  And the best way to do that is to have a community of educated people here who represent all these, these minorities in this country, but who reach these majorities around the world.  It's a smart plan for the United States, wholly apart from being fair. It's just a smart way to go after make--keeping the country on top.  And, and reaching out to the rest of the world.  But that gets lost as there is so much racism that kind of presses down these things.  You don't get to-get that argument made as clearly as it should be made.  But it really is a legitimate idea to think that the more trained African American you have here and Hispanics and others, the better off our country is gonna be toward keeping itself a powerful economic force, as well-educated and well-trained minorities here reach out to the majorities that are around the world and engage them in trading and investing, that will keep the country strong and productive.  So I think it's an important issue just from that point of view, wholly apart from the issue of fairness.
Story_ID: 9017
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the criminal justice system, black people--alarming number of black men now are incarcerated?
Speaker 2: Well it's been broken for a long time.  It remains that way.  The, the discrimination of just arresting people, the lack of support they have in defending themselves. The lack of support they have in paying for lawyers and paying--getting their way through the system.  And, of course, the positions they're in, in the first place to get looked at so hard because they're poor and down and out and in too many communities and feeling desperate and not seeing ways out, engaging in criminal activities that bring them in the spotlight of the law enforcement people--it's a very tough combination of things to work against.  So we gotta do on our part, a better job of managing our children and our families.  We've gotta do a better job of insisting on education for them.  And a better job of having people be patient enough to take their-to take the time to make it in this world.  On the other hand, the system has to be more fair to not target young folks unfairly who are just kind of loitering or moving around.  And our system has to also make the laws work better. The--just the crack cocaine versus powder cocaine distinction we try to fix here, is a major reason why so many young folks are incarcerated.  If you were a white kid and you had powder cocaine, that was five times more. In some cases, five hundred times more. In other cases when a black kid had crack cocaine--Because we said crack cocaine is more dangerous.  Although, none of this scientific evidence now supports that, that was a belief apparently some years ago, twenty years ago.  So we made the penalties ti- five times tougher.  And so with crack cocaine, you go to jail.  You don't get to explain yourself.  You don't get to go home to your mom and dad and the preacher and everybody try to start over again.  Powder cocaine, you can get probation, go home to your community and try to get yourself together.  So that whole set of laws is wrong.  And it's got a lot of folks in jail who haven't done anything, but posses this illegal substance.  They didn't shoot anybody.  They didn't hurt anybody.  They didn't steal anything.  They possessed an illegal substance, as the other kid did.  But because you categorize it as a incendiary--more incendiary than the other one, you made the penalties greater. And therefore, on the first offense, you go to jail.  So that whole set of things is a problem
Story_ID: 9018
Speaker 1: So what would you consider at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well that's a good question.  I suppose people--If I were to leave today, people would remember me as something of an expert in tax--in taxes. As a pro-trade Democrat who has worked hard on connecting us with Asia, with Latin America, with Africa. A one who's been an Africanist in the sense that I've chaired these various groups for Africa.  I spent more time traveling to Africa probably than anyone except maybe [Donald Milford] Don Payne.  Don Payne has worked on the foreign policy issues.  I worked on the economic connections. And the issue I talked to you about about making Africa a vital strategic partner of the United States. I'll be remembered as one who's worked hard to reestablish a different relationship between Africa and the United States.  Not a donor, donee relationship. But one where we engage Africa as an important trading and investing destination for our country and for our business community here.  And I hope I'd be thought of as one who was a good member of the Congressional Black Caucus. And who worked with the other members to try and bring some hope and aspirations to our people in the-in the Hinterlands out from Washington [D.C.] to try and make connections to them and provide some hope and opportunity for people.
Speaker 1: And one last question.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well just as someone who didn't forget where he came from.  And who cared enough about people to, to fight for them.  I'll never-I must always remember that there was a time when someone who--who was an African American didn't have a chance to voice the concerns of the African Americans in my state [Louisiana].  And every time I get a little tired of, of the work I'm doing, a little beaten down, I have to remember that.  I give voice to concerns that there was no voice for, just a, a few years ago.  And that keeps me going.  And so I think that I want to be remembered as someone who just remembered that he came from a small country town in northeast Louisiana with a mother [Angeline Harris Jefferson] and dad [Mose Jefferson] that didn't have much education but who aspired to push their family on.  And who bought what their parents were selling.  And who wants to sell it to the rest of our children out here--whether they're mine or the others--that family is important, that religion is important, that community is important and that keeping our folks hopeful is extremely important 'cause without hope and inspiration we just--we can't establish a vision for our people.  Because we--for most-most of our lives, we're stepping into places we don't know where we're going.  And we have to just believe that we, we can make it.  And we have to have confidence that we have a chance to get there.  Because we're stepping into places we've never been before.  And so I hope that, that'll be a part of a legacy I can leave here. Back at home and in this Congress.  Also I wanna be remembered as a good member of Congress who knew my job.  Who did my job extraordinarily well.
