Story_ID: 30877
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm an interviewer today for the HistoryMakers archives.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is George Henry Jones, G-E-O-R-G-E, H-E-N-R-Y, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 21, 1942, Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm professor of biology here at Emory University.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 12, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the conference room in the Rollins Research Center, which is where the biology department is housed at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 30878
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that are kind of a warm-up, and they only require short answers.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I love bacon cheeseburgers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vancouver, British Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It probably is the phrase that I use at the end of most of my e-mails, which is a phrase, or set of phrases from a song by James Taylor, "Never give up, never slow down, never grow old, never ever die young."
Story_ID: 30879
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Thank you.  Now, we're going to go over your family history.  We're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Bernice--you want her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, Imonette, I-M-O-N-E-T-T-E, Weaver, W-E-A-V-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind the middle name?
Speaker 2: I have no idea where she got her middle name from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was September 19--let's see, she was eighty four--1903 [September 19, 1903].
Speaker 1: Okay, and was she born in Muskogee [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: No, she was actually born just outside of Waco, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I basically don't know much about her family apart from my grandparents.  So, her father [Elijah Bowman Weaver] was a minister, I believe a Methodist minister, but he was also a farmer, and apparently a very prosperous and successful farmer.  My mother told the story of how he actually rented a train to move the entire family from Waco to Muskogee sometime between 1910 or so and 1920, I don't know the exact date, but he moved all his farm animals, and all of the members of the family--there was something like fifteen or sixteen brothers and sisters.  My mother was the youngest in that family and we settled in Muskogee.  And, in fact, the house that they lived in, in Muskogee is still standing.
Speaker 1: So, about what year was that?
Speaker 2: My guess is it was probably somewhere about 1915, 1912--1915, somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a reason why he moved his whole operation to Muskogee?
Speaker 2: Again, my guess is that even back in those days, the effects of discrimination were less pernicious in Muskogee than they were in a lot of other places in the country and probably even in Oklahoma.  So my guess is that like so many other blacks, he was drawn there because it was a safer place, a more secure place, and a place in which his family could--(coughs) excuse me--continue to grow and develop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, you hear that about Muskogee, that the population was more integrated, Indians and black...
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I did not.  My grandfather died before I was born [in 1942].  I knew my maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Elijah, E-L-I-J-A-H, Bowman, B-O-W-M-A-N, Weaver.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he AME [African Methodist Episcopal Church], or CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal Church] or...?
Speaker 2: I believe he was AME.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Mary Jane Weaver.  She died when I was around seven years old [ca. 1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she also from Waco or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know what her previous history had been before she married my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's no talk about the family, how they acquired the land and...?
Speaker 2: No, I never learned any of that information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they did have land?
Speaker 2: They did, yes.
Speaker 1: Outside of Muskogee?
Speaker 2: At that time it was outside of Muskogee.  Now, it's obviously well within the city limits.  But at that time it was outside the city limits of Muskogee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother grew up on this land?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother, did she have a lot of brothers and sister?
Speaker 2: She had, well as I said, she was the youngest in a family of around sixteen or seventeen.
Story_ID: 30880
Speaker 1: What did she [Bernice Imonette Weaver, Jones's mother] say about growing up [in Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Apparently she didn't talk much about it, but when she did she probably had a great time growing up.  Again, it was a good community.  She had siblings that--it was a very close family.  And it remained close even in her adulthood.  That is, the surviving brothers and sisters remained close.  So, I think she had a very good childhood growing up.  She actually went to the same high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma] I did, or vice versa, and she got her college education at Langston [University, Langston] in Oklahoma.  So, she, I think was very much a product of Muskogee in much the same way that I was, and still am.
Speaker 1: Okay, Lang--okay, alright.  Did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Nothing that I can remember specifically, no.
Speaker 1: When she went to Langston, did she have a particular vocation she was pursuing?
Speaker 2: She always wanted to be a musician, a professional musician.  But she ended up, well, she majored in music and minored in English.  She ended up being a music teacher after she left Langston.  Not immediately, but sometimes thereafter she actually got a master's [degree] in music from Columbia [University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: But, she never realized her dream of being a professional pianist, which is what she really sort of aspired to doing.
Speaker 1: Now did she teach on the university level or the...?
Speaker 2: No, she taught high school music and in the end, toward the end of her career, she was the supervisor of music for all of the black schools in Muskogee.   So, she was responsible for setting up and monitoring the music programs in all of the schools, elementary through the high school
Speaker 1: Well, what was her specialty?  Was it piano, or...?
Speaker 2: Piano, yes.
Story_ID: 30881
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Henry H-E-N-R-Y, Jones.  I'm actually a junior but I stopped using the junior after my father died.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Okay, and what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 4, 1896.  No, sorry, 1886.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: St. Charles, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What can you tell us about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Basically, apart from his brothers and sisters, I know almost nothing about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: So you never met his parents?
Speaker 2: No, they were long dead by the time I was born [in 1942].  I came along very late in my parents' lives.  So because my mother was the youngest in her family, I had first cousins who were older than she was.  And again, I knew my father's brothers and sisters, but, again, he was not the youngest, but the second from the youngest in his family.  So, again, that side of the family was well up into their forties, fifties, sixties by the time I was old enough to have any idea of what was going on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father grow up in St. Charles?
Speaker 2: He grew up in St. Charles.  He moved to Muskogee probably, I would guess--and again, somewhere in the early part of the Twentieth Century.  My guess is when he was somewhere between twenty-five and thirty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, about the time of the Tulsa riots, 1920, 1921.
Speaker 2: Neither of my parents ever talked about those riots, so I don't know what impact, if any, they had on them.  They must have been--I'm almost certain they were there when they--I know my mother was.  My father probably was, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like with the riots being in 1921, the repercussions went on for several years in the papers around the country.  So yeah--well, did your father talk about growing up in St. Charles and what it was like?
Speaker 2: No, he never did.
Speaker 1: Did he have a chance to go to high school in St. Charles?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, he did go to school in St. Charles.  I'm not positive, but probably 99 percent certain that that was the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any college education?
Speaker 2: He did not go to college, he had a high school degree.  He served in World War I.  That I do know about him.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about his experiences in the war?
Speaker 2: He never, well the only thing he ever told me was he never saw any combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was involved in support kinds of activities.
Speaker 1: Did he go to Europe?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  So, now he never talked about his childhood at all?
Speaker 2: I can never remember him ever talking about his childhood.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's kind of a generational thing, that generation not really talking about how they grew up?
Speaker 2: It wouldn't surprise me if that were the case.  I suspect that it also had to do perhaps with the fact that the difference in our ages was what it was.  So, for example, it's possible that he told me things when I was, you know, three or four or five or six, and I just don't remember now.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your father passed away?
Speaker 2: I was twenty five.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, is there a story about how your parents--well, what did your father come to Muskogee to do?  What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: I don't know what actually brought him to Muskogee in terms of profession or occupation.  What he did was, he was a postman.  So, he delivered the mail for most of the downtown businesses in Muskogee for years and years and years.  So, he was well known down there, in both the white and the black communities.
Speaker 1: In those days, that was a real good job.
Speaker 2: I think he felt he had a very good job.  By today's standards, he wasn't making a lot of money, but it was stable, and as far as I'm aware, there were never any issues about his employment or my mother's.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a stable kind of environment you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 30882
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how your parents [Bernice Imonette Weaver and George Henry Jones] met?
Speaker 2: Again, I don't know the answer to that.  I asked my mother questions about their relationship from time to time, and got very terse answers which for reasons I don't understand.  Their relationship was also stable, there was nothing in it--it wasn't, I don't think there were any problems between them.  But, to give you an example, I once asked my mother why they had only had one child.  And her response was, "Just be glad you're here."
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard that before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard that answer before. So--
Speaker 2: They just didn't talk about their relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, for whatever it means, I'm not aware that they ever celebrated an anniversary.   So, I don't know neither the year nor the date on which my parents were married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were born in 1942?
Speaker 2: 1942.
Speaker 1: And they'd been married awhile before you were born?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had been married for a number of years. When I was born, my father was fifty-six and my mother was thirty-nine.
Speaker 1: That's about twenty--how many years...?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen years difference, yeah.  Okay.  So, when you think about their personalities and their talents and their dispositions, and even how they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm not good at that.  Everybody tells me I look most like my mother.  In terms of my disposition, I think I'm almost certainly most like my father.  He was laid back and calm.  I never saw him get excited about anything in the entire time that I knew him as a parent.  So I think that's probably the sort of disposition that most people would agree that I have.
Story_ID: 30883
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were growing up [in Muskogee, Oklahoma], did the household just consist of your parents [Bernice Imonette Weaver and George Henry Jones] and yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just the three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that probably helps the economics on some level when you only have--in those days...
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure that we were probably somewhat better off because there were not additional siblings of mine that had to be supported by their incomes.
Speaker 1: They had two good jobs, a stable situation, you were an only child.  So, did you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: One of the earliest childhood memories that I have was playing outside the house of the woman who kept me, who babysat for me, essentially, while my parents were working.  Because they both, after I was born, I think--I don't know how long my mother stayed away from work before she started again, but I know that by the time I was two or three years old she was working full time again, maybe--probably even before then.  So my earliest childhood memory is playing outside the house of the woman who took care of me during those times, and I think at that point I was around four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, what were you like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Well, I think that there were a number of factors, I think, that sort of created the personality that I developed especially when I was younger.  As I said, my mother, both my parents worked full time, both were employed full time.  So, when I was being taken care of, it was not a child care facility or anything like what exists today.  There was just this one woman and her husband, and she took care of me.  She was herself older, so basically I had to entertain myself.  So, I think one of the features of my personality that exists even now, that is true even now, is that I got to the point where I learned to enjoy my own company, and that is still the case for me.  I don't have problems being by myself, entertaining myself, finding things to do when I'm by myself.  In fact, there are many instances in which that's the way I prefer it.  And I think that probably is directly related to my simply having to develop that kind of facility when I was growing up.  Because she took care of me probably until I started school.  So, my guess is that, as I said, my earliest memory is outside her house when I was four.  I suspect she probably took care of me for five or six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  There are other scientists who say the same thing.  They have a similar background.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They may have entertained themselves as a child and focused on things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30884
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: So, when I was born [in 1942], and up until the time I was around seven years old, we lived on the west side of town close to my mother's family home.  When I was seven, we moved for a short time to a house sort of nearer the center of town, and we stayed there.  I think we must have been renting at that point.  We lived there, I think for about six years--no, sorry, about six months.  And then we moved into a house that was about half a block away that we then bought, or that my parents bought.  And that then became the family home.  So, that home was, it was in a, what was I think at that time, less so now interestingly enough, a somewhat integrated neighborhood.  All of the houses immediately adjacent to mine, and within say a radius of half a block or so, were occupied by black families.  But a couple of blocks down the street there were white families.  A couple of blocks up the street there were white families.  A couple of blocks behind us there were white families.  So, while we were not necessarily alternating in terms of the occupancy, it was a neighborhood in which blacks and whites lived.  I used to, I played with white kids when I was growing up, white kids from that neighborhood.  And it was a stable environment and, again, the people who lived there were people who either had been there for some time, or moved in and stayed.  So there were not a lot of transient occupancies there.  And the families, again, who lived there, were basically the families and the children and so forth that I grew up with, until I actually left there to go to college.  So, from my perspective, it was a great environment.  I can't imagine that living anyplace else or in any different circumstance would have been any better for me in Muskogee than that situation was.  One of the other memories that I have from sort of sight and feel, to a certain extent, was there was a huge snowstorm in 1948, I believe.  That was more snow than I'd ever seen in my life, and I can remember what the yard and the neighborhood looked like on a very bright and sunny day after the snow.  It might have been the day after, but it was certainly a couple days after the snow, and it was just beautiful.  So, that's one of the sort of vivid memories of the environment that I have from my childhood.
Speaker 1: Did it snow much?
Speaker 2: It did not snow much, so that was really unusual.  I don't know how much it was, my guess would be it might have been eight or ten inches, which would have been a lot for Muskogee.
Story_ID: 30885
Speaker 1: Now, was there a name for the neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't have any real name.  There were other areas of town that did, but mine did not.
Speaker 1: What side of town was it on?
Speaker 2: Sort of the north side, north central.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you come into contact with many American Indians growing up?
Speaker 2: Not many.  No.  Not many at all.  They were there, I would see them downtown and other places, but they didn't go to my school, for example.   And we didn't--they did not frequent any of the sort of places of entertainment or commerce or whatever that I and the other blacks did.  So, again, I saw them but we never had any close contact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your grandparents [Elijah Bowman and Mary Jane Weaver] live in town, too, with you?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother did.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was still living, yeah.  She still lived in the family home on the west side of town when I was growing up, but as I said, she died when I was around seven years old [ca. 1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that point, there was also an aunt.  She had one of her daughters who was living with her at that time--again, sort of testifying to their ages, the age differences, between the older siblings and my mother's family and her.  So, her husband was alive when I was born, but he died--again, I think even before my grandmother did.   So the sister, my aunt, lived with her mother until she died, and then she moved to Los Angeles [California] and then they sold the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your family gatherings were pretty small, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I was born, probably a third of the siblings had died already.  There were some of her brothers and sisters that I never knew.  The others were fairly old.  And some of them lived to be significant ages.  By the time I was twenty [ca. 1962], all of my parents' siblings, I'm pretty sure that's true--by the time I was twenty or twenty-one, all my parents' siblings had died.  My father had a brother, the youngest in the family, and a sister who was the next oldest to him who was still alive.  And the brother died only about ten years ago [ca. 2001].  The youngest, he lived to be a ripe old age.
Speaker 1: Did he live in St. Charles [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: He lived in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: The sister, uh, she would have died maybe about twenty or twenty-five years ago.  One of the memories I have is my daughter and I, at that time she was living with her family, so this was her husband's family in Wichita, Kansas.  And I can remember that my daughter and I went up there.   Again, this would have been, what, thirty years ago [ca. 1981] now, for her hundredth birthday.
Story_ID: 30886
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started elementary school at Dunbar [Elementary School, Muskogee, Oklahoma] .  And, again, basically in my neighborhood there were four elementary schools in the city and that was the one that was closest to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Dunbar was named for Paul Laurence Dunbar [African American poet]?
Speaker 2: Named for Paul Laurence Dunbar, yes.
Speaker 1: And clearly intended to be a black school.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was, yes.  At that time, all of the schools were segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a favorite subject you keyed in on in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember enjoying arithmetic.  It wasn't called math, of course.  I remember enjoying arithmetic back in those days, and I don't remember having actually had any science until sixth grade.  And I had a teacher in sixth grade--I don't really know what her background was, but she was very good at teaching us science.  Her name was Mrs. Riley.  And I remember that I was always enthusiastic about the science lessons that I would learn from her, or that she would teach us, because she was very good at it.  So, she might have had some science background that she actually brought to the teaching profession, because she was very good at making science interesting and explaining things to us in ways we could understand.  But that didn't happen until sixth grade.  But from that point on, math and science were my areas of interest.  From that point on, I always knew that I was going to do something probably in the sciences in terms of a career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you as a kid collect rocks or study insects or any of those things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to do all those kinds of things.  And the other thing is, again, my parents must have realized fairly early on that I had that kind of interest, so they bought me chemistry sets as Christmas presents, that kind of thing, and microscopes, things like that.  So, I did all those kinds of--I used to collect butterflies--all of those kinds of things when I was growing up, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30887
Speaker 1: So, did you have many friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  Again, it was a community in which there were a lot of kids my age, and it was relatively small, so even the kids that, even outside of my neighborhood, there were a number of children my age in the neighborhood that I used to play with.  But, again, I had friends from church, I had other friends from school.  So, yeah, I had a lot of friends growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you mentioned church.  What church did you all attend?
Speaker 2: At that time the name of my church was First Baptist.  It's now called First Missionary Baptist, to distinguish it from the white First Baptist Church that also existed in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is that a, I never thought of that, but is 'missionary' used sometime as a way to distinguish a black Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know there are a lot of missionary Baptist churches.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's frequently the way that is used to distinguish the black churches from the white churches.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  That's something that I had not connected to this point.  So, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was.  It was important in my mother's [Bernice Imonette Weaver] life.  That was her church.  My father [George Henry Jones] went to a different church, interestingly enough, and it was a huge part of my upbringing.  Not only because of the religious context, but also because the black churches in Muskogee were, and it's probably true in a lot of places, were very intimately connected to the community.  And so were--it played a significant role in our development apart from the kind of religious training that we gained there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were your parents a part of any of the Civil Rights organizations?
Speaker 2: My father was a member of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  My mother was not.
Speaker 1: Did it--was your household the kind of, did they discuss, you know, local politics at home and what was going on in the country?
Speaker 2: A little bit, but again, my impression is that my parents, I won't say had conflicting, but they had differing political views.  And, so my sense is that there was not a lot of discussion about politics because there wasn't going to be much common ground.  That's just an impression.  So, I don't remember a whole lot of conversations about politics in the household.
Story_ID: 30888
Speaker 1: Alright.  How would you characterize their [Jones's parents, George Henry Jones and Bernice Imonette Weaver] political differences, since this was such a turbulent time in the history of black folks?   What were their true...?
Speaker 2: My father, I think, could be described as politically active.  I can certainly remember that there were local candidates, at any rate, that he actively supported and would campaign for in the black community and would be actively involved in their campaigns.  My mother didn't do anything like that.  And my impression, and that's all it is, my impression is that her feeling was that it might be best in this environment, at any rate, to sort of try to fly under the radar as much as you could.  As long you weren't making any waves, then people would leave you alone.  And people in this case meant white people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's been a lot written about World War I vets in Oklahoma being really involved in the riot there, being the key element in the riot in Tulsa in 1921 [Tulsa race riots], and that generation of men, you know, were a lot more militant.
Speaker 2: As I said, I don't--my father certainly was not militant.  I don't remember either of them ever mentioning the Tulsa riots.  I learned about them in classes, in Negro history courses that I took.
Speaker 1: When you were young?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Most of the country--I don't think most of us knew in general anything about it until the 1970s.  They really weren't taught, you know, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Well, again, for whatever it may be worth, I took Negro history when I was a freshman in high school.  And that was a specific course that I took for an entire year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, Oklahoma has a history of black historians.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You know, Melvin [B.] Tolson and Drusilla Dunjee Houston, her Daddy, Oscar Dunjee, I think [Houston's father is Rev. John William, but her brother Roscoe Dunjee was a journalist and Civil Rights activist in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: And the guy who just died recently [2009].  As I get older, the names aren't....
Speaker 1: [Dr.] John Hope Franklin?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He's from right outside of Tulsa [Oklahoma].  It's interesting, he didn't write about the riot in detail until years later, years and years later, 1978, I think.  But, that's quite a chapter.
Story_ID: 30889
Speaker 1: Did your parents [George Henry Jones and Bernice Imonette Weaver] take the black newspapers [in Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, we took some of the quote unquote "nationals", the Chicago Defender, for a while.  But then, at some point, the publication of a black newspaper started right there in Muskogee.  It was called the "Oklahoma Independent."  And that went on for maybe a couple of decades, maybe even more while I was growing up.  And that was the paper that essentially provided the news and information to the black community during the time when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd heard about the "Black Dispatch" some years before, but the "Independent"?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, that's good.  So, would you say, when you were a kid growing up, would you say that the black community was organized?
Speaker 2: No, I would not say that it was organized in the sense that we think about organization in the context of civil rights today.  What it was, however, the term that I would use would be cohesive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a community that looked out for itself and for the members of it, and did things in some cases in an organized fashion that resulted in the betterment of the black community.
Story_ID: 30890
Speaker 1: Okay.  I like the way you put that, cohesive.  So, what about, now when you were growing up, television was kind of new in the early '50s [1950s].  I guess you were about ten or so.  Did you all get a TV?
Speaker 2: We got one ultimately, but we were sort of late in the game.  I can remember very clearly for some time, again, I don't know if it was months or years, going next door to watch TV with my neighbor.  He would occasionally invite me over to watch TV on his TV.  So, they had one before we did.  But we ultimately got a TV.  I guess I might have been, I don't know, eleven or twelve by that time, we finally got one [ca. 1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like TV, movies, radio and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: It's interesting, I liked radio more than TV even after we got a TV, not maybe because I just had grown up with radio, I mean, I still really enjoy listening to the radio.  Right now, my favorite station is "Radio Classics" on Sirius [Satellite Radio, launched 2002], where they play the old mysteries and the old science fiction radio stories.  I used to love that, and I listen to that whenever I can.  Because, again, I have that connection to my childhood.  But I did watch TV, and even back in those days, or perhaps I should say, especially back in those days, I was very interested in science fiction because I knew I wanted to be a scientist and science fiction I just thought was fascinating, so I read a lot of science fiction books.  My parents [George Henry Jones and Bernice Imonette Weaver], again, supported that interest of mine.  I would like the science fiction shows on TV back in those days.  "Tom Corbett, Space Cadet" and "Rocky Jones, [Space Ranger]" and those kinds of things.  And I also listened to those kinds of shows on the radio as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Yeah, those pre-date me, even.  I remember  "Captain Video [and His Video Rangers]."
Speaker 2: Captain Video, I watched Captain Video.
Speaker 1: I was real young, I was--my brother is the exact age as you, seven years difference, but I remember watching Captain Video.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Captain Video too.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a favorite science fiction writers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite science fiction writer was and still is a guy named Robert Sheckley [1928-2005].  I believe he's dead now, but in addition to, I always thought his science fiction writing was clever, and in addition, it was funny.  He was--he had a sense of humor that he incorporated into his science fiction writing.  So, he wrote, you probably have seen or heard variations of a story called "The Tenth Victim," [1987] and there have been a number of variations of it on TV and in the movies and so forth.  It's about basically people who are living in a society where you advance by participating in this hunting game where you kill, if you kill your opponents, then you move up the ladder in terms of the sort of social structure.  So, you play this game, there are ten of you, and you know who you are, and you've got to figure out ways to kill them before they kill you.  And that's a story that I think has been, again, as I said, has shown up in a number of different incarnations in the movies and on TV and in other books as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sounds like law school or something (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laughter) Yeah, yeah, right.  Or maybe an undergraduate pre-meds.
Speaker 1: Okay, I had to say that.  I know they're going to be angry at me in the office (laughter).  But, at any rate, this is--so, I'm just trying to figure out all the influences on you and--did you like--did you ever watch "Mr. Wizard" on television, with Don Herbert?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I loved Mr. Wizard, yeah.  I watched Mr. Wizard.  I watched this show called--it was a show like Mr. Wizard, but it was an older guy, and I think it was Professor something, it was a white-haired guy, but I just can't remember his name now.  But, it was the same kind of thing, where he sort of showed how to do everyday household things.  And to give you an example of the influence those kinds of shows had on me, one of the things he, one of the "experiments", quote unquote, that he showed once on his show was that if you take, for example, a gallon bottle of water or any liquid that you want to empty, and you just turn it upside down, the water's going to gurgle out because the air that's in there has to be displaced.  If you take that same bottle and swirl it, so that you get a vortex, the water will flow out faster because there's actually a hole for the air to escape through.  And even today, if I'm standing over the sink with a bottle like that, I'll swirl it so that the water will run out faster.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, I wonder who that was?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: His title was Professor something, I just can't remember.  It'll come to me at some point.
Speaker 1: There were a lot of early shows on TV that came and went so fast, but Don Herbert, I think he just died a couple of years ago [2007].
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had it on public radio.  He had a lot of followers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Mr. Wizard very well.
Story_ID: 30891
Speaker 1: So, you really became consciously aware of being interested in science in the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I take it you made good grades?
Speaker 2: I did.  I don't remember what my grades were in elementary and junior high, but I certainly made very good grades in high school.
Speaker 1: Did you have--did you start--would you describe yourself as thinking like a scientist at an early age?  I mean, in terms of, you know, observation and measurement, I mean, and thinking about, you know, the reason why things happen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, certainly in that latter context.  I certainly, I was always interested in trying to understand why things were the way they were, and trying to figure out how things worked.  I would--when my parents, for example, had appliances that no longer functioned that they were ready to throw away, I would always take them apart, not necessarily to repair them, but just to see what was going on inside.  So I've always been curious about how things work and trying to understand how they work.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did your parents kind of help you through that kind of process?
Speaker 2: Well, they did in the sense that they encouraged it.  They didn't--Neither of my parents had any scientific background, so there wasn't much that they could do in terms of, you know, even answering questions.  But, in terms of buying books, in terms of, again, buying me things like chemistry sets and microscopes and things to sort of stimulate my interest and curiosity, they were very supportive of those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Did your mother or father take you on field trips around to the museums or to...?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Whenever we had the opportunity to do that, when I was growing up, my father had siblings who lived in St. Louis [Missouri], and my mother had siblings who lived in both St. Louis and Chicago [Illinois].  And, still, one of my favorite places in terms of museums, is the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.  And my parents first took me there when I was fairly young.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you got a chance to travel some?
Speaker 2: We did.  Most of our vacations back in those days, we would take at the home of either my father's or my mother's siblings.  So, we'd travel to St. Louis for a vacation, to Chicago for a vacation.  And my brother's sister, my father's sister, that I mentioned a few minutes ago, was living in Pasadena, California.  So, we went out there more than once, several times, too.
Speaker 1: Those sound like great experiences, coming from out of Muskogee.
Speaker 2: They were, they were.  I had great times on all of those trips.  And I remember that I was always sad to leave.  And in most cases, you know, it wasn't, we didn't go for a week or even ten days or so, we'd be there for a month, or six weeks.  I can remember, for example, visiting my father's sister in Pasadena, and we stayed there long enough for me to actually join the Boys Club [Now the Boys & Girls Club of Pasadena].  And so I would go to the Boys Club there in Pasadena everyday for the entire time we were there.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Boys Club or the "Y" [YMCA]?
Speaker 2: No, it was the Boys Club.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  I know some people in Chicago that were part of the Black YMCA movement that lived in Pasadena.
Speaker 2: No, this was definitely the Boys Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know at that time that Pasadena was the home of Jackie Robinson?
Speaker 2: I did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't really know that much about any of the places we were traveling in those days.  I didn't know that much about St. Louis or Chicago, either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: They were just a sort of new adventures for me.
Story_ID: 30892
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, most kids in those days, I remember when I was growing up, I wanted to grow up and move to Oklahoma and be a cowboy.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Really?
Speaker 1: But you were living there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did the cowboy phenomena affect you, because, you know, westerns dominated the movies, the television, the radio even?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I don't recall that sort of environment.  And I knew it was there.  I went--there were a couple of occasions, there used to be a, I started to say big, I know don't whether it was big or not, there used to be a rodeo in Muskogee [Oklahoma] that would come around I think at least once a year.  It some sort of sponsored annual kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Was that the black rodeo?
Speaker 2: No, it was not the black rodeo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I know that I went to that a couple of times with either my father [George Henry Jones] or my mother [Bernice Imonette Weaver] or both.  But other than that, it didn't really have that much of an impact on me and those around me when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: So, the whole cowboy thing didn't really affect you that much.
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: I would have thought, if I was in Oklahoma, you know, I'd see the steers walking down the street, and you know, the whole...
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  You know, we had friends who were farmers, who were ranchers but beyond that, it didn't really have much of an impact on me when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, because there was, you know, there was such a hype about the West in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, it may well have been that.  I would suspect that it would be the case, that for example, that it did have more of an impact on white kids who were growing up in that community.  But I didn't know of any black cowboys.  For example, I knew they existed, I didn't know--but I couldn't give you any names, and it just wasn't something that was really registered in my consciousness.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting, because I think most people really weren't that consciously aware of black cowboys.  It was maybe in the '60s [1960s] when they started talking about black cowboys.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I didn't become aware of them, I don't think, until the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] myself.
Story_ID: 30893
Speaker 1: Alright, so when you started high school you went to Muskogee Training...?
Speaker 2: Manual Training School was the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Manual Training High School [Muskogee, Oklahoma].  Alright, now we were--usually manual training has something to do with being a black school.  Do you have any comments or thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it certainly, it was a school, as the name suggests, that was initially set up to provide sort of occupational training and skills.  And even when I was there, even when I was in school [ca. 1955-1959], there were courses in auto mechanics, there were courses in barbering and cosmetology.  There was homemaking, there was a track for people who wanted to go into commercial cooking, for example, in addition to the academic courses.  So, what happened was, over time, the curriculum expanded from those courses of study that were primarily designed to provide occupational skills and training for black students, including the more academic disciplines as well.  So, I was able to take algebra and plane geometry and physics and chemistry.  But even in those days, for example, I knew that in order to move forward in terms of my math skills and development and training, I needed to take trigonometry.  So, trigonometry wasn't offered at my high school, so I ended up taking trigonometry by correspondence from the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] in my senior year.
Story_ID: 30894
Speaker 1: How did you, you must have had some advice and some good mentors, for you to even know that you needed to have trigonometry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, who were some of the mentors and advisors for you in high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, let me preface that by saying that one of the reasons, I think, that those of us, and there are many of us, who became, including me, became the people that we became was because of the commitment and dedication and interest of the people, some of whom I'm about to name now, who really were dedicated to ensure that we have the best education that we could possibly get that--they could possibly give us.  And that they gave us the best advice and counsel that they could, in terms of not only our development there in Muskogee, but our careers after we left.  So, one of most significant influences in that regard in my life was my chemistry professor.   His name was Dr. Charles Adams.  He wasn't actually Dr. Adams at the time he was in Muskogee [ca. 1942-1959], at the time I was in Muskogee, I should put it that way.  He subsequently got his Ph.D. from Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  And he was a brilliant man--smart, funny and caring, and he gave us good advice.  But also, I think, as important as his counsel, was the fact that he pushed us.  He demanded that we give our very best.  I can remember very clearly an example when I think I was a junior and he had given us an assignment.  It was something where we could sort of do whatever we wanted to do, within certain limits.  And I decided that I was going to draw a picture of a honeybee.  So, I went home and worked on it, and I worked hard, I didn't sloth at all, I didn't give him a stick drawing.  And I brought it in the next day and showed it to him, and he said "Well, this is okay, but it's not good enough."  So, he sent me back home to do it again, so I started over from scratch.  I brought that in a couple of days later, and he said, "Well, this is better, but it's still not good enough."  So, he sent me back to do a third time, and finally, the third time I did it well enough in his estimation that he was willing to accept it.  So, that, I think, is an example of the fact that he just wasn't  willing to let us do less than what we were maximally capable of doing.  And I think that was the kind, as much as anything, the kind of support that I got, not only from him, but from so many other teachers when I was growing up.  They didn't--they were convinced that we could be more than they had been, and they were going to push us to make sure that that happened.
Speaker 1: Now, what did Charles Adams go on to do?  You say he got his Ph.D. from Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.  But he continued to teach there in Muskogee.  He ultimately became, I think, co-principal was what the term was.  So, even though things were great in Muskogee in my opinion, even for me as a black person growing up in the '50s [1950s], it took them a while to sort of come into the Twentieth Century.  So, Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954] had very little impact in Muskogee until around 1970.  That's when they closed down my high school, at least as a high school, and integrated the schools entirely.  And Dr. Adams, I think became co-principal of the new Muskogee high school.  So, they had one white principal and one black principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody--Who else?
Speaker 2: Mr. Davis, who was the math teacher.  He taught Engl--algebra, plane geometry.  He had a significant impact because, again, he made math fun to learn.  And again, he was smart and knew what he was doing.  It wasn't as if he was not himself a mathematician, he was.  He was simply teaching it to us.  And again, his was a situation in which he pushed us and made us do more than we thought we could do.  An anecdote that I can remember once, it must have been when I was a senior, he had given us an assignment and we hadn't taken it sufficiently seriously, and he scolded us for it.  He said, "Okay, I'm going to do this.  I'm going to give you this particular problem.  If you can do this in ten minutes, everybody--anyone who accomplishes this in ten minutes will get an automatic 'A' in this class."  What he wanted us to do was to solve a particular, very simple equation using the quadratic equation, which is a formula that you use to solve equations in mathematics.  And again, it's simple, it's straightforward.   And none of us were able to do it, including me.  I was close, and I might have gotten it if I'd been given a couple more minutes.  But he knew that we had not been paying sufficiently close attention to be able to do that.  So, he wasn't at all fearful of having to give anybody an 'A'.  But, what that said to me was that, and I can't speak for my classmates, although I suspect it was true for at least some of them as well--what that said to me was that I didn't know as much as I thought I did, and that I needed to work harder than I had been working if I was really going to understand mathematics, even at that level.
Story_ID: 30895
Speaker 1: So, this high school experience--now, did you feel that your--because one of the things that's remarkable--when we look over your outline here, is that you go from Manual Training High School [Muskogee, Oklahoma] to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when I saw this, I said how in the world did this happen?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a community in which the value of education was perhaps the strongest, certainly one of the strongest values in the community.  One of the things I like to tell my students is that I never had a conversation with my parents [George Henry Jones and Bernice Imonette Weaver] about whether or not I was going to college.  It was always assumed I was going to college.  It was never whether, it was just where.  And, I think one of the facts that testifies to the value of education in that community, is that I was not the first student from my high school to go to Harvard.  I was preceded there by, again, the son of a close family friend, and a person was a friend of mine, too.  He died actually just relatively recently.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: His name is Kenneth [Harlan] Simmons [1933-2010].  He was an architect at UC Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  And he retired from Berkley and moved to South Africa, where he died I think within the last year or two.  But, he went to Harvard before I did.  He was maybe ten years older than me.  And, he was under-graduate at Harvard and got his bachelor's degree from Harvard before I even got there.  So, I was not the first black student from Muskogee to go to Harvard, but I might have been the last.  I don't know that there have been any other black students from Muskogee to go to Harvard since I did.
Speaker 1: Was there a connection to Harvard from the Muskogee side?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I certainly talked to him after I was admitted about what it was going to be like, and I can't really tell you why.  I started writing to Harvard to get information when I was a sophomore in high school.  And, I had no sense at that point that I would or would not be able to get in.  But, sort of, I guess the attitude, part of the attitude that developed as a result of my interactions, my exposure, my encouragement in that community was, if you've done well, which I had, you have nothing to lose by giving it a shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, why Harvard?  Was it because of Kenneth Simmons?
Speaker 2: My impression, rightly or wrongly, was Harvard was the best school in the world.  And if I could go to the best school in the world, I should try to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did anybody--So, was this done kind of innocently, in a sense?
Speaker 2: It probably was innocently in a sense.  Again, I had no idea whether or not I had the credentials to get me into Harvard.  And I have to be honest and say that I had very little idea of what it was going to take to succeed there once I got there, if I got there.  I learned very quickly what it would take.  But, again, it was a situation where the sort of ethos in that community was aim as high as you can.  And for me, that was as high as I could aim.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now did your parents know you were applying to Harvard as a sophomore?
Speaker 2: I didn't--wasn't applying.  As a sophomore, I was just writing in for information.  They sent me catalogs and information about various programs and so forth.  I wasn't applying at that point, I was just trying to get information on some of the programs that I thought I might be interested in.
Speaker 1: So, did you write to any other schools?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that I did, interestingly enough.  I don't remember that I wrote any place other than Harvard.
Speaker 1: There's been other stories like yours.  Tyrone Hayes [endocrinologist and professor at University of California, Berkeley] out in Bay area, he said outside of Harvard--that's all, he didn't even write to anybody else.
Speaker 2: I applied, ultimately, I applied to other schools, but I don't remember getting any advance information from anyplace other than Harvard.
Story_ID: 30896
Speaker 1: So were you in the National Honor Society?
Speaker 2: I was, I was in the National Honor Society.  And I applied for a National Merit Scholarship, but I didn't get one.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you come close?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  I have a, I guess it's not a plague, it's a certificate that says I was an honorable mention or something like that, an honorably mentioned national merit scholar, but I didn't get any money.
Speaker 1: Well, that's pretty close.  I mean, honorable mention, I guess they wouldn't even send you that...  Okay, well, in high school other than academic work, were you involved in the recreational aspects of high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did some things.  I was in the band for three years.  I played alto saxophone and my mother was the choral director, and I just, I liked to sing, so it wasn't an issue of shying away because of any issues with my voice or whatever, but my mother [Bernice Imonette Weaver] taught at Manual Training.  So, I was going to school at the school where my mother was a teacher.  And, both of us, I think, to her credit, both of us made a conscious effort to try to not let our relationship play any significant role in what happened in my life at Manual Training.  And it worked.  There were friends of mine, for example, who didn't find out until very late in my high school career that she was my mother.  So, she was doing the right thing apparently and so was I.  But there toward the end of my senior year, I said well, she's the choir director and I'm her son.  I don't think that I should go through my entire high school career without singing in the choir--in the chorus, so I actually joined the chorus in my senior year, and sang in the chorus, and it worked out fine.
Story_ID: 30897
Speaker 1: What was it like, seeing your mother [Bernice Imonette Weaver] operate in a professional capacity [as choir director at Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma], you know, I guess...?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I didn't think much about it, I knew she was good at what she did because I had seen--she used to put on these really extravagant programs, musical programs of various sorts that I would always attend.  And I would see her doing those kind of things and frequently, she would have rehearsals at the house or she would need to take me to school in order to have a--for there to be a rehearsal because, again, there wasn't any other child care available.  So, I knew that she was good at what she did, because I saw the products of her efforts.  And, so, being in the choir, I knew that she was going to hold all of us to a high standard, and she did.  And the thing that she used to do, and it was very clever of her, and I even knew that at the time--so I was in the baritone section and whenever anyone was misbehaving, she wouldn't try to identify them, she would always blame me.  She would say, you know, "Somebody was talking back there."  She would tell me to stop talking.  So, what I had to do in order not to be blamed for that was I had to keep all of them in line, because I knew I was going to be blamed for it, no matter who was doing it.  It was very clever, and it worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  There seems to be a strong musical tradition in Oklahoma, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dr. [Legand L.] Burge [Dean of the College of Engineering, Architecture, and Physical Sciences], we interviewed at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Inst., Alabama, on April 11, 2011], grew up in Oklahoma City, he plays the piano.  He was a pianist in church and toured all over Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: I think that was a part of, again, the kind of, there weren't many artistic outlets for us as we were growing up.  It was very difficult, I think, for anybody in my community, no matter how talented they were, to become an artist, a sculptor.  There weren't even those kinds of classes in the high school, or anywhere for that matter that I'm aware of.  So, when you thought about the kind of artistic outlets that people might both want and need to have, one of the ones that was available, one of the few that was available was music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so a lot of really terrific musicians came out of my community.
Story_ID: 30898
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, as you--you're in your senior year.  Have you been accepted to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] by the time you became a senior [at Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I think I learned of my acceptance to Harvard sometime after the beginning of the new year of 1959, sometime early in 1959, which would have been a little over half way through my senior year.  I don't think that I found out before Christmas, but I don't remember specifically.  Certainly, earlier in the new year, I knew that I had been accepted.
Speaker 1: That must have been, what was that like?  That must have been a real thrill.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a real thrill, because as I said, I had no idea how competitive I was likely to be with anybody anywhere, not only at Harvard, but anywhere, you know.  What was the pool going to be like at any school that I was applying to?  And, so having gotten into what was my first choice, I think was a real--yeah, we were really excited.
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated, were you at the top of the class?
Speaker 2: I was the valedictorian in my class, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  And, did you have in your mind that you wanted to become a biologist at this point?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was primarily interested in chemistry at that point.  So, I started at Harvard as a chemistry major, and I took a biochemistry course my junior year, and was just fascinated by it.  And I switched my major then to what was called biochemical sciences, which, at that time was primarily a major for pre-meds, which I wasn't.  I never wanted to go to medical school.  But the biochemistry was what I really wanted to do, and that was the course of study for me at Harvard at that time.
Speaker 1: A couple questions.  Just going back to high school, you say you took a trigonometry course, a correspondence course?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That shows a lot of initiative, you know, for a kid in high school.
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I was going to need it, and again, Dr. [Charles] Adams and Mr. Davis both told me that I needed to take trigonometry and you're not going to be able to get it here.  There was no place in Muskogee that I could take it.  I don't even know that it was offered at the white high school, although it might have been.  So, they assisted me in getting in contact with the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] and I took it through correspondence there.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting point that it might not have been offered at Muskogee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that it was, yeah.
Story_ID: 30899
Speaker 1: I think the whole view of integration is that somehow you're going to get a better education in a white school, but that may not be true.
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting in that regard, sort of as an aside.  After Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954], maybe half a dozen black students who had previously been in the black school system, went to the white high school.  As you might imagine, no white students came to Manual [Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: That's when they started the Christian schools and other...
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, again, it wasn't a big deal there, because such a small number of black students went to the white high school, so they never really had to think about alternative schools in Muskogee, just because it wasn't a problem.  And the reality is that we didn't want to go there, I didn't want to go to the white high school.  And I don't think, with a few exceptions, anybody else, any of my friends, did either, and I am convinced to this day that I got a better education at Manual than I would have gotten at the white high school.
Speaker 1: How were--You say you were an integrated neighborhood, so to speak, but a lot of the public facilities were segregated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How were race relations?  I mean, what was the attitude of the black community and what was your attitude in terms of...?
Speaker 2: By and large, it was live and let live.  We pretty much left each other alone.  And in that community, it was possible to do that in large part because of the variety of opportunities and services of various sorts that were available.  So, when I was growing up in Muskogee, there were, I think, three black physicians in town.  There were three or four black dentists.  There were half a dozen black lawyers, there were black businesses of various sorts--clothing stores, other retailers, shoe stores--there were black cleaning establishments, there were black restaurants.  Basically, almost anything you needed you could get through the black community in Muskogee.  And the things that you couldn't, you could get through white providers because of the fact that they were perfectly happy to take our money, let's just put it that way.  You know, they didn't necessarily want you sitting in their restaurants.  That wasn't a problem because we didn't necessarily want to be there anyhow.  But, my parents [Bernice Imonette Weaver and George Henry Jones], for example, had charge accounts at white department stores and clothing stores when I was growing up, and again, they were perfectly happy to take our money, and to treat us cordially.
Speaker 1: There were no like fountains or anything marked or any of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: When I was very young, there were.  I can remember seeing "colored" and "white" fountains in one of the stores.  By the time I was junior high, those had disappeared.  Now we still couldn't, there was still a black and white movie theater.  We still couldn't go to the white restaurants.  That didn't happen actually until the time I was just about to graduate from high school [ca. 1959].  There were other facilities, again, that were--blacks couldn't join the country club.  There were other facilities, again, that were white only.  But by and large, they weren't any things that were necessary to our development and our well-being.  There was a black hospital.  Although the hospitals weren't segregated, there was a black hospital where I got my tonsils taken out.  But, I was born in a white hospital.
Speaker 1: Like a county hospital?
Speaker 2: It was called Muskogee Baptist [sic, Oklahoma Baptist Hospital, the white hospital].  I'm not sure exactly who operated it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was Oklahoma Baptist Hospital.  But anyhow, it was not the black hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a name for the black community in Muskogee?
Speaker 2: No, there was not.
Speaker 1: Was there a main street that if you said, such and such street, like...?
Speaker 2: If you're asking me if my community had a name, there was a section called Reeves Addition in Muskogee, that was at that time, entirely black.  So, if anyone said anything about Reeves Addition, you were talking about the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like, was there a street like Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] or West Fifth Street?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Street] was one of the main streets that ran through Reeves Addition.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, that would be the black business strip?
Speaker 2: No, that's actually--it was residential.  Interestingly enough, the black businesses were downtown, they were right there, sort of cheek by jaw with the white businesses, sort of in a somewhat different section, but in the downtown area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, 2nd Street, for example, was one of the streets where there were lots of black businesses in Muskogee.  The black theater was on Second Street-- restaurants, clothing establishments, cleaners.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I thought there had to be something like that.  But, okay, so now this is 1960, right?
Speaker 2: 1959, I started at Harvard, if that's what you're asking.
Story_ID: 30900
Speaker 1: Alright. So, you're a senior in 1959, you graduate and you're going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now.  So, did your parents [George Henry Jones and Bernice Imonette Weaver] have to pay for the whole thing?
Speaker 2: I got a scholarship.  I also worked while I was at Harvard.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, how did you go?  Did you all drive or did you catch a train, or?
Speaker 2: There were two other white young men from Muskogee, who were attending Harvard at the same time.  They were the sons of one of the prominent white doctors in the city.  One of them was, I think, two years ahead of me.  The other one, like me, was an incoming freshman.  And, they reached out to me when they found out that I'd been accepted, and my first trip to Harvard, I drove up to Harvard with them in their car.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.  What was the conversation like, with the two Harvard...?  Did you ask him about what it was like?
Speaker 2: I did, we talked about a lot of different things, and interestingly enough, I don't know whether this is true or not, but we stopped somewhere near St. Louis [Missouri] to eat at some sort of chain restaurant, and if someone called the name of it, I would probably remember.  And we went in, and I didn't think anything about it, but I knew that there were some places that were integrated at that point where it wouldn't be a problem, but I didn't think anything about it at the time.  So, I went in with the two of them, we sat down at the counter, ordered and ate.  And somebody, a person who was sitting next to me, not in any sort of malicious or threatening way or anything, said to me, "You know you're probably the only black person who's ever eaten at one of these restaurants."  Actually, he probably didn't say "black person", he probably said "Negro" who's ever eaten at one of these restaurants, and I hadn't even thought about it.
Speaker 1: Was it a Big Boy?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a Big Boy, but it was some sort of chain that I knew about that I'd heard about before, and again, they presumably didn't think anything about it.  You know, we were three young men who were hungry on the road and needed to go in and get something to eat.  And, interestingly enough, there were no issues.  Obviously, I was the only black person in there, but there were no issues at all.  We were served, and ate, and paid and left.  Nothing ever came of it.  I'm not aware that, apart from that one comment, I didn't notice anyone staring or whispering or anything like that.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting time period and locale, where it was kind of confusing what rules would govern the behavior.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So, it was a perfectly comfortable trip, as I recall, and I don't remember there being any issues at all of any sort related to it.  We just drove up and we were there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any questions or parts of the conversation that stick out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The one thing I, I don't remember--I did that with them several times.  And I don't remember whether it was that or another trip, when we were driving up, but one of the trips, at any rate, one of the things that does stand out is that the car broke down.  And it turned out that the nature of the damage was sufficiently severe that it was going to take a lot of money to repair the car.  It was something like a 1957 Nash Rambler or something like that.  And they just decided that it wasn't worth it.  So, right there, I think it was Angola, Indiana, they just bought a new car.
Speaker 1: (laughter).  That's....
Speaker 2: Yeah, got up one morning and went out and bought a car.
Speaker 1: I see that it impressed you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.  I mean, I didn't know what we were going to do.  I figured we were going to take the bus or get the train or something like that.  They just went and bought a new car.
Speaker 1: That was the difference between the black middle class and the white one.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 30901
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, well, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  You get to Harvard in 1959?
Speaker 2: 1959.
Speaker 1: Fall of 1959.  Well, describe the campus and what was going on when you got there.
Speaker 2: Well, again, I was, I had essentially no expectations.  Not because I was not capable of developing expectations, but because I had no frame of reference.  I had talked to my friend who had been there, but, again we hadn't had long penetrating conversations where we sat around and talked for hours and hours.  I'd just gotten some general impressions from him, so I had very little idea about what to expect.  It certainly looked like what I thought an Ivy League campus was supposed to look like.  And, the way Harvard worked then, and I suspect it still does, is that all the freshmen live in what were essentially dorms by themselves.  That is, they're not mixed in with upper classmen.  You're not mixed in with upper classmen until your sophomore year.  So, I had a roommate, a guy from Rochester, New York, who I'm still very close to, and...
Speaker 1: Was it a black roommate?
Speaker 2: White.  No, he was white.  And, so, you know, I was doing all of the things that all of the other freshmen were doing at that point and just trying to feel my way along and trying to get some sense of what my expectations should be and what Harvard's expectations for me should be.  And, one of the things that stand out in that regard is a session that we had with one of the deans, I can't remember his name.  But, one of the things he said was that, and I'm not going to be able to quote him exactly, but this will be close.  One of the things he said was, he said that, "The biggest hurdle that you needed to cross, was getting in here.  Now that you're here, it's our responsibility to see that you graduate."  And again, that's not an exact quote, but that's close to what he said.  And I hope he meant it, I presume that he meant it, but I can remember that that stuck with me, because what it said to me was, that "Now that I'm here, I've got a reasonable chance to succeed here, because if he's telling the truth, Harvard is going to help me to be successful."
Speaker 1: And so was that the case?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.  Certainly my first semester I struggled.  As it turned out, not because I didn't have the ability, but I just wasn't prepared for the sort of rigorous academic environment that Harvard presented, based upon my experience in Oklahoma in Muskogee.  They did everything they could for me, but there was just no way they could re-create that environment, or come anywhere close to it.
Speaker 1: What was the hardest, were the hardest courses? Math and science, or English and...?
Speaker 2: The hardest courses for me were the humanities and social science courses.  I figured out how to do well in the math and the science, and that was simply a matter of spending the hours.  Again, I will say this without being embarrassed.  My first chemistry test in my freshman year, I got a "D" and I was crushed.  But I was determined that I was not going to get another "D".  And fortunately, for me, at that time, I mean most places in the country now, certainly Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] for example, if you take a course in a semester, you get a grade for that course for that semester.  Back in those days, and it may still be the case, Harvard had what was called full courses and half courses.  And a full course, which was what that chemistry course was, you got a grade at the end of the semester, but it was only a provisional grade.  You got a grade at the end of the year that was for the whole course.  So, even though I got a "D" on that exam, I ended up getting an 'A' in the course because that "D" figured in to all of the other grades.  And after that point, I had learned my lesson and I did really well.  So, I figured out how to do the math and the science.  It took me quite a while how to do the social sciences and humanities, because, not so much in terms of the subject matter, but because of the expectations.  So, and I'm sitting in a literature course, and the instructor asks the class, "What do you think the author was thinking when they wrote that?"  And I'm sitting there and saying "How am I supposed to know the answer to that, and therefore, how am I supposed to answer that question?"  So, it took me a long time, and I needed actually, assistance in trying to learn how to read social science and humanities literature in sort of an interpretive context, because I just wasn't prepared for that at all when I got to Harvard.
Story_ID: 30902
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who were some of your fellow students that stand out [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, I developed a very close relationship.  So, the way that the dorm was set up when I was a freshman, there were, we actually had a suite.  It was, we had a sort of living study area, and there were only two of us to a room, and we each had our own separate bedroom.  And, then across the hall, there was an identical, almost a mirror image, with two other students.   And then there was sort of a safety door between that room across the hall and another corridor that was, you know, twenty or thirty down the--feet apart.  So, basically, there were six of us, the two in that first suite and then the two in the suite that were separated by the corridor, and then my suite right across the hall.  We became very close during that freshman year, and we ended up rooming together even after, as sophomores, juniors and seniors.  So, and I still have a very good relationship with really all of them, but certainly a fairly close relationship with two out of the five, one of whom was my roommate.  Another was one of the people in the room across the hall who now lives in Aiken, South Carolina, and he has come to Atlanta on occasion.  So, we've kept in touch and still do.  So, I was close to them.  And I also developed some fairly close relationships with some of the other black students.  I only learned relatively recently, because one of my classmates is doing a documentary himself, about the black students who were in the class of 1963, that is, the graduating class of 1963.  And I learned as a result of his activities, that the nineteen of us who were admitted to Harvard that year, out of a class of around 1,100 as I recall, that was the largest number of black students that Harvard had ever admitted at one time.
Speaker 1: To that point or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, to that point.  Now, I'm sure that they've done more now, but at that point, nineteen was the largest number in any class that Harvard had ever admitted.  And so I became close to some of them.
Speaker 1: Was there a reason for that?  Was there some sort of mandate?
Speaker 2: It wasn't so much a mandate.  As I understand it, there were several of the administrators who simply decided that Harvard needed to do a better job, and that they were going to make the effort beginning that year, to try to increase the number of black students that were admitted.
Story_ID: 30903
Speaker 1: This just occurred to me and I'd better ask it while it's on my mind.  As I'm sitting here, it was revealed to me that you're at Harvard during the entire Kennedy administration, the John F. Kennedy Administration, from the time he was elected to the time he was assassinated [November 22, 1963].
Speaker 2: Well, I had graduated when he was assassinated [Spring 1963].
Speaker 1: Had you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had graduated [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In spring of 1963?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had graduated when he was assassinated.  See, I was there during the Cuban Missile Crisis [1962].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like that would have been an exciting time to be at Harvard.
Speaker 2: It was, and it was a scary time, too, especially in relationship to Cold War issues.  So, I can remember, for example, at my college one of my roommates during the Cuban missile crisis was really having a serious sort of internal debate about whether or not he was going to leave school, because he thought it was likely to get serious enough that some shooting would actually take place.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people were on needles and pins.  That was at the height of the Cold War fear.  And, also the height of a lot of Civil Rights fear.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were sit-ins at (unclear) in Cambridge while I was there.  I didn't participate in them.  I was more active in civil rights once I got to graduate school.  But, my feeling was, rightly or wrongly, that I was at Harvard for one reason, and that was to get a good education and get a degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you got a young, vital kind of a president [John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963] with a Harvard [University, where Jones attended college] background.  I think the first person that I ever heard of, and obviously, I mean, everybody knew he was from Harvard.  His brother [Robert "Bobby" Kennedy], too, and a number of other cabinet officers and you know, Harvard men, in the White House [the president's home, Washington, D.C.].  So, did that, how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: It didn't have any impact on me.  It may well have--my roommates may have felt differently, and I suspect there were others, certainly in the Harvard community who felt differently.  But, no, it didn't have any real impact on me.
Speaker 1: Had you paid much attention to the [Dwight D.] Eisenhower administration [1953-1961]?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It just seems like such a stark contrast between the two of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30904
Speaker 1: No, I hadn't.  I was not terribly political, again, in those days.  And, I was in fact criticized for it by some of my black classmates.  But, as I said, for rightly or wrongly, I felt I was there for one reason.
Speaker 2: Well, people who--I know people have, they used to say in those days, that if you're in school, you know, you really owe your people to graduate, to get out.
Speaker 1: That was exactly my feeling.  I felt that I was representing everybody who had ever spent, you know, an hour trying, or a minute encouraging me or teaching me or supporting me in any way, and that if I failed there [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I had let them down.  And, I just didn't think that I could let that happen.  There was just no way I could let that happen.
Speaker 2: So, there could be a lot of forces pulling on a young man in those days.  I could see that the compulsion to make a contribution to a movement--but I guess it would depend on what your--I think a lot of middle class black kids have got involved with people who could take going to school for granted on some level.
Speaker 1: Well, my feeling, again, it may have been rationalization.  But, my thinking was that if I graduated from Harvard, then I was doing something for black people.  If I graduated from Harvard with something other than a "C" average, I was doing something for black people, and that if I graduated from Harvard with a "C" average but had been the president of the NCAA [sic, NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I hadn't done any more than if I'd graduated from Harvard with honors, and not the president of the NCAA--NAACP.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Again, that was my rationale.
Speaker 2: Now were there any black organizations on campus where the students organized?
Speaker 1: There weren't when I got there, but one of my classmates formed the first black student organization on campus.  He just passed away about two weeks ago [March 19, 2011].
Speaker 2: Okay, who was that?
Speaker 1: His name was John Gordon Butler, Jack Butler.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what was his field of study?
Speaker 1: John, I think was an English major.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was the organization he formed, do you remember?
Speaker 1: I think it was called the Harvard Association of Black Students [Harvard Black Students Association].  If you're interested, I can find out specifically.
Speaker 2: I don't think so, but...
Speaker 1: But it was a black student organization.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's pause here while I'm thinking about--
Story_ID: 30905
Speaker 1: So, the other person that I can remember from-- one of the upper classmen from my Harvard days [1959-1963], was Booker Bradshaw.  I don't know if that name means anything to you.
Speaker 2: I don't know him.
Speaker 1: Booker became an actor.  I think he died [in 2003], if I'm not mistaken, and I remember having met him at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  But I remember that he was on one of the early episodes of "Star Trek."
Speaker 2: Booker Bradshaw.  What role did he play?
Speaker 1: He was a doctor [Dr. M'Benga].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was the ship's doctor on one of the early episodes of Star Trek.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's interesting.  So, was he a drama major?
Speaker 1: I don't know what his major was.  He was at least a year, probably more like two or even three years ahead of me at Harvard.  So, I don't really know what his major was.
Speaker 2: We asked during the break about Archie [C.] Epps [III, 1937-2003, civil rights activist, black administrator at Harvard University].
Speaker 1: Yeah, again, I've met Archie.  He was also ahead of me, but he wasn't a person that I knew well at all.
Speaker 2: Now, were there any black women on campus that you remember?
Speaker 1: No.  At that time, Harvard was still all male.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  They would be at Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they were at Radcliffe.  We took courses together.  I probably know it's not the right answer.  So, there were no Harvard students, female Harvard students at that time, but I took--all of my courses had women in them.  And I took courses on the Radcliffe campus as well as having them take courses on the Harvard campus.
Speaker 2: Were there as many, I mean, proportionately, black women students at Radcliffe as there were black males at Harvard?
Speaker 1: Not to my knowledge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't know more than one or two of the black women at Radcliffe, and to my knowledge, and I'm almost sure this is the case, the entering class of 1959, although there were nineteen of us at Harvard, there was only one admitted to Radcliffe.
Speaker 2: So, one more social question here.  So, for your socializing, what did you, I mean, I know you didn't have a lot of time for--but what was your focal point?
Speaker 1: Well, to the extent that I did any dating, and I did some, I didn't do a lot, I dated women from other colleges in the area, from Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], from Wheaton [College, Wheaton, Massachusetts].  And I dated women that I simply met in the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In Cambridge [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Cambridge.
Speaker 2: Okay
Story_ID: 30906
Speaker 1: So, now who were some of your mentors at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  Who were some of the significant mentors and professors?
Speaker 2: I don't think I can say that I knew anyone at Harvard that I would call a mentor.  That may have been my fault as much as it might have been any of theirs.  I certainly felt that some of the professors that I had in certain courses were not only strong teachers, but from what I could see of them, they were the kind of people that I wanted to become.  They were the kind of models that I wanted to try to become.  One of them was a guy who taught freshman chemistry.  His name was Eugene Rochow [1909-2002].  He might have been a Nobel Laureate, I'm not sure [Rochow won the Perkin Medal from the Society of Chemical Industry in 1962 but not the Nobel Prize].  And he was an excellent teacher, he made chemistry fun.  And I came away from that course having learned a lot of chemistry, but I think also having learned something, even though I may have only done so unconsciously at the time, about how to teach science in a way that makes it not only instructive, but enjoyable.  So, I really enjoyed that class.  Another significant influence, again, although not a person that I would call a mentor by any means, was the person who taught the biochemistry course that I took when was I a junior.  His name was John [Tileston] Edsall, E-D-S-A-L-L [1902-2002], at that time and subsequently, a well-known biochemist, sort of one of the pioneers of the discipline.  And, again, he taught a course that I just loved.  And that ultimately set my career path, because he made it interesting and it was clear that there were lots of fascinating topics that had only been, whose surface had only been scratched in terms of the biochemical work that had gone on up to that time.  But there weren't--I didn't have any mentors at Harvard.  I think Tyrone Hayes [endocrinologist and professor at University of California, Berkeley.  He received his B.S. degree from Harvard University in 1989], for example, that you mentioned a few minutes ago, I think his situation was different.  Scott Edwards' [evolutionary biologist and professor at Harvard University, he received his B.S. degree from Harvard University in 1986] situation may have been different.  But, I didn't have mentors at Harvard.  I had models and strong teachers, but no mentors.
Speaker 1: Nobody felt compelled to take you under their wing and guide you through?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you really had--being an only child really helped, I guess, in that situation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I pretty much felt that I had to make my own way.  And, I have to say, that I'm not sure that I would have benefitted in some cases from some mentorship, some mentoring, but in the end I did well.  I made some decisions that I would change now if I had to do it over again.
Speaker 1: For instance?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the mistakes I think I did make was that in my senior year I took a graduate course in biophysics.  And not only was I in over my head, although I was able to overcome that, I think by just working much harder than I otherwise would have felt I needed to work, I didn't enjoy it, and I don't think I learned that much.  It was a course that was recommended to me by my advisor, by the person who was my advisor in biochemical sciences at the time.  And I tried to talk him out of it, because it wasn't what I wanted to do, but it was what he thought I needed to do, and so I did it, and it was a mistake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were other courses that I would have benefitted from much more than that one, and that would have been a much better choice.
Story_ID: 30907
Speaker 1: On the other side of the coin, were there figures that tried to pull you back and keep you from going forward at Harvard?
Speaker 2: Nothing obvious.  Needless to say, all of the instructors knew who I was, because in most cases, I was the only black student in the class, so I was easy to identify.  I don't know that there was anything that I can point to and say this was an obvious example of racism and discrimination.  But, I can't say otherwise, either, because they certainly did know who I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Were most of the other students kind of treated with indifference, too?
Speaker 2: Good question, and I honestly don't know the answer to that.  I continued to be very close to one of my black classmates.  He moved to Ann Arbor [Michigan] after I got there [Jones worked on the faculty of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, from 1971 to 1989], found out I was there, and got in touch with me.  This would have been maybe thirty years ago, and we've been good friends ever since.  And we talk about our experiences at Harvard from time to time.  We've actually spent a fair amount of time together.  One of the passions we share is motorcycles, so we ride together on occasion.  He's never said to me that he remembers any overt instances of racism or discrimination, but it would not at all surprise me if either a: they existed in his case and perhaps the case of my other classmates as well, and b: that they also were true in my case, and I just didn't recognize it for whatever reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you didn't have the expectation that it would be otherwise?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I had been in other circumstances where I had experienced racism and discrimination, and it was something that I would have simply--that would have been an expectation and something that I simply would have to overcome.
Story_ID: 30908
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you do in terms of your course work [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I imagine you did fairly well.
Speaker 2: I did very well.  You know, the reality is what it is.  I would have graduated with honors if I hadn't taken that biophysics course.
Speaker 1: And that was on the advice of your advisor.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just as an outsider listening to this, it sounds almost like he was sabotaging your...
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know, maybe he was.  I don't know, but that was the difference between my graduating with honors and not graduating with honors.
Speaker 1: It just seems that way, it really seems that way, but--.
Speaker 2: But apart from that, I did well.  I have an over 3.0 GPA, and again that was back before the days of grade inflation, when a "B" meant something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what were your prospects upon--now, you graduated in?
Speaker 2: 1963.
Speaker 1: As chemist or a?
Speaker 2: Biochemist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, at that point, again, as I said, I never wanted to go to medical school, so I...
Speaker 1: Why not?  Well, so many--I mean, black doctors enjoy such prestige in the community and...
Speaker 2: I just was never interested in medicine.
Speaker 1: And everybody, you know, talks about, my son is a doctor.  That seems to be the--you know, you see it on TV--my son, I want him to be a doctor.  Everybody wants their son to be a doctor, so why not a doctor?
Speaker 2: I just was never interested in medicine.  I think my mother, in particular, would have much preferred that I become a doctor or a lawyer, a quote unquote "professional."  But, I just was never interested.  I always wanted to be a practicing scientist, I wanted to figure out how stuff worked, and so I just never had any real inclination to go to medical school.  So, toward the end of my, I guess it was the beginning of my senior year [1962-1963], I started researching and applying to graduate school, and I applied several places.  I wanted to get out of the northeast.  I loved Harvard, but didn't like the Boston area at all.  And, again, so having it all to do over again, I would absolutely go back to Harvard again, but I didn't like the Boston area at all.  So, I looked at places, and I did apply to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] nevertheless.
Speaker 1: Now, what was it about Boston [Massachusetts] you didn't like?  I mean, I know it's a lot different from Oklahoma [Muskogee, where Jones grew up].
Speaker 2: Well, I guess for me it just, the community, even the black community, the people I got to know outside of Harvard, it was just sort of stiff and standoffish, I guess is the best way that I can describe it.  I never really felt that the people that I knew were as friendly, for example--as outgoing, as friendly, as enjoyable as the folks that I had come to know growing up.  I just never felt, I never really felt a part of that community, I guess is a way to put it.  Or, that I wanted to be a part of it, perhaps is an even more important element of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it wasn't, I didn't hate it there.  It wasn't that I felt that I could not continue there if I needed to, but in addition to everything else, I felt that I had been there for four years, and it was time to do something different.
Speaker 1: Now Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is a stimulating place in terms of the kind of things that come to the campus, I mean speakers and events.  Did you take advantage of a lot of those things?
Speaker 2: From time to time.  I did, again, go to talks and symposium workshops, those kinds of things from time to time.  I'm sure that there were a lot of things that I could have done that I would have been interested in that I didn't do at Harvard, but again, I had a primary objective [of graduating and doing well in college].  Nevertheless, I didn't spend all of my time in the library and in the class and in the laboratory.  I was on the track team in my junior and senior year, and played intramural sports a lot from the time that I was a freshman on, so I did other kinds of things as sort of recreational activities.
Speaker 1: So, when you decide to go to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I applied to maybe half a dozen different schools, one of which was MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  And, I also knew that a lot of the important new discoveries in biochemistry--and remember, this is 1963, almost fifty years ago now, when biochemistry was really still a discipline in its infancy.  I mean, there were many institutions, top rate institutions, that didn't even have biochemistry departments.  Harvard didn't have a biochemistry department.
Story_ID: 30909
Speaker 1: Can you kind of give us the history of that, because we, I think a lot of people assume today that biochemistry, why wouldn't that be--?  What was the nature of the science then?
Speaker 2: Well, most of what we now call biochemistry, if this is what you're asking, is where you actually are looking at the sort of chemical processes that go on living systems.  Most of that was done in either biology departments or in chemistry departments.  And that was in part because of the fact that, again, in those days it wasn't really even possible in many cases, to go to a graduate program and actually get a degree in biochemistry.  As I said, even Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] didn't have a biochemistry graduate program.  You could go Harvard and get training to become a biochemist, but you'd come out with a different degree.  And a number of my colleagues, for example, that I got to know in various contacts after I left Harvard, who got their Ph.D.'s at Harvard, who in fact are appropriately described as biochemists, their degrees are in biology or chemistry.  So, the discipline was growing.  We didn't know that much.  For example, it wasn't until 1954 [sic, 1953], I believe it was, when [James D.] Watson [and Francis] Crick published their paper on the structure of DNA, so a lot of the stuff now is sort of the core of the study of biochemistry.  Those experiments and their results were only coming to light in the mid to late 1950s.  So, it was at that point when I think institutions were beginning to develop programs that ultimately became biochemistry departments.
Speaker 1: What is, you mentioned Watson [and] Crick, what is the Central Dogma, what is that?
Speaker 2: The Central Dogma is, first of all, it's no longer dogma.  But the Central Dogma, in a word, is DNA produces RNA produces protein.  That is, there's a straight line in the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein.  We now know that in fact that is not the case-- that, in fact there are offshoots to that, that you can get.  RNA has activities that we only thought protein had at one point, and there's also an enzyme that is quite well known and established now that will make DNA from RNA [reverse transcriptase].  So, there's a line now that goes back from RNA to DNA.  So, I guess you could consider that now as sort of the Central Dogma.  DNA yields RNA yields protein, except that RNA can sometimes yield DNA and protein, and RNA can actually function in the same way that protein does.
Story_ID: 30910
Speaker 1: So, you applied to--?
Speaker 2: So, I applied to half a dozen [graduate] schools, got into all but one, I think.  I didn't get into Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California].  And, because of the fact that a lot of what I thought, at any rate, were the exciting developments in biochemistry were going on the west coast, I decided that of the schools that I had been admitted to, that the place that I wanted to go was UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, again, UC Berkeley had one of the few biochemistry, actual biochemistry departments in the country.  And, arguably, it was the best biochemistry department in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So you go out there in 1963?
Speaker 2: 1963, fall of '63' [1963].
Speaker 1: And how did you like that?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  In addition to, again, the university, I found that I still don't consider myself a West Coast person.  I really enjoyed living in the Bay Area [California] for the time that I was there.  So, I really did enjoy my time at Berkeley, both educationally and academically, but also personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were out there--well, politically, when they had the Free Speech Movement [1964-1965]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Mario Savio, you know...
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't participate in those activities, but I did some other--I became more politically active, and one of the things that I did that I'm actually quite proud of, I participated in a tutorial program in East Oakland for middle school and high school students that was run by the Black Panthers.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  The Panthers started up in 1966, Huey P. Newton, did you meet Newton?
Speaker 2: I never met Huey Newton, I met [Robert George] "Bobby" Seale [co-founders of Black Panther Party].
Speaker 1: Bobby Seale, okay.  So, what was that like?   What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I thought it was great, and I think it's the kind of thing you don't hear about.  I certainly didn't hear about then, and even to a certain extent, don't hear about now.  You know, you hear about all the bad things that--the shootouts, and that kind of thing that the Panthers were involved in, but you don't hear that they were feeding people in Oakland, [California] that they were running tutorial programs for kids in Oakland.  They were actually making positive contributions in the black community there.  And I was proud, I still am, to be a part of that.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?  Did they recruit people, or how did they...?
Speaker 2: I found out about it through a friend of mine who had some connections--I'm not exactly sure what they were, and they recruited me to participate in the program.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, this was at a--where was it?
Speaker 2: We had it at a community center.  We did tutoring at a community center in Oakland.  And I would help kids primarily with their math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, the interesting and nice thing about it was, you know, it wasn't ten kids, it was a hundred kids.
Speaker 1: So this is 1960 what?
Speaker 2: It probably would have been '66 [1966] or '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around in there.
Story_ID: 30911
Speaker 1: So, I had a great time at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  I enjoyed, as I said, the university and after my second year, it basically became a job, because I wasn't taking courses anymore.  So I was basically just going into the lab and doing experiments, and that's what I did until I finished my dissertation and rode up and left.
Speaker 2: So, what was your focus of research at UC Berkeley?  That's a great research institution.
Speaker 1: At that time, I was a carbohydrate chemist.  So, the laboratory that I was in was a laboratory that was, in fact, run by and mentored by an internationally known carbohydrate chemist [Dr. Clinton E. Ballou].  And he was interested in the structure of cell walls.  So, one of the, I can remember very clearly--I'd started on a project in his lab that wasn't terribly interesting and wasn't going very well.  And he had a room that was a little bit smaller than this one, where we had our lab meetings, and you know, could eat lunch and had conferences and so forth.  I can remember sitting at a table there one day when he was just passing through.  And I looked up at him, and I said "Dr. Ballou, I've been thinking about moving on from the project that I'm working now and trying to isolate an enzyme that will degrade a particular component of the yeast cell wall."  And he looked back at me and said, "Good, I've been wanting somebody to do that for a long time."  And that's how my thesis project got started.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So, what did you discover, I mean...?
Speaker 1: So, what I did was, I isolated, I just went outside the building and got a beaker full of soil, because I knew there would be microorganisms in that soil.  And what my hope was, and it turned out to be the case, that I could find a microorganism in the soil that would break down this particular carbohydrate, and I was able to do that.  So, I just took that soil, I made a liquid culture, and I grew the organisms up in the presence of this carbohydrate as the sole source of carbon, which means if they didn't break this stuff straight down, this carbohydrate down, they wouldn't be able to grow.  So, I was able to find a bacterial culture that was able to grow on that particular carbohydrate, and that in fact did chew it up into smaller pieces.  And so I characterized the enzyme [alpha-mannosidase] that was responsible for breaking up that carbohydrate [yeast mannan].  That was my thesis project.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what is the significance of that?
Speaker 1: Well, what we learned from that was something both important and, at that point, unknown about the structure of the yeast cell wall, because the carbohydrate that I was using to grow these bacteria, was a carbohydrate that is a major component of the cell walls of yeast, making basically the same kind of yeast that we used to make beer and to make bread and so forth.  And again, their cell walls, unlike the cell walls of some other organisms, are made primarily of carbohydrate.  This one that I was working on is one of the major components, but there were some important features of its structure which had not been determined at that point, and which it was almost impossible to determine by strictly chemical means.  That is, it was useful, if not absolutely necessary, to combine an enzymatic approach with a chemical approach to try to understand those details of structure, which were at that point unknown.  So, the enzyme that I was able to isolate was the enzyme that degraded the carbohydrate in a specific fashion and told us something about the structure of that carbohydrate that we didn't previously know.  Therefore, it told us something about the yeast cell wall that we didn't previously know.
Speaker 2: Okay, the enzyme is produced by bacteria?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you got your Ph.D. in 1968 [from University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: And what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 1: It was about that enzyme and its properties and its function in degrading that carbohydrate.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  And you worked with Dr. Clinton E. Ballou, that's who the professor was?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Well, was he, would you consider him a mentor?
Speaker 1: He was, I think in a very real sense.  And the interesting thing is that one of the things that I like best about him was that he knew when I needed help and when to leave me alone.  Somehow, maybe it was his experience, I'm not sure exactly what it was, but he seemed to sense when I was struggling and he needed to come in and help me.  And, he also seemed to sense when things were going just fine, and when I didn't want to be bothered.  And, so I think he was the ideal person for me to work with at that point in my career.
Story_ID: 30912
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So this is, now, UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] is a very intense research environment, you know, people there around the clock.  What was it, was that what your day was like here every day?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly once I started working in the lab full-time, yeah.  I was probably in the lab minimum--I shouldn't say minimum--average, ten hours a day.  And again, it was, you know, evenings, weekends--not because I necessarily felt that I was under any sort of specific kind of pressure to produce or whatever, but because that was simply the tempo that was required in order to do the experiments.  If I had cells growing, then I might have to collect those cells at a particular time.  And it didn't matter if that time--if it was midnight or if it were 4:00 o'clock on Sunday afternoon.  If that's when the cells needed to be collected, that's when I needed to collect them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we often see scientists like driven-- with projects driving what they do.
Speaker 2: Well, it is, but it's not--because, for me, it wasn't because I felt that I had to get to some particular point, some particular end point.  It was the fact that I enjoyed what I was doing, and the fact that I was willing to put in the time, whenever that time might be, in order to get to the end point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I published three papers as a graduate student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  "The Journal of Biological Chemistry"?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In 1968, and one in May, and in February of 1969, okay.  And one of your articles has been cited ninety-four times, according to Google Scholar [an online scholarly article search engine] in other publications.
Speaker 2: Who else was at UC Berkeley that was important to you?
Speaker 1: Well, I took an immunology course from a fellow named Leon Wofsy, W-O-F-S-Y, and I really liked him.  At that point, I actually thought for a moment that I was going to go into immunology.  He was a good teacher and a nice guy, and he would talk to me about career issues.  And again, I guess to a certain extent I would consider him to be a mentor, too, although I ultimately decided that I did not want to go into immunology and sort of lost contact with him as my career progressed at Berkeley.  But, certainly early on, he was a person who did have--influence me.  And the course that he taught was one of the more valuable courses I took as a graduate student, and some of the things I learned there have been of value to me in my subsequent professional career, because I have had to use immunological techniques to do some of the kinds of research that I even do now.
Story_ID: 30913
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduate [from University of California, Berkeley, in 1968], you begin work with the National Institutes of Health [NIH]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us how that came about.
Speaker 2: Well, it actually came about through Dr. [Clinton E.] Ballou, my Ph.D. advisor.  So, because I had done work on an enzyme, he felt that it would probably be a good idea for me to get some additional training in enzymology, in the study of enzymes and how they work and so forth.  And so, he knew the person that I went to NIH to work with, and wrote to him and said, "I've got this graduate student who's about to graduate" and I hope he said, "and he's a good guy and has done good work in my lab and would you be willing to take him on as a post doctoral fellow in your labs?"  So, he said yeah.  So, I applied for a fellowship from an agency which still actually provides post-doctoral support, called Helen Hay Whitney Foundation, and they provided me with a post-doctoral fellowship, and I spent the first two years of that fellowship at the NIH.  The first year was in the laboratory of Dr. Herbert Weissbach, W-E-I-S-S-B-A-C-H.  And he then left to go to a molecular biology institute that was run or sponsored by Roche Pharmaceuticals.  I didn't want to go, so I stayed at the NIH and worked for another year or so in the laboratory of Dr. Alan Peterkofsky, P-E-T-E-R-K-O-F-S-K-Y, and so I was at the NIH for a little bit more than two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you learn there, or what did you eventually do there?
Speaker 2: At the NIH, I first started, when I first got there with Dr. Weissbach I started to work on the system that I'm actually continuing to work on now.  And that's the bacteria called Streptomyces [Streptomyces antibioticus], so I actually started my studies of Streptomyces in Dr. Weissbach's lab.  And the purpose, the sort of biological interest of that system, is that streptomyces make antibiotics.   So, I was particularly involved then, and to a certain extent, still am involved in studying the production of an antibiotic called actinomycin, you may have heard of it.  And so I began doing that at Dr. Weissbach's lab.  Now, Dr. Peterkovsky worked on a different system.  So, when Weissbach left, and I needed to move to another laboratory, I knew that it was not going to be possible for me to continue my studies on actinomycin.   It probably was not even desirable because it gave me an opportunity to learn some new kinds of things in Dr. Peterkovsky's lab.  So, Peterkovsky worked on basically protein synthesis, and I was involved in trying to understand how particular kinds of amino acids [building blocks of proteins] are made and incorporated into proteins by various kinds of biological systems.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now you're there for two years?
Story_ID: 30914
Speaker 1: Just about two years, then in 1970, you get another post-doctoral--well, no, it says here you used the same fellowship.
Speaker 2: Same fellowship.
Speaker 1: Okay, same fellowship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same fellowship, but a different position.  I went to the University of Geneva.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Switzerland?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about that experience, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Well, again, it was a great experience for me. The sort of history is that--one of the systems that I worked on in Peterkovsky's lab was also a system that was being studied by this guy at the University of Geneva, Bernard Mach, M-A-C-H.  And, what he said to me was, "Here's an opportunity for you to spend some time in a foreign country."  I'd never been out of the United States--well, Mexico--but I had never even been to Canada before that point, and certainly hadn't lived anyplace outside the United States--"So here's the opportunity for you to live outside of the United States for a little while and further your scientific career at the same time."  As sort of an aside, it's probably in there--I'd gotten married by this time, so I was still married at that time--so my then wife and I thought that it would be an excellent opportunity, to get away and see what it's like to live someplace else.
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet your wife in California?
Speaker 2: I met my wife in California, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So, we packed up and went to Geneva in 1970.  And I had a terrific time.  I learned a lot, enjoyed living in Geneva sort of in terms of the environment.  The only real issue, and I don't want to minimize it, even then, Geneva was a very expensive place to live.  And, I was only making something like $9,000 a year from my fellowship.  My wife was not working.  We tried, but couldn't find anything for her.  So, it was tough to get by on that amount.
Speaker 1: Was there a language barrier there?
Speaker 2: It turned out not to be that serious a problem.  I knew some French.  I took a French course after I got to Geneva, so my French improved, and everybody in the laboratory spoke English anyhow, so it wasn't an issue.  As a matter of fact, I'd say--I can't give you a number--a significant number of people in the institute where I was working were Americans, who were there just like I was, on fellowships or other postdoctoral kinds of situations that had brought them from the U.S. [United States] to Switzerland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a particular highlight of that trip?
Speaker 2: Oh, a particular highlight of that--well, I guess sort of a category of highlight was Geneva was situated so that you were only a few hours from almost anyplace else in Europe that you wanted to go.  So, one of the highlights was the fact that it was possible to use Geneva as a jumping off point to travel to many other parts of Europe.  So, I went to Scandinavia, Germany, France, Italy--I did a lot of traveling because of the convenience of getting out of Geneva and getting into these other cities and countries because of its location.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see, so you're there until '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: '71 [1971], fall of 1971.
Story_ID: 30915
Speaker 1: So in '71 [1971] you take up a professorship in the zoology department at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Alright, and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't remember who it was.  It probably was someone who had a larger impact on my career than I'm remembering at this point, but someone had advised me that it's going to be hard to get a job if you're not in the country.  It's going to be hard to get a job in the U.S. [United States] if you're not in the country when you're looking for it.  So, it would make some sense for you--telling me--it would make some sense if it's at all possible, for you to find a job before you go to Geneva [Switzerland, as part of his fellowship].  So, I actually went on the job market in the spring of 1970, before I left to go to Geneva.  And, again, I applied for positions that were available at a number of institutions.  I applied for a job at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], I applied for a job at UC San Diego [University of California, San Diego], and I applied for the job at the University of Michigan, and interviewed at all of those places, and ultimately decided that the best situation for me was the situation at Michigan and for a number of reasons, one of which was because of the fact that I was replacing a person whose area of research was similar to mine, and he was going to be leaving all of his equipment and stuff behind.  So, I'd be going into a laboratory that was already almost fully equipped, if I had took that position at Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Plus, Michigan was willing to hold the job for me for a year.  As it turned out, it ended up being a little bit more than a year.  So, I actually took the position at Michigan before I went to Geneva.
Story_ID: 30916
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me go back a little bit.  I didn't ask about this.  Now, when you worked for the National Institutes of Health, you were in Washington?
Speaker 2: Bethesda [Maryland].
Speaker 1: You were in Bethesda?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't ask you about this.  But, usually everybody's got a story about when [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in 1968, and the events around that.  Do you remember what was going on there?
Speaker 2: I got to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] that year, right after the riots.  So, I was still in Berkeley [California] when he was assassinated.  And, again, while there wasn't the same sort of public response as there was in D.C., needless to say it was an event that affected us all very profoundly.  But I got to D.C. probably three or four days after the end of the riots.  It would have been late April, mid to late April of 1968.
Speaker 1: So you were almost in transition during that period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly.  And, you know, there were still, as you might imagine, plenty of evidence that the riots--there were still lots of signs that the riots had taken place.
Speaker 1: There were tremendous riots in D.C. in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the city was calm by that point, and I had relatives there.  I had two cousins there, and in fact, stayed with one of my cousins, my wife and I, while we were getting set up looking for places to live, and that kind of thing.  So, again, as related to my experience there, although I was working in Bethesda, we lived in the District [Washington, D.C.].  And, I think that probably was less a conscious decision than the way things worked out, but it worked out, I think, much for the best.  I loved living in D.C.
Speaker 1: What part of town did you live in?
Speaker 2: We lived over near the zoo [National Zoological Park, Washington, D.C.], 16th [Street NW] and Columbia [Road NW].
Story_ID: 30917
Speaker 1: So, back, now we're in Ann Arbor, Michigan, 19..?
Speaker 2: '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: '71 [1971], okay.  Well, how did you like the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: I loved it, yeah.  When I ultimately left there seventeen or eighteen years later, it wasn't because I was dissatisfied with Michigan--I had a great time in Michigan.  I enjoyed the University, even got to the point where I liked winter.  Yeah, I was treated well there, I had good experiences there, and rose through the ranks to full professor.  I think the only thing that I would change about my experience at Michigan was, and again, hindsight's always 20/20, is I took an administrative position in 1984, associate dean of the graduate school.  Having it to do all over again, I probably wouldn't have done that.
Speaker 1: Okay, why not?
Speaker 2: It took me away from my research.  I had just come back from a very productive sabbatical and was really, I think, poised to move my research activities to a different level.  I don't know that I ever got to what I think is that level, maybe I did.  But if I did, I certainly didn't get there nearly as quickly as I would have if I hadn't taken that position, that administrative position.  I thought I was doing the right thing at the time and maybe I was, but having it to do over again, I wouldn't do it.
Story_ID: 30918
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we have here that in 1973, based on some of your research papers, your research considers the microbiology of tumors and myelomas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that point that was the system that I started working on when I went to the University of Geneva [Switzerland].  So, it was mouse plasma cell tumors, basically the same kind of tumors that produce myelomas.  And, I was interested in--those are also the cells that make antibodies, which is why when they're damaged that causes--which is one of the reasons why that causes your body to deteriorate.  So, what I was interested in, though, was how they make those antibodies.  I was interested in the mechanism of antibody synthesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why I was using the myelomas as a model system to study that question.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1976, now I'm trying to, you know, pinpoint the highlights here, and in 1976, the NIH publishes a paper called 'Guidelines for Research on Recombinant DNA'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how is that significant to what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, it was not significant to me.  It was significant because what that did essentially was to usher in the era of recombinant DNA technology.  That was when, it was during that period that the first gene cloning experiments were performed and published.  And it was at that time that people were starting to utilize those kinds of techniques, to begin to answer some of the fundamental questions in biology.  And, it's important to me because four years later, that's the direction I decided to go in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Up until that point, I'd basically been a traditional sort of--I don't know, there's a probably a name for it, but basically you break open the cells and you see what's inside, kind of biochemist.  With the advent of molecular genetic engineering technologies, it was possible to ask questions in a different fashion.  And within four years, it became possible to ask and answer those questions in the system I was most interested, which was not the myeloma system, but the Streptomyces [a genus of bacteria] system.  So, after the sabbatical I went on in 1980, no '82 [1982] I guess it was, 1982, my research, although I continued to work on other systems after that, the focus of my research after that sabbatical became Streptomyces.  And I should add at this point that I have always wanted to do Streptomyces after my first post-doctoral stint at the NIH.  The problem was that--there were two problems.  One, even in those days, where it was possible to get--where research funding wasn't nearly as tight as it is now, Streptomyces were not, it wasn't a sexy system, it just wasn't that easy to get money to do that kind of research.  So, I would--usually in a research grant, I would say, "In addition to what I'm going to do in the myeloma system, or skeleton muscle system, or whatever, which were much more visible, and therefore likely to be able to garner research support, I'd say I also want to spend a little time working on Streptomyces if that's okay.  Back in those days, people didn't care, so I'd have a few tens of thousands of dollars in this research grant that I could use for the streptomyces work just so that I could keep it going.  What happened that changed all of that in the early 1980's was the development of these genetic engineering techniques in Streptomyces.  It became possible to do the kinds of things in Streptomyces that had been possible to do in other kinds of bacteria, like e-coli some years earlier.   So, that was actually what I went on sabbatical for in 1982.  I went to the John Ennis Center, actually back then it was the John Ennis Institute in Norridge, England, which was then and really still is, the most prominent research facility for Streptomyces research in the world.  And the laboratory that I was in was in the laboratory of the person who I think is probably appropriately referred to as the godfather of Streptomyces genetics.  His name is David Hopwood, H-O-P-W-O-O-D.  And I learned how to do gene cloning in streptomyces, that was what I was there for.
Speaker 1: What was his name again, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: H-O-P-W-O-O-D, Hopwood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Professor Sir David Hopwood.  He was knighted about fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you come back fully armed to do this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was ready to roll.  I had, after a couple of iterations, I got an NIH [National Institutes of Health] grant to support just the streptomyces work.  And then I became a dean [associate dean of the graduate school at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did becoming a dean like kind of slow down what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the point I was making a few minutes ago.  That was something I'd do differently if I had to do it over again.  I would not have taken that position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, how long did you stay?
Speaker 2: I think two years.  I think I was in that position for two years, maybe a little bit longer.  It was only a part-time appointment, but it was more than half--I think it was a quarter time appointment, but I spent more than a quarter of my time in the job.  And again, it was time that I didn't have to spend in the lab.
Story_ID: 30919
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it after you were Dean that you published the paper on actinomycin [a type of antibiotic]?
Speaker 2: Which one, which one are you referring to?
Speaker 1: 'Actinomycin and DNA Transcription.'
Speaker 2: I don't have a paper of that specific title.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's basically the work that we were doing during that period, was on transcriptional and other forms of regulation of actinomycin production.  So, we worked on this particular streptomyces, an organism called streptomyces antibiotic studies, an actinomycin producer, and we were interested, and still are, in using molecular genetic approaches, gene cloning approaches, to try to understand the mechanism that results in the production of that antibiotic, and also how it's regulated.  What causes it to start, what happens once it starts, why does it make as much as it does, etc.?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're still interested in those questions twenty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's the significance of actinomycin?  It's an antibiotic, but...?
Speaker 2: Actinomycin is an anti-tumor agent.  It's an antibiotic and it has an antibiotic effects on bacteria.  But in terms of its clinical significance, it's an anti-tumor agent.  It's even, as far as I'm aware, it's still used to treat certain kinds of tumors that turn out not to be treatable using other kinds of chemotherapy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, cancer patients are prescribed actinomycin for certain kinds of tumors?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  But, you want to know more about it [actinomycin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to understand the antibiotic, about sort of a longer term goal of the research that I'm doing. If you want to think in practical terms, it's that if we understand these kinds of things about one or several antibiotics, we probably will be able to utilize that information to manipulate these systems to get them to do more and better things for us.  So, some guys published a paper five or six years ago where they estimated the number of antibiotics that this group of organisms, Streptomyces, as a group, is capable of producing.  And the number they come up with is about one hundred thousand.  The number we've actually found is about three thousand, so there are lots of these antibiotics apparently still out there waiting to be discovered if we can figure out how to do it.
Speaker 1: So there's lots of work out for biochemists for a long time to come, apparently?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 30920
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're still, you're a professor of biology by 1986, a full professor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Now, why did you, what happened to compel you to move to Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1989?
Speaker 2: So, one of my long time colleagues at Michigan is a fellow named Billy Frye, F-R-Y-E.  Billy was a faculty member in the zoology department when I got to Michigan.  We became friends.  He subsequently, and he would scowl at me for saying this, but he subsequently forsook science, and went into academic administration.  He was seduced by the dark side.  And, he became, I think, first, an associate dean in the undergraduate college at Michigan.  He subsequently became dean of the undergraduate college and ultimately became provost at the University.  He left Michigan around 1987 or 1988 [sic, 1986] to become dean of the graduate school here at Emory.  He then, after having come to Emory, became Emory's first provost.  Emory had never had a provost before in 1987 or 1988, and the then president of the university, [James] "Jim" Laney, tapped Billy to be his provost [Frye later served as chancellor of Emory University from 1997 to 2001].  That meant that there was a vacancy in the deanship of the graduate school.  So Billy called me up and said, "George, I don't know whether this is something that you'd be interested in, but if you are, we're looking to hire a dean of the graduate school and if you have any interest at all, why don't you come down and take a look at us."  So, I didn't know if I really wanted to do it.  As a matter of fact, I probably thought I didn't want to do it, but I said, what the heck, I'll go down and take a look.  And, in fact, I liked what I saw.  I felt that this was an opportunity for someone to come in and really do some building of a graduate program, because Emory was not known as an institution with a strong graduate environment at that point, and I would have a chance to make a difference.  I also had been at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] for almost eighteen years, and I felt maybe it was time for a change.  I was comfortable there, and maybe I was too comfortable, and I felt maybe it was time to get up and do something different.  So, in the end I felt that this was a good opportunity.  And, in addition to everything, I think what was probably the deciding factor--I'm sure I would not have done it otherwise, or taken any other such position otherwise--is that it was clear that I would be able to come here and be dean of the graduate school but still keep my lab going.  I would not have to give up science entirely.  And, I wasn't ready to do that, and so I would have not taken any administrative position if it required that I give up science completely.  So, I moved out here in 1989, and again, kept my lab going and brought down two people from Michigan with me and hired a couple of other people after I got here, and became dean of the graduate school and vice president for research.
Story_ID: 30921
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, how's it been [working at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It's been good.  Unlike the situation at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], I don't regret having taken the graduate deanship, although again, that did interrupt, and to a certain extent, impede the development of my science.  What I do regret in this context is that in 1996 when I stopped being dean of the graduate school here at Emory, I regret that I didn't leave Emory at that point.  Not because there was anything wrong with this as an intellectual environment--Atlanta is a good place to live or whatever. And this was actually a point I made in an email that I sent to, I think, Kenneth Preski [production scheduler for The HistoryMakers] about why there was not a faculty colleague that would have been useful for me to bring in to this interview.  That's because I don't have any colleagues here, and that's because of the way I got into this department [biology department].  I was appointed in this department because of my position as dean of the graduate school.  I came back to this department because it was then my natural professional home as a faculty member.  But this department is very strong in several different areas.  None of those are my area.  So, I don't have any real colleagues here.  My colleagues--I've never published with any other faculty member at Emory.  I may be the only person in this department about whom that's true.  When I publish papers with other colleagues, they're at other institutions--now, other people here do the same, but I do it uniquely.  That is, I don't have other faculty colleagues here with whom I publish because they're not people who are working on or are interested in the areas in which I do my research.  So, it would have been best for me, I think, when I stepped down as dean to have gone to an institution where I had colleagues whose research interests were more coincident with mine.  I had an NIH grant, again, at that time and I was young enough, I think, where I would have been attracted to other institutions, but I just didn't--it wasn't that I tried and nobody wanted me, I didn't even try.
Speaker 1: This is 1996?
Speaker 2: '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay, so your dean position--your position as dean...?
Speaker 2: I resigned.  I decided I did not want to do academic administration as a career.  I enjoyed the time I spent as dean and vice president.  And, during one of those years, as your data probably show, I was actually acting dean of Emory College, so I was basically dean of everything that year [1990].   And I had a good time, worked hard, but had a good time.  I learned a lot about how universities work.  But in the end, I decided that I did not want to be a dean, I did not want to be a provost, I did not want to be a president, and so I resigned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a note here that in 1991 that you began a new line of biological research looking at the differences in local motor activity in mice and the differences in sensitization of amphetamine, cocaine and caffeine.
Speaker 2: That's not me.
Speaker 1: So they goof--That's not you, okay.  So, we'll scratch that out.  But you've stayed with the actinomycin?
Speaker 2: Yeah, streptomyces.  I now work on other organisms.  I work on other streptomyces that make different antibiotics in addition to the actinomycin system, but I have been working on streptomyces exclusively for the last twenty years.
Story_ID: 30922
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, tell us, just kind of bring us up to date on your research.
Speaker 2: So, in 1994, I took another sabbatical back at the same place, the John Ennis Center in Norridge, England.  At that time, I was looking for a particular gene that we thought, as it turns out correctly, that was involved in regulating the production of antibiotics, not only in the organism that I work on, but in Streptomyces generally.  And that has turned out to be the case.  But as is so often the situation, you start out doing one thing and you find something that leads you in a somewhat different direction.  So, I took a particular approach to try to identify and clone this particular gene, and I cloned what I thought was that gene.  It turned out not to be that gene.  It turned out to be the gene for a completely different protein.  Just because of some similarities in biochemical properties, I got this other gene.  But that other gene turned out to be the protein that that gene encodes, turns out to be interesting in its own right.  And it turned out to be one that had not been studied in Streptomyces at all.  So, looking at that particular protein sort of got me interested in another related area of Streptomyces biology that had not been studied in any detail at all up to that point.  That would have been the late 1990s.  And that's an area that's called RNA degradation.  So, RNA is ribonucleic acid, and again, back to the question you asked about the Central Dogma, DNA yields RNA yields protein.  So RNAs are important in transferring genetic information from the genome, from the chromosome.  And, for years people looked at how you make RNA, and the ways in which that process is regulated.  And it's clear, no doubt about it, that there are important, essential mechanisms that are responsible for how you make RNA that, again, people have looked at that even now represent classical studies that appear in the textbooks.  What people have not looked so carefully at is not how you make RNA, but how that RNA is broken down.  And there are two reasons for that.  One is because it's hard.  It's not nearly as easy to study how it's broken down as it is to study how it's made.  The second is, for a long time, people thought that the breakdown was pretty much just a random process.  You just break it down, and then you just recycle those building blocks to make more RNA.  Well, it's clear now that that's not the case.  That a) the process is complex, and b) it's highly regulated, and I guess there's a 'c' too, that regulation also affects the expression of other genes.  So, you cannot only regulate the expression of genes in terms of how they're made, you can also regulate them in terms of how the products are broken down.  And as I said, very little information was known about that latter process, in Streptomyces.  So as a result of stumbling on this enzyme-- as it turns out it's an enzyme that's involved in that breakdown process--my laboratory has essentially become centrist, focused on the relationship between the breakdown of RNA and the production of antibiotics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you have, do you have a significant number of graduate students that work with you on this?
Speaker 2: I have no graduate students at this point.  And there are a couple of reasons for that, the most important of which at this point is that it's not clear how much longer I'm going to be a practicing scientist.  And I just haven't felt in recent years that it would be fair to a graduate student to take somebody on if I'm not going to be able to say I'm 100 percent dead certain I'm going to be here when it's time for you to graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So right now, if you're asking about my staff, I have a senior research associate, I have a technician, and several undergraduates working in my lab.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I wondered how--your primary responsibility now is a researcher and a teacher here at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right this minute, I'm on leave.  I'm on paid leave, but since 1996, I have been a regular house and garden variety faculty member, teaching and doing research and serving on committees.  I was chair of the department for four years, chair of this department for four years, from 2003 through 2007.
Story_ID: 30923
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you happiest doing research?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even at my advanced age [sixty nine years old], I still enjoy the research, and actually still enjoy doing experiments myself.  I don't do as much as I used to, but I still work at the bench myself from time to time.
Speaker 1: So, is there an ultimate goal you want to, is there--that you want to accomplish before you...?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah there is, there really is.  Not ultimate in the sense of answering the fundamental biological question, but really sort of serendipitously, we have used, or are beginning to use, a new approach to study the biology systems that we're interested in.  It's called high throughput DNA sequencing.   Just to give you an idea of sort of the way that that has an impact on the kind of stuff that we do in terms of understanding the structure of the genetic material and the genomes of organisms, the first living cell whose DNA was sequenced, probably took a year to get that sequence information.  It might have taken longer than that, certainly six months to a year.  Now you can do it in a week, maybe less.  And that's because of the development of new techniques that allow you to do this kind of sequencing very rapidly.  We've been able to use that technique in our system to understand some things about the relationship between RNA degradation and antibiotic production.  To my knowledge, nobody yet in the entire world, has done that, and I'm hoping that before I actually step down as a practicing scientist, that we will be able to mime, to use that approach, to mime the system and get as much information out of it as possible that will help us to understand how these processes work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's one of the reasons why I'm still involved and excited about the science, because there are things that we can do now that we couldn't even do two or three years ago.
Speaker 1: In research, the nature of research, I've been told, is that you really have to stay on the new technology...
Speaker 2: That's right.  You know, there's a real temptation to get something that works and just to keep doing it.  And that's the quickest way to stagnate.  You may become very good at it, but in the meantime, the likelihood is going to be that the science is passing you by.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we've interviewed others who have gone into administration and tried to get back to research, and find that the bus has left, the train has left the station.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  That's one of the reasons why I was not willing to completely give up my science when I became a dean, because I knew from talking to other people, in part, that if you give it up completely, it's almost impossible to come back to it.
Story_ID: 30924
Speaker 1: Is there any moment in your career that you would describe as kind of a Eureka moment, where you discovered something that you, you know, and just...?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly, when we got the data from the throughput DNA sequencing, which was about eight or nine months ago [2010]--and again, we're still getting, I'm going to be sitting down with a bio-informaticist on Friday to go back and look at some of this same data and get some additional information.  We haven't come close to miming all of the data, all of the information that is available in this data, and so that was certainly one of the most exciting moments that I can remember in my scientific career because it worked.   There was a chance it wouldn't work at all, there was a chance that if it had worked, it wouldn't have told us what we wanted to know.  And neither of those happened.  It worked spectacularly and gave us information that we weren't even expecting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so being a research scientist, primarily, some people think that you're trying to find something and you're beating your head against the wall every day, but people that we've talked to in the past kind of indicate they get a little reward everyday they learn something new.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I tell my students all the time, that almost every day I find something out that nobody has ever found out before.  It may be a little thing, but it's still something that nobody has ever done before, almost every day.
Speaker 1: What a reward.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30925
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?  You've described a couple of points where you thought that you would change something.
Speaker 2: Other than the ones that I've mentioned, I probably wouldn't.  There's certainly nothing major that I would change, I think at this point.  I would have, I probably would have turned down that associate deanship, and I would have left Emory in 1996, but other than that, I can't think of any real major changes I would have made.
Speaker 1: When you look back on your upbringing, in a black community where there was a lot of religious thought and in a Bible Belt state like Oklahoma, does your scientific training or activities in any way conflict with...?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  I believe in evolution, but I also believe in God.  And I find no conflict whatsoever.  And that's in part because of the fact that I don't pretend to have all the answers.  I think some of our brethren who consider themselves to be more religious than scientific think that they have all the answers.  I don't think they do, and I know that I don't.  And for that reason, there is no dogma that causes conflict, because there's no dogma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you be in favor of, what do they call that, they call it--creation--
Speaker 2: Intelligent design?
Speaker 1: Yeah, intelligent design.
Speaker 2: No, I don't support those, because I don't think they're sciences. I'm happy to have anyone present what they consider as an alternative scientific--let me put it differently--a scientific alternative to evolution.  Neither quote unquote, creation science, nor intelligent design are that, are scientific alternatives.
Story_ID: 30926
Speaker 1: I was reading recently and I can't cite the woman's name, but it was an article in the Discovery Magazine about a new approach to evolution.  It's basically one of the bacteria-based view of evolution, where complicated microorganisms organize themselves, and looking at it like that...
Speaker 2: It's clear that microorganisms are very sophisticated systems, that they in fact, although they grow as single cells, they are microbial communities that differentiate and that provide different services within that community.  And there's this guy at Michigan State [University, Lansing, Michigan] who has been growing a culture of E. coli from a single population that he started out with for something like twenty years.  And what he's been able to do is to actually look at evolution happening over time in that culture.  So, it's clear that evolution takes place, and there are many, many pieces of evidence that indicate that it not only has taken place in the past, it's still going on now.
Speaker 1: Could we have medical science as it exists today without the evolutionary theory?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think evolution, it has been said that evolution is to biology what math is to physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some people would disagree with that, but certainly there are others who think that that's the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30927
Speaker 1: Do you, we live in a culture today where in popular culture where there are all these antibacterial agents and hand sanitizers and wipes going on.  They seem to be so popular.  A lot of school systems just have a tank of hand sanitizers instead of sending the kids to the bathroom.  What do you think about all that?
Speaker 2: I think probably having the hand sanitizers in certain work environments is a good thing, and maybe necessary.  But the antibacterials that we use commercially are probably a bad thing.  And there have  been, as you probably are aware of, there have been recent studies that show that the antibacterials don't do anything more for you than washing your hands thoroughly with just regular soap.  What the antibacterials do is that they tend to select for resistant bacterial populations, because of the way we use them.  And clearly, one of the sort of practical outcomes of the kind of research that I do is dealing with the problem of antibiotic resistance, which is a serious problem around the world and is responsible for a lot of the epidemic illnesses that people have to deal with today.  For example, you probably know, I'm sure you know about MSRA [sic, MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus], the staph[ylococcus] aureus, and they're also many resistant strains of the organism that causes tuberculosis that are a serious problem today.  We thought that tuberculosis, until relatively recently, the last twenty years or so, was a disease which we pretty much had eradicated.  But a number of factors have basically lead to individuals who have suppressed immune systems, one of the major which is HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] infection, has lead to a resurgence of tuberculosis.  And many of those tuberculosis strains that those people have to deal with are antibiotic resistant strains.  And they're resistant strains that are produced in part as the result of the overuse of antibiotics and in part because of the misuse of antibiotics.
Story_ID: 30928
Speaker 1: Now we look back again at everything that you've done at this point.  What would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Well, I've thought about that, because that's a question that these kids ask me at the History--ScienceMakers events [NSF ScienceMakers Public Program with Center of Science and Industry, Columbus, Ohio, 2010; with the Detroit Science Center, Detroit, Michigan, 2011].  That's always one of the questions that they ask.  And I guess there's not a single simple answer to that question.  There's certainly a number of things that I have done that I'm proud of and that I think will have a lasting impact.  One of them is actually something that I did that's outside the realm of science.  During my time as dean of the graduate school [at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], probably my most significant accomplishment was that I established a program for training graduate students to be teachers.  It's called The Assistant Training and Teaching Opportunity Program.  We call it TATTO for short.  And it's a program that has really spread throughout the university and has become a model for other programs at other institutions around the country.  So, I think given the fact that many of our graduate students are Ph.D. recipients aren't going to go to research laboratories, aren't going to go to research institutes, aren't necessarily going to become scientists at a research institution like Emory, but are going to go to liberal arts institutions where their primary responsibilities will be teaching, I think having a program like this has a significant impact, not only on the students who get this training, but also on the students that they will teach and train in their careers down the line.  So, that's certainly one component of my legacy.  I hope that the other component--another component is that I have been a model to young black scholars who can see through me that it is possible for them to do what I do, and as importantly, possible for them to aspire to be something other than those sorts of professions that they may have been stimulated to think about in the past, that they can be something.  Not that there's anything wrong with being a lawyer or a doctor or a businessperson, but that they can be a research scientist if that's something that they really think they would enjoy and be good at,  and that there are black people like them who have been able to do that successfully.
Story_ID: 30929
Speaker 1: I was just thinking as you were talking, about how people sometimes disparage research in any field as being frivolous.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When all the things are falling down around us, looking at what the youth are doing in school, you know, how can you spend your time doing research and don't know the outcome of--just reading and studying and--.  How would you respond to that?
Speaker 2: Well, that I think is a legitimate question.  And I think one of the reasons people are challenged to ask that question, and I say this to colleagues and to students and others all the time, is because for so long the scientific community, in this country in particular, has taken the attitude that we know what we're doing, give us the money and let us do what we do and leave us alone.  The time is past when we can, I think, do that with the same sort of cavalier attitude that we have in the past.  And that's because of the fact that there are so many instances now in which the longer term solution to our problems are going to come from the research laboratory.  The environmental issues, you know, what's going on in Japan [earthquake and tsunami, March 11, 2011] right now, the ultimate solution to those kind of problems to keep them from happening in the future, is going to come from research laboratories.  Again, talking about some of the epidemics and pandemics, HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus], cancer--all of these are things that affect people in terms of their day to day lives and we need, we as scientists need to make the connection to show that what we are doing, in fact is going to lead to outcomes that will have an impact on them in a positive fashion, perhaps in ways that have to do with those kinds of issues that I've talked about.  What people need, what we need to help people to understand is that there have been only a handful at most of instances in which a particular medical, biological, or other kind of problem that has some connection to science has been solved as a result of an agency, a group of individuals, whatever, saying we're going to do this, we're going to solve this problem.  Richard Nixon said in the late '60s [1960s] I think, "We're going to have a cure for cancer in a decade."  He was wrong, because you can't cure cancer by deciding to cure cancer.  You cure cancer by understanding what causes cancer, and attacking those root causes.  To the extent that we are closer now to developing cures for cancer, because there's not just one kind, we're there and we're getting closer because of the fact that we are looking at and trying to understand what makes the cancer so different from a normal cell, and how you can then affect those differences in terms of treatment.  So, that's the long answer to your question.  The short answer is that basic research is fundamental to solving practical problems that people have to deal with every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a point that has not, I think, been made.  I was listening to one of the news programs.  It might have been--whatever the one on NBC is--"Meet the Press" and I did hear one of the Democratic Congress persons say something in defense of not making the same sort of deep budget cuts that the Republicans want to make, that we need to continue to provide support for agencies like the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and the NSF [National Science Foundation].  And people need to understand, and it's our responsibility to make sure that they do, that what we're doing, what I'm doing in my laboratory, has significant implications for what happens to them every day.
Story_ID: 30930
Speaker 1: Okay.  How is Atlanta as an atmosphere for doing research?  They got Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] here, I mean, Emory's here, Atlanta U. [Atlanta University] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably, for many, I think it's probably ideal.  I think people for example who are involved in epidemiology or any research that is related to infectious disease, having the CDC right next door, that just makes it...
Speaker 1: Centers for Disease Control.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that just makes this as good a place as any in the world if you're interested in any sort of infectious disease or the development of vaccines, or treatments for various kinds of infections.  I'd say this is probably the ideal place.  And just as an academic community in general, I've found Atlanta to be very conducive to research activities.  I think, as you know well, there are a number of other institutions in the city, excellent institutions.  Emory has strong connections with Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  We have in this department strong connections with Georgia Tech.  So, I have certainly felt that, as I said, my issue is not with the research environment generally.  It's with the specifics in terms of  people who are doing the kind of things that I do.  My closest colleagues are at UGA [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].
Story_ID: 30931
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your--did your parents get a chance to see you become a doctor of biology?
Speaker 2: My mother [Bernice Imonette Weaver] did.  My father [George Henry Jones] had passed by the time I got my Ph.D. [1968], but my mother was still living at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she consider that as significant as being an M.D. [medical doctor]?
Speaker 2: I don't think she even considered it as significantly as graduating from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Jones graduated in 1963].  I think she was happy, and I think she knew that it was what I wanted to do, but I think she was more impressed by my graduating from Harvard than my getting a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your family today?  Are you still married?
Speaker 2: I'm not, no.  I've been divorced for a long time.
Speaker 1: Do you have any children?
Speaker 2: I have a daughter.  She's, right now she's in a graduate program in political science at City University of New York [CUNY, New York, New York], and she's at this point ABD ["all but dissertation"] and is getting ready to take an internship to work on her dissertation.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  Now, are there any other questions that I should ask you before I ask my last question--anything, you know?
Speaker 2: I think you've probably pretty much covered everything.  I thought a little bit about the kind of things you might want to know the answers to, to make sure that I had answers prepared--or not prepared, but at least had thought about the kinds of things you might want to know, and I can't think of anything right offhand that you've left out.
Story_ID: 30932
Speaker 1: Here's something I didn't ask, and I should have asked.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I've got concerns at a lot of different levels.  Hey, what the heck, I'll say what I believe.  I'm very concerned at a sort of macrocosmic level about the balkanization of this country.  I'm concerned that our immigration policy over the last couple of decades has brought in a number of people who have, and I could be wrong about this--whose attitude is, I want to live in America, but I want it to be like Bombay [India], or Hanoi [Vietnam], or Tokyo [Japan], or Rio De Janeiro [Brazil] or Caracas [Venezuela].  What I think is happening is that the country is becoming increasingly separated because of our national and ethnic differences that have arisen, as a result, in part of immigration policies and in part because of illegal immigration and in part because of the, let's say, failure of the country to try to look at issues that have to do with creating a more--I won't say more homogenous, I'll put it the other way--less heterogeneous population.  I would argue, and I think there are people who would agree with this, that America's never been a melting pot, because that implies a sort of homogeneity that in fact has never existed in this country.  It doesn't exist now, and in fact, I think, we're getting farther from that objective.  Whether it is desirable or not, I think we're getting farther from it rather than closer to it.  And I think that one of the components of the society that suffers as a result of that, is the black component.  Because I think what has happened in recent years, is that attention has been deflected away from the needs of the black community by some of these other issues that are related to the problems that have been created by the increasing numbers of non-white, non-black citizens of this country.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of what that might be?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one good example is I think there's much, much less interest now in the specific problems of black health than there was, say a decade or twenty years ago.  You  know, the kind of things that primarily affect the black community--hypertension, HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] infection, diabetes.  I think that there's less research directed in these areas now than there used to be, and I think it's part because of funds and commitments and interests that are being directed in other areas.  At a somewhat lower level, I can give you a more specific example.  Emory [University, Atlanta, University] not only supports, but in fact publicizes, actively publicizes, touts, its diversity.  I wrote a couple of articles for one of the Emory publications--now, it's been almost fifteen years ago, in which I argued, and I still believe, that Emory has made a decision, consciously or unconsciously to become more diverse by becoming more international.  And I think a reflection of that is that the last time I checked, and I'd be willing to bet cash money that it's still true, the percentage of black students, the percentage of undergraduates at Emory College, hasn't changed in twenty years.  The percentage of international students has changed.  The percentage of students who are first generation Americans, but who are themselves--whose parents came from another country, has changed, it's gone up.  But the percentage of black undergraduates in Emory College, I'll be willing to bet, has not changed in twenty years.  And I argue that that's because the university decided consciously or unconsciously that it was going to become more diverse by becoming more international at the possible expense of the native born black American students who are perfectly qualified to go here.
Story_ID: 30933
Speaker 1: Now the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir,  how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I guess if somebody, if somebody asked somebody about me, say twenty five years from now, I would hope that the response might be that he was an excellent scientist, an excellent teacher, and a good person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
