Story_ID: 9515
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start out by--we're going to slate it. I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my name is Vernon, V-E-R-N-O-N, E., as in Edward, Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 8/15/35. Today's date is January 24th, I believe, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're at a law firm, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, in Washington, DC.
Story_ID: 9516
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone. They're a little 'People' magazine-ish. Just bear with me. But I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: That's hard to say actually. I'm a big eater. But I suspect fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I'm a man of all seasons.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I have a favorite phrase or saying.
Story_ID: 9517
Speaker 1: We start out by asking people about their background, and I'd like to start out by asking about your father, if you could state his name and tell something about his background.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father is Vernon E. Jordan, Sr. He grew up in Jasper County, Georgia--Monticello, Georgia. Left at a very early age to move to Atlanta to seek a better life, work, and to try to raise a family, and he is--his first job, as I remember, was to chauffeur for a big rich white family in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about his growing up?
Speaker 2: A little bit, not much. He remembered lynchings. He remembered the meanness and the deprivation of black people and living in rural mid-Georgia, and he clearly wanted out of there. He was one of seventeen children. His father was Charlie Jordan, and his mother was Annie Jordan. Charlie Jordan had eight of those children by one wife and seven by another, so he was a part of a huge family. His view of dinner is that he never knew that there was anything to eat about the chicken but the feet because the preacher and his guest got the good parts of the chicken, and he got the leftovers. And so he grew up with a bias about inviting preachers to dinner.
Story_ID: 9518
Speaker 1: And what about your mother? Can you talk about her and her background?
Speaker 2: My mother, Maribelle Griggs Jordan was born in Talbotton, Georgia. That's Talbott County. Came to Atlanta [Georgia] at a very early age to live on "the lot," as it was explained. By living on the lot, you lived actually in the house or on the premises of the white family for whom you worked. And she sort of started out as an upstairs maid and became the cook and at a very early age was cooking in the house of this white family. The daughters in that family were her age and her size, so when she went to church at St. Paul AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church on Sunday, where she was an usher on Sundays--some Sundays when she was not--she wore the hand-me-down clothes of these white girls in the house in which she worked. So at a very early age, she was sort of the best dressed lady at St. Paul AME Church. And it was there--my father sang in the choir, my mother was an usher. My father chauffeured, and she worked in the same neighborhood as a cook. And that is where they met. Their romance began in St. Paul AME Church.
Speaker 1: Did she talk any about her growing up there?
Speaker 2: Little bit, not much. There was a tendency, I think, on both their parts to not look back but to look forward. There is great scripture for that, forgetting those things, which are behind and reaching forth unto those things which are before. I think that was pretty much their attitude. They were both centered on family, bringing up their children, and working.
Speaker 1: Now you talk about your mother's drive and determination a lot, and I'm just wondering, where do you think that came from?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know the source of it. She was greatly inspired by my grandmother, Julia, whom I never knew. And I sensed from her conversations that my grandmother Julia was a hardworking woman in the context of segregation and deprivation at that particular time. So that as a very young woman in the late '20s [1920s], she came to Atlanta to get out of that rural, unhappy, unhealthy society to come to Atlanta to live on the lot. And you lived on the lot until you got enough economic independence to get an apartment or get a place to live. So I don't know the source of my mother's drive, her independence, her--if my mother had been trained in college and educated, she could've done anything because she did so much with so little. While she was unlettered and unlearned, she sort of had a Ph.D. in life. I say that in my book. And I don't know how she knew that it was important to be involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], but she was not only involved; she was president of the PTA in every school I attended. And once when I was in one school and my youngest brother was in another, she was president of both because somehow she knew that if she went to the PTA meetings, she could somehow help the principal and the teachers and the system make the educational experience for her boys and for the other children a little better. How she knew that, I don't know.
Story_ID: 9519
Speaker 1: When did she realize she had a skill for cooking? Let me ask--
Speaker 2: Well, working in that big house. And she actually controlled the budget and instead of on Friday night having some new entree, she would take the leavings of the rest of the week and make a delicious stew or something, so she learned how to economize in cooking. And I think she developed, as I watched her growing up, a sense of beauty about food. It was an art form for her. And I watched her as she tubed sandwiches and later as she tubed wedding cakes. Early in her catering career [Mary Jordan Catering Service, started in 1932] she subcontracted, or outsourced, as they say now, her catering business once to Durden's Bakery. Nancy Durden ran that bakery on 10th Street. And then after that, Nancy died. Two white women out near West Atlanta [Georgia], and before there was a party. We would go there, and we would pick up these cakes. And she decided that she could do that herself. There's a school in Chicago [Illinois], at least there was, called Milton's Cake Decorating School [ref. to Wilton School of Cake Decorating, founded in 1929] and my mom packed up, went there, stayed three weeks, came back, and she did her own cakes, 'cause she was having to pay the outsourcing contract and then charge for that to her customer. So she took out that outsourcing cost and sharpened her own creative skills as a caterer. She was the CEO [chief executive officer] of our family. She knew about inventory. She knew about buying. In the early days of her cooking and catering, she would go early in the morning to the homes of white people, clean up, then go buy the groceries, then cook, then serve, then clean up. I remember when she got three fifty a day for that. And then she slowly progressed to the point that if you were having 150 people for cocktails from four to six, she would get there at two thirty and bring the tablecloths, the highball glasses, the cocktail glasses, the ice, the food, the silver service. It was a full-service catering business, and I grew up in it, and I'm so eternally grateful for that experience. Because it was a twofold experience--twofold in the sense that it made us--we became acquainted with the work module that you earn your keep, but it also exposed you to a culture of entertaining, a social culture of conversation with friends over a cup of tea and over a cup of punch. And that has benefited me in my life because our home was always--our home always swung back on welcome hinges--doors of our house, and I felt very free to take friends home and spend the night. And I was never worried that there would not be enough to eat, nor was I worried about the quality of the food. It was what we had, and it was what we shared. And my father worked in the business. He would come home from his government job, and he would tend bar. I expect I've been tending bar since I was about ten years old. I used to just pass the hors d'oeuvres, or fan the flies from the wedding cake. But it was all a part of a family business, and we were all into it. And it was about service, it was about work. But it was also exposure to how you did things socially.
Speaker 1: And your mother had some very highbrow clients?
Speaker 2: The best.
Speaker 1: That's what's impressive about it.
Story_ID: 9520
Speaker 1: I want to go back to what your earliest memory is of growing up--your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: I grew up in the first public housing project for black people in Atlanta [Georgia]--University Homes. [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt came in '37 [1937] to dedicate University Homes, which was right in the neighborhood with the Atlanta University Center. He also went to Techwood Homes [public housing] over near Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] to dedicate the first public housing project for white people in America. This is 1937; we were a separate people. My childhood in the housing projects, University Homes, was a happy, adventurous, exciting childhood. In the process of writing 'Vernon Can Read,' that was one of the things I had to explain to publishers and editors, that despite the fact that we lived in a segregated, sometimes dehumanizing circumstance, that we did not live unhappy lives because there was structure to our life. There was home. There was school. There was the Gate City day nursery. There was St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church. And there was choir rehearsal, the St. Cecilia Choir every Monday and every Friday at five o'clock. And there was no issue as to whether you would attend--it was mandated, and we enjoyed it. And the Boy Scout meeting was on Wednesday. And then on Saturday, we went to the Butler Street YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. And for a time after school when we were in elementary school, we would leave elementary school and go to the Gate City day nursery. That was a Community Chest--now United Way agency--and that was Mrs. Kelly and Mrs. Carter, and they were social workers. And they looked after us until our parents got off work on to a certain time when we walked home. So there was structure, and we had a good time. There was also tension. And the tension was that kids who lived on Trainham and Chapel Street adjacent to the public housing project where they had outdoor toilet facilities right in the middle of the city of Atlanta, they viewed kids who lived in the housing project as uppity because they had running water and steam heat, and so there was that tension of sort of between the haves and the have-nots. Also, there was no stigma, as I think maybe exists today for living in the housing project. And University Homes teachers lived there. Businessmen lived there. It was a maximum feasible participation community. There was the schoolteachers and the public elementary and high schools, but there was also Mr. Bloodworth, the iceman. And there was--I can't even remember his name now, but the Pullman [train] porters and the dining car waiters and the men who worked in the post office, and there were one or two number guys around who--we were all there. We were all one community. One of the great joys of the housing projects in 1941, when Joe Louis [boxer] was fighting Billy Conn, every radio in the court was on, and you could just walk through the court and hear Dom Dunfrey give you blow-by-blow descriptions of Joe Louis's--he lost to him in '41 [May 1941], I believe. Then he beat him in '46 [1946]. But whenever Joe Louis fought, we were all there cheering, cheering for Joe Louis. It was a community event, and there was nobody in the community that was not involved in it. So it was a great childhood.
Story_ID: 9521
Speaker 1: I remember in 1946 or '45  [1945], we were quarantined for scarlet fever. My mother had scarlet fever. And they come and they put this sign up, and you can't go outdoors. You have to stay in. The sheets have to be done. It was very interesting. But also, I had both fond memories of the difficulty every Thursday of having to come out of the tree, come off the football field, or come out of the sandlot because our mother called us and we had to go in and take a bath and put on a shirt that buttoned on to your pants. And you put on sandals, and you put Jergens lotion on your legs so there would be no ash. And then you would get your little brother in tow and with the music book, pass right by those trees or sandboxes or the football game on the way to music practice--to piano lessons. And that was a big problem because, you know, you had to deal with the 'sissy' accusation, and it was exacerbated by the fact that when you got to Mrs. Rosalind Days's house, right through Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus of the Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] campus, which is a big thing as a kid, to live across the street from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], Clark College, Morehouse College, and not far from Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], there was something about walking through those campuses and seeing those buildings and seeing Dr. James P. Brawley, the president of Clark [College], and seeing Dr. Rufus Clement, the president of Atlanta University, as he would come out in his three-piece suit with his Phi Beta Kappa [academic honor society] key and his spats, and he drove a big blue Lincoln Con[tinental automobile]. That was--we walked and said, "God, I'd like to do that someday." I mean, I can remember coming from the Ashford Theater on a Saturday afternoon and seeing Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, president of Morehouse, striding across the campus with this erect posture. And so twenty feet behind him, I'm trying to walk like Benjamin E. Mays. We ultimately became friends and colleagues. The proximity of this public housing project to the Atlanta University Center complex somehow was directly related to the fact that I always knew that I was going to college, and it was not a debatable issue. I was certain of that every day that I got up to go to school. This piano thing we were going to Mrs. Days's house, and the living room was here, and the music room was here, and there was this circular sofa. And you sat as you arrived, and there were very cute little girls with plaited hair, with bows and their organdy dress and their patent leather shoes all dressed up. And some would come before you, and some would come after you. And then when it's your turn, you had taken your lesson in the music room while the others are watching, sitting on the sofa waiting their turn. For most of us boys, my brother and I, we had not practiced--we had not rehearsed. And Mrs. Days was tough, and she taught piano with the ruler in her hand. And so when you hit the wrong key or you missed middle C, you got cracked on the knuckles. That was not just embarrassing, but it also hurt, and so there were tears coming down, and there were girls sitting out there. I mean it was--well, regrettably--and I regretted it all my life--both my brother and I stopped piano lessons in large part because of that stigma and practicing with the girls. And we started taking--playing the trumpet and the trombone. I played the trombone. But, you know, the problem with that is that you cannot walk into your house at midnight after a nice party and take out your trumpet and start playing it. What I envy so much, and my wife, who can come in and go to the piano and play anything from Bach to Brahms or Mozart to 'Amazing Grace.' That's a wonderful thing, and it's one of my regrets, so much so that I have flirted with the idea for years of secretly taking piano lessons, not telling a soul, and then at Christmas dinner, just start playing 'Silent Night.' I've not done it yet, but it's on my agenda.
Speaker 2: There's always time.
Story_ID: 9522
Speaker 1: I want to go back. Your brother--will you give their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two brothers--had two brothers, Warren Harding Griggs, a stepbrother, who was older, is now deceased. He was in the CCC camp [Civilian Conservation Corps, a New Deal public works program], my mother's child, in the CCC camp, and he was growing up our hero because he was a bigger guy, and he was in the CCC camp, and he was in World War II, and he took us on our first big trip. He took us to Chicago [Illinois]. We drove to Chicago. We ate in all of the good places to eat on the South Side of Chicago, and we saw relatives and friends of his because he had gone to Greer College in Chicago [in Hoopeston, Illinois], which was an industrial school, and so he knew the city. He'd lived there. And so he'd come back home to take his little brothers up. But he was wonderful, and we idolized him, and he was fabulous, and he ultimately went into the food business, became a chef, was a very distinguished chef. Had a great career as a chef and passed away in 1999. My youngest brother, Windsor, seventeen months younger than me, we were great friends growing up, and we did a lot of things together because he was just a year behind me. He was the less serious one, my mother would say, and I was, by some measure, the more serious one. But he was the greatest fun, and still is. He now runs my mother's catering service.
Speaker 1: Now, were you like treated almost like twins, or were you the--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No.
Speaker 1: --typical older brother?
Speaker 2: I was the older brother. And as it relates to my other brother, I was in the middle. But no, we were not twins, and we were different. I was the more studious of the two of us, and I was always winning declamation contests. I was always saying readings at the St. Cecilia choir, and I always made the best Easter speech. Windsor wasn't much interested in that.
Story_ID: 9523
Speaker 1: Were you your mother's favorite, though?
Speaker 2: My mother had a theory that a mother's love inexorably and disproportionately flowed to the weakest child. And so it's not clear that I was a favorite, but what was clear that Windsor, my brother, got a disproportionate amount of caring and loving because she thought he needed it most. Warren and I were a little bit more independent, a little bit more self-sufficient.  But I don't think she--she would always say, "I love all my children," and when some nice Christian lady would come up when we were all there and say, "Which one is the smartest?" I mean that really upset her, and she would just say, "All of my boys are smart," because that was a dumb question, you see. And she also made sure that whatever sibling rivalry there was, it was a natural kind of sibling rivalry; it was not based on grades or achievements. I mean we were all taught to be proud of each other.
Story_ID: 9524
Speaker 1: In your experience at St. Paul, was it a positive experience? I know it was an integral part of the community, but was--
Speaker 2: At St. Paul Church? Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about what--
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, the best day of the week, of my week, was walking to Sunday school every morning with my father. That was our time. We had a big breakfast, and then we walked to Sunday school together every Sunday morning, rain or shine. And we liked that, and he liked it.  And we would get to St. Paul, and he would go to (teach his) Bible class, and we would go to our classes. My brother and I were in the same class. Brother J.R. Smith was our teacher. And then Mr. James Florence, who's still living. And we just had this wonderful time in Sunday school. And then after Sunday school between church and Sunday school, we would meet our father, and we would go to the little Colored store for a soda together, and that was a kind of fraternization with him that we liked, and he really enjoyed the (teaching his) Bible class. And then after that, my mother would join us at church--she would drive. And we sat on the same pew, and my mother, as was the tradition in the South, held my father's hat in her lap. And we sat there, and we listened, and we took communion together--well, not together, the grown people and then the children went. But then after church, the people gathered outside, and we would always take Sister Fannie Green home for dinner, sometimes Mamma Kemp. And that dinner, that dinner was a big family occasion. And then the recreation after dinner was to drive Ms. Fannie Green or Mama Kemp back to the white section of town, where they lived on the lot. And we looked forward to that, and we looked forward to the conversation, to the gossip about the church, and conversations around the dinner table then were not necessarily all inclusive and participatory. You know, children spoke when they were spoken to, and there was no dissent. But it was meaningful.
Speaker 1: Was there any discussion in your house about AME [African Methodist Episcopal] versus Baptist? Was that ever a discussion?
Speaker 2: No, no, we were--my mother and father met in St. Paul [church], we grew up there, so that was it. I do not remember ever during my time the preacher coming to my house because of my father's--because of my father's bias. I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good, though I've heard that story. A lot of kids around hated to see the preacher come because they couldn't eat anything.
Speaker 2: Right, until he was finished.
Story_ID: 9525
Speaker 1: Tell about the schools--your schools, schooling.
Speaker 2: My first school was the Walker Street Elementary School. Ms. Hill was my first grade teacher. Mrs. E.J. Martin was my third grade teacher. I was madly in love with Ms. E.J. Martin. She was a beautiful woman. And I remember seeing her in the bar after I was in college, the Lincoln Country Club. And I went in and I saw her, I said, "Hello, Mrs. Martin--" Ms. Martin, she wasn't married. I said, "Hello, Ms. Martin."  She said, "Come here, boy. Now, let's get something straight. I did not teach you. Do you understand that? We were in school together."  It was so wonderful, and she died of cancer at a very early age, and it was heartbreaking because I thought she was so beautiful and such fun, and I guess--I didn't know it then, but it's obviously what I thought, she was very sexy. But my teachers I liked, they were tough. And we were using hand-me-down books. The per-pupil expenditure for black kids at that time was less than it was for white kids, but these were dedicated teachers. I remember Mrs. Tate. She was very good at math, and she was--she was on us during Negro History Week, and she taught us about Paul Laurence Dunbar [poet]. "Lies, lies, you'd best heed Lord, don't you know the days are broad. Why, if you don't get up, you scant there'll be trouble in this camp every morning, the morning through. I have trouble. Either you lies, lies, don't you hear me call? Don't you dare to turn to that wall."  I learned that--that was E.R. Tate in the third grade, fourth grade, in the Walker Street School. I think I say this in the book, the huge disappointment the year that I was sixth grade when they were selecting students to play the part of various historic and current Negroes, and I wanted to be Joe Louis because Joe Louis in the '40s [1940s] was the man. He was the man. But my best friend, who now lives in Kansas City [Missouri] and we talk once a quarter, he got the part of Joe Louis, and he did not have to be announced when he walked on stage. He walked on stage, boxing gloves and boxing shorts on, and went to the end of the stage, and they were already cheering before he said, "I am Joe Louis."  I was given the role of William Grant Still, whose name is misspelled in the first edition of the book, but we corrected it. And I had on this sort of paper black tie, white tie, white tails--I mean black tie and tails.  And with baton in my hand, I walked to the center of the stage and very proudly said, "I am William Grant Still, and I conduct Tchaikovsky and New York Philharmonic. Not much response (laughs) from the audience. As I think about it, on the other hand, I think my teachers probably rightly cast me as William Grant Still and rightly cast Frank as Frank Hill.[sic.,Joe Louis] At the time, I didn't like it.
Speaker 1: Because you wanted to be--to play the popular character--
Speaker 2: Wanted to be the man.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) The man, the man.
Speaker 2: The man.
Speaker 1: That's right (laughs).
Story_ID: 9526
Speaker 1: What would you say you were like as a child? I mean what was--were you--was there an introspective part of you? Were you, you know, rambunctious? Were you--I mean were you well mannered? I mean were you a dreamer? What were you?
Speaker 2: Well--what was I? Smart, and thought to be smart, and thought I was smart. I made very good grades. There was a tad of certainty about me that I--I mean I wanted to be president of class in the first grade. And so these--this need to be a leader somehow was always there, and somehow I always was. That was--I loved athletics. I did that. I loved my lessons. I loved being at the head of the class. I loved being up in front of the class. And I loved playing post office. You remember post office? I thought that was pretty good. You go to the post office, and you call the girl that you want to--yeah, I like that.  I liked the girls.  Always was lucky enough that I had a girlfriend or two. I was a happy child, I think. And my childhood was so influenced by the discipline of the family, by the sort of pushing you forward or pulling you forward by my parents, mostly my mother. In the sixth grade, I was in the school patrol, and we went home and said, "there's going to be a trip to Washington [D.C.], School [Safety] Patrol. Costs $35."  The next morning at breakfast, Mother gives me $35, my brother $35, and she said, "I want you to go on that trip to Washington. Travel is one of the best ways to learn."  And so that was adventure. Going to the Butler Street YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], through the Gray-Y program, that was another adventure. Going to day camp, that was an adventure. And I wanted to do all of that. And there was parental encouragement to do that. There was encouragement from the teachers at the school, from the counselors at the 'Y'.  There was--if we had perfect attendance at the St. Cecilia choir rehearsal, Dr. Richard A. Billings, who was the doctor at our church who sponsored it, was also a Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] graduate, and the team physician. So if we had perfect attendance over a period of time, he would take us to the Morris Brown College football games, and we would sit on the bench with the players. I mean can you imagine that? I mean that was big time. And we had winter coats with hoods that zipped, and we sat there on the bench with these football players, and we went into the locker room at halftime. That was a memorable moment, those moments in my childhood.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite sport?
Speaker 2: Well, basketball was sort of my best sport. I played a little football, but my mother also bought a trumpet for me after I quit piano, and so I sort of had to choose between playing football and the band. It was an easy choice. But I played basketball all through high school.
Speaker 1: And did you--do you think the communities were--you know, you hear about the community sort of choosing some children. Do you think that happened with you?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And seeing something in them? Do you think that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I think I was spotted because of my grades, because I liked to talk. Mr. J.D. Winston in Atlanta, who just passed and for whom I wrote a little eulogy, selected me to give the prayer at a public dinner for the Butler Street YMCA. And so I think I was viewed as having some talent, and there was always an opportunity given me to express that.
Story_ID: 9527
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about the Butler YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association, Atlanta, Georgia] because that played a very central role.
Speaker 2: The Butler Street YMCA is a great institution. It was certainly a great institution in my time, and the first book party for 'Vernon Can Read' [Jordan's memoir] was held in Atlanta [Georgia] at the Butler Street YMCA because it seemed so appropriate to do that at home, and teachers and former classmates and neighbors. It was a wonderful thing. Because what 'Vernon Can Read' did to my life, it was homecoming all over America. I saw people I hadn't seen. I saw people that I thought were dead. It was homecoming in so many ways, and that was true at the Butler Street YMCA, and that was the right place to have my book party, as opposed to some downtown hotel. And in many ways, it was the best book party because it was home when I saw friends I actually grew up with and so on. But the Butler Street YMCA was so much a part of our life because we went there on Saturdays. During school, we went--played basketball as the Walker Street Thunderbolts, and we won the championships in Gray-Y [YMCA grade school, father-son Indian guide group]. Frank Hill, Sidney Smith, and I. And Frank Hill's father was out coaching. I could remember him screaming at everyone, said, "Vernon, you shoot too much."  But he was right. But it was also day camp, and it was also boarding camp. And you moved from Gray-Y to Hi-Y [YMCA high school, father-son Indian guide group]. But it was something else. It was a gathering place. It was a convenient place of Atlanta's "talented tenth," and that's where I saw the doctors and the lawyers and the college presidents and the social workers and people from the Urban League and the [United Negro] College Fund. Because under Warren R. Cochran, the 'Hungry Club', which was the only interracial luncheon club in the South, the Atlanta Negro Voters League was operated out of the Butler Street Y because of Mr. Cochran. Tense community meetings evolving around the desegregation/civil rights era took place at the Butler Street Y. So it was more than a place to go learn to swim. It was the nexus of the leadership; it's where everybody gathered. And so as a kid, it was nothing--I mean it was quite ordinary to see L.D. Milton, the president of Citizens Trust Bank, Mr. J.B. Blayton, head of the Mutual Federal Savings and Loan, or Mr. Norris Herndon, president of the Atlanta Life Insurance Company, or Mr. C.A. Scott, who was the editor of the 'Atlanta Daily World,' Mr. C.R. Yates of Yates and Milton drugstores, Reverend William Holmes Borders, Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr--they were all at the "Y."  Dr. Mays, Dr. Brawley, Dr. Clements--they were there. And as a kid, I guess I was Hi-Y by then, I knew about the Hungry Club. And as a Hi-Y kid, I always knew that one day I would address the Hungry Club, and that was a great ambition, and I wanted to do that because that was a measure of achievement, and that was a forum about the problems confronting black people. And it happened; I did address the Hungry Club. And it was a crowning moment. So the Butler Street Y was, and still is--in my mind, I mean I'm not home anymore, and lots of things have changed, and the community's not the same--but the Butler Street Colored YMCA in my upbringing was a huge force for good for the community and for me.
Speaker 1: Gosh, when you describe it, it sounds so rich, and I feel we've lost some of that, you know.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, sure.
Story_ID: 9528
Speaker 1: What was forming you as a young person around that time? And let's go into your teens. What's forming you? You know, you have two closewell, you had real--two close running buddies?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a little group of us. Riley Ragsdale, Walter Lee, Claude Johnson. We were boon coon buddies, and we went to classes together, and we went to events together, we double-dated together, and we shared our aspirations together. But it came to a point where we necessarily parted ways in that because I broke from the group. We had sort of had a plan. We were coming to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], going to get a house, be sharp every day, have a car, date all the pretty girls up here at Howard, and when we finished that, we were going to study. And after my friend came from the National Service and Scholarship Fund for Negro Students that talked to the Honor Society about going north to college, I was totally wrapped up by him, and I got very interested.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you were so wrapped up by him?
Speaker 2: It was different. Paul--I can't think of his last name. It's in the book.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was an educator, and he was a tall, articulate, persuasive man, and he talked to us in that library about opportunities of going north to college, and I liked it. And I had a little trouble from counselors at my school and some of my teachers, whom I asked to write recommendation, said, "you know, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was good enough for me. Why isn't it good enough for you?"  Others would say, "how can you go to that school? Your mother's just a cook." And my answer was, "You know, write the recommendation."  And then I got accepted, and my friend Leslie Simmons, now Samples, who was at the book party at the Butler Street Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association]--I could not go out with my buddies that Saturday night because I had to go on a party with my mother, so I went out with out with Leslie on a Sunday night, and she went out with him on Friday night--Saturday night, and she told me on Sunday night, "your buddies are not your buddies. They were really knocking you 'cause you're different. You think you're smarter. You're acting like a white boy."  But then she said, "Vernon, you are smart," whatever that meant, "so you've got to go do what you've got to do and you go do it."  And before I wrote that in the book, I called and asked her if it was all right, and she said yes. She stood in line at the Butler Street Y for an hour to buy the book, another hour to get it signed. And when Leslie got to the table to sign--get her book signed, I stood up, and we embraced, and we cried. It was so terrific. And after all these years, she was very smart, and she married a guy who played in the high school band with me, George Samples, and she has kids and grandkids. She'd had a career in the Department of Labor. She was very smart. And she said, "you just--you go ahead."  She said, "go do what you've got to do."  And I've never forgotten that. And I talk to her from time to time. There are people and moments in your life that you never forget, and that's one of them. And my job, as it relates to my friends, was to still be their friends, but I had to go on with my agenda. And we did not stop being friends, it just put some--the relationship was never what it was.
Speaker 1: And the experience, just that short Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] experience, that didn't influence you to say, "uh oh, just maybe this is not it," or "I shouldn't go."
Speaker 2: You mean with the Dartmouth alumni?
Speaker 1: Right, the Dartmouth
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: It didn't? It was like?
Speaker 2: No, no, he turned me off, actually. I don't know where he is now, but he turned me off because he said, "I want you to go to Dartmouth and come back and be a Booker T. Washington for your people."  Well, what he wanted for me and what I wanted for me was two different things.
Story_ID: 9529
Speaker 1: You go off to DePauw [University, Greencastle, Indiana], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you don't know DePauw from any place?
Speaker 2: I just know what I've read about it.
Speaker 1: You read about it. But you've never been and you--and you had been to Chicago [Illinois], though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd been to Chicago, and I went to DePauw University to an educational guidance clinic immediately after I finished high school to check it out. I was the only black in that program. I was discouraged by the director of admissions--whom I saw at my forty-fifth class reunion--from coming, he thought I should go to Ball State [University, Muncie, Indiana]. "It would be easier." And he thought that the notion that I wanted to be a lawyer was ridiculous and said so. Said I ought to be a high school teacher and that maybe I should not think about going, so I said, "I'll be back."  And in 1973, when I got an honorary degree from DePauw University, I winked at him.
Story_ID: 9530
Speaker 1: I explained in this book that my father was a man of his time and that my mother was a man--a woman ahead of her time. I know that had I finished high school, gotten a job in the post office, bought a little white house with green shutters, a white picket fence, kept my hedges trimmed, my lawn cut, my car washed and my shoes shined, go to Sunday school every Sunday, church, vote in every election, read the newspapers, listen to the news, pay my taxes, my father would've said, "That's a very good life," and he was not wrong about that. My mother was a woman ahead of her time, and her attitude was, "That's just not good enough." That you can do better and bigger things, and you could.  And so, once it was clear to my dad that I was going away to college, that I was going to pursue these things, he was into it. He's the guy that told me when they left me at college, "You can't come home."  And he's the guy who told me four years later, "You can come home." So that he--he was not without his sternness, and he was not without accomplishment and objectives for me, but they were not quite at the same level, although he would always adjust upwards as I moved up. My mother, on the other hand, said, "this is not good enough." I remember 1978. My mom came to New York [New York], and I took her with me and Shirley, my then, now deceased, wife, on Tuesday to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], where I got an honorary degree, on Thursday to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], where I got an honorary degree, on Monday to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], where I got an honorary degree. And so Tuesday morning, my mother and I are standing in LaGuardia Airport [New York, New York], and she's getting ready to fly back to Atlanta [Georgia], and she says, "Well, I'm proud of you, but I'm not surprised because it's what I expected." That was her view. And so I was always, I think, motivated by her expectations, and her expectations were always reaching up and reaching out. But she could also be tough--I mean this conversation with her in my senior year about the ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps], and I finally said, "Well, what do you know about the ROTC? I don't want to join it. I'm not interested"  And she said, "You're going to join it"  And I finally said, "What do you know about the ROTC, mother?"  She said, "I don't know anything about it, but all of the white women that I work for, they're sending their boys. There must be something to it."  And she didn't quite get the fact that they were keeping their boys out of the war. But I never went to war. I was in the ROTC, then I was a 2S [student deferment from military draft], then I was in law school, and I was 1A [available for military draft], I never went to war. She said, "There must be something to it." And that curiosity that checking out what other more educated, more sophisticated women were doing for their boys must have some resonance for her boy. "There must be something to it."
Story_ID: 9531
Speaker 1: So what do you think you have of your mother and what do you think you have of your father?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I have a little bit of both. My signature was taught me by my father, how to sign my name. The drive, the extroverted personality--much of that comes from my mother. But my fetish for order in many ways comes from my father--that my shirts have to be here, my ties have to be here, and my underwear has to be there. I have this great sense of order. That comes from my dad--he had everything in order, and I tend to have--or would like to have everything in order. Now, if you saw my desk, you wouldn't think that, but before I leave, it has to be in order. And he--there was something systematic about him, and I think that came from his [U.S.] Navy experience and from working for the government all these years. He was--there were never any surprises with him, and he always knew where his tools were. And there was a sternness, a no-nonsense about my dad and his commitment to work. He got up every morning, and he made his breakfast himself every morning. Same breakfast for as long as I can live. He had two eggs over light on toast, four strips of bacon, and a cup of coffee, and he made it himself from the time that I can remember him until he died. He made that breakfast. And that goes to his sense of order. And--but my mother, on the other hand, was the creative person. She took initiatives and she had ideas, and she was always pushing--one more step, one more step, do this and do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounded like that when she was decorating the cake, you know, when you described her decorating the cake.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember RJ--I was on the board of RJR Nabisco [RJ Reynolds Nabisco-food/tobacco conglomerate], and they've moved the headquarters from Winston-Salem [North Carolina] to Atlanta [Georgia], and after the board meeting, where we decided to do this 25 billion dollar deal, I went by to have a little lunch with her, and she was tubing that cake. I said, "Mama," says, "well, you can't tell them this but I'm going to tell you, we're going to do a 25 billion dollar deal, and RJR Nabisco--sell the company to Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts [private equity firm]." And so she's tubing and just laughing to herself. And I said, "What are you laughing about?"  She said, "I'm laughing because my Vernon, Jr. is involved in a 25 billion dollar deal." And she just laughed. But she was not surprised--it's what she expected. She used to actually go to shareholder meetings with me if a company on whose board I sat was meeting in Atlanta, she'd go to the shareholders--sit through all of that stuff. And a couple of times, she was in New York [New York] when there was a shareholders' meeting. She would come because she was curious about the process. And she had her own stockbroker, and she bought stocks and stuff, so she would sit in these shareholder meetings. On some board I was joining, I had to buy some stock, and I was a little short of money. I said, "I've got--."  She says, "It'll be there tomorrow. Gotta have that stock." So she had been hearing about this on the edges as she's catering dinners and cocktail parties, and so she took special joy in that. There's a great story about my mother worth telling. In 1976, I went back home to speak at the Friendship Baptist Church in Atlanta, Mitchell Street. And the woman was Jones--Dr. Jones, I think it was--introduced me, and she said all these things Urban League had sent out. Then she says, "And Dr. Jordan has honorary degrees, and they are: doctors of law, Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts], 1969," and she started going down the list. And Reverend [William V.] Guy, the minister, got up and said, "You can't do that. We'll never get out of here, so you have to stop."  And so she stopped, thankfully, and I said what I had to say, church was over, and whenever I was in Atlanta on Sunday after church, I would take my mother to Morrison's Cafeteria. She loved the Morrison's Cafeteria because she said the vegetables were fresh. That's where I'm driving, we're on our way to Morrison's Cafeteria, and I said, "Mama, did you see that lady? She was going to stand up there and read all twenty-three of my honorary degrees"  And my mother said, "It would've been just fine with me." (Laughs).
Speaker 1: That's wonderful. It's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It is, it is.
Story_ID: 9532
Speaker 1: You went off to DePauw [University, Greencastle, Indiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how was that whole experience there? I mean it's one thing--you had gone and you were excited. You saw a pretty campus and all that. But how was the experience?
Speaker 2: The experience was great. I gave the commencement last in 1993, I've done it twice, and I said if I had it to do all over again, I would come back to Greencastle. And I really mean that. I was just there for my 45th class reunion. I was the only black in my class. There were only five in the student body. You couldn't get a haircut. The black barber in town wouldn't cut your hair. You couldn't date the girls. But none of that mattered. I knew why I was there, and I made the most of it. I won oratorical contests, I was involved in the city council, I was a court jester of our house fraternity, I was very involved in student activities, I played basketball my freshman year. And my attitude was, "I have a purpose here, and to the extent that my presence is a problem for somebody, that is their problem, not my problem." Because if I had made it my problem, I would not have done well. I knew why I was there. Also, I kept hearing my dad saying, "you can't come home."  And so I just did what I had to do, and I had a very good time, and I made some very good friends. Every entity, every college, has its--every organization has its negative quotient, but I never let that bother me. And so I had a--I am very grateful for the DePauw experience, and I was a trustee for a time, I support it annually, and it's in my will.
Speaker 1: Do you think that it was because of the type of university it was?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I mean, listen--I couldn't join any of the fraternities. You couldn't drink beer at Moore's Bar downtown. When I first got there, you had to sit upstairs at the Vaughn Castle Theater. It was like being in the South. And there was an attitude sort of amongst the 176 black people in the town, because up until 1946, what few black students that were at DePauw, they stayed with the black families in Greencastle. And so they didn't like this loss of revenue, so to speak. [Russell] "Deke" Freeland, who's a distinguished DePauw graduate, was the first black to stay in the dorms in 1946. And so I got there in '53 [1953]. But I had a good time. I made friends, girls and boys. I liked the discipline and the study. I didn't make Phi Beta Kappa [academic honor society]--there was a great story about that. Phi Beta Kappa my senior year, Dr. Jomey, an economics professor, grabs me after chapel. He's got tears in his eyes, and he said, "Vernon, they didn't call your name for Phi Beta Kappa."  I said, "That's right, Dr. Jomey. Why does that concern you?"  She said--he said, "All of our colored students made Phi Beta Kappa." Because that was in the era where that's all they had to do. They were not involved in student activities, they just studied. It would've been nice, but it was never in the cards for me to make Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the experience you had there was different, though? You couldn't have that experience in the South. I mean under those--you couldn't have had that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, there were--no colleges in the South were integrated at that time.
Speaker 1: I know, I know, I know.
Speaker 2: And I think had they been, there would've been various kinds of experiences--.
Speaker 1: Do you think if they had been, it would've been--because you said not much was--you also said not much was different than it was in the South except--that's I'm trying--.
Speaker 2: Well, Charlayne Hunter-Gault [journalist] went to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] in 1961. Her dormitory was on the first floor. Her room dormitory--room was on the first floor. The girls who lived above her took turns every night knocking silverware on the pipes, and she studied to that knock. That would never have happened in Greencastle. And I think that's--there was not that kind of overt hostility, although you were not welcome into the Sigma Nu and Lambda Chi fraternity.
Speaker 1: And the people that you like your friends, one was Jewish, right, was at DePauw was he? David?
Speaker 2: Merna? No, no, oh, no, David's not Jewish.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But was a very good friend.
Speaker 1: A very good friend.
Speaker 2: And remained a very good friend.  We're still in touch. We're not as close as we once were--William Welty, who was my roommate from Hoopeston, Illinois, just saw him dining at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] the other day.
Story_ID: 9533
Speaker 1: There was nothing gonna to dissuade you from going to law school. That was already in the cards. You had your life sort of planned out, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had sort of this mental detour after I went to this conference on the ministry. And in my senior year, I applied to two--three seminaries, but also applied to law school. And then the summer after college, '57 [1957], I was driving for the Chicago Transit Authority [CTA]. And in the middle of the summer, I just wrote these schools and said, "I've been spending the summer trying to decide between the altar and the bar. And in the process, I have discovered sin, and I like it, so I'm going to law school."  And that was the right decision for me. I'm convinced that I was--I'm better off as a lawyer than I would've been as a minister.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the story you tell of--you know, on the CTA as the bus driver, it's a wonderful story--I mean it just--you made it come to life, that whole thing.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It was a great job. Had fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, but after your sophomore year, is that when you went back to work for [Robert] Maddox [bank president]?
Speaker 2: I went to work for him my sophomore year the first time.
Speaker 1: Sophomore, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, well, you were sort of feeling a little brash at that point, right? You sort of--you know, very self-confident in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, I think self-confident is a better word than brash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think there's some people who were concerned that I didn't storm out of his mansion when he said, "I've never had a nigger work for me that can read." Number one, I was on a mission, and that was to get--make a little money to go back to school. Number two, Mr. Maddox was a very old man. It's the only way he knew how to talk. And I'd known white people like that all of my life, and so he was never my issue. He was a means to an end. But what he did for me was to define the white Bourbon Southern aristocratic psyche. And it's not in--I've never had to have it work for me--when he found out that I was colleged, he asked the ultimate question--which is also the ultimate insult: "Are you going to be a teacher or preacher?" Because in his Southern mentality, if you were black and you were colleged, there were only two options. Nothing's wrong with either one. What's wrong is that in his mind those were the only things that I could possibly do in this society--was to teach or preach. Both of which, in his view, would take place in my own community. And when I said, "I'm going to be a lawyer, Mr Maddox." He said, "Niggers aren't supposed to be lawyers."  And so he is the ever-constant reminder of the mindset that had such a huge impact on the life of my parents and my grandparents and black people in the South generally.
Speaker 1: And when you were sitting in his study reading, what were you thinking of a lot of times? You know, you said--you said you spent a good amount of time--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. My interest was what I was reading, not where I was sitting. Because my sitting there was not my problem; it was Liz's problem, the cook. And after I had the confrontation with him, it wasn't even a problem for him. He said, "Just go ahead and read, then." And that's where I was every day.
Speaker 1: Now, but you liked his collection, his collection of books? I'm just--.
Speaker 2: Well, he had great books. I mean the books were not reflective of this biased mind, 'cause the mind was open to Shakespeare and to Browning and what have you. The mind was--now, there was one book of speeches that I found and that had Booker [T.] Washington's Atlanta Exposition address among the great speeches of a certain era. And that part of that speech which says, "We can be as separate as the fingers on the hand yet one, and mutual progress" had been underlined to the point that the pages were perforated. Because that was a year before Plessy v. Ferguson [U.S. Supreme Court decision of 1896]. This was Plessy v. Ferguson reincarnated, and that was a philosophy that was the gospel, separate but equal that in some ways, they thought Booker [T.] Washington addressed.
Speaker 1: It made a lot of sense.
Speaker 2: To them.
Speaker 1: To them, that's right. That's right.
Speaker 2: But beyond that perforated page, this was a very good library, and there were many, many choices. And I was a college student, curious, and so I read.
Story_ID: 9534
Speaker 1: You went to Howard [University] Law School [Washington, D.C.] at the--really probably at its--at the time a lot of people would say was its most exciting.
Speaker 2: Well, I think--
Speaker 1: Because of who was there.
Speaker 2: It was for me a much--it was a great experience, but it was a great experience for different reasons. I mean I had spent four years at DePauw University [Greencastle, Indiana], where there were virtually no women to date, black or white. And all of a sudden, I'm at the capstone of black high education. And not only--it was the high cathedral of black intellectual life. But in addition to that, the Howard campus was loaded with beautiful black women, and I had been in Greencastle for four years. So I thought I'd died and gone to heaven. It was wonderful. And would--I had not seen this phenomenon of the fraternities and sororities at lunchtime singing--the Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] over here, and the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], over there and the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] over there, and I met my first wife listening to her sing the solo to the Delta Sweetheart song. And I dated more than I studied my first semester 'cause it was nice.
Speaker 1: Well, you just as well had been at a military--I mean for all intents and purposes because you couldn't do anything in DePauw.  Well, I couldn't date.
Speaker 2: You couldn't date--I mean date.
Speaker 1: So I imported dates for weekends and special occasions, and, you know, I got through it.
Speaker 2: So anyway--but I was saying, you know, that's an exciting period, though, because [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall was around I mean there were a lot of people.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, at Howard during the time that I was there--I remember [Howard University president] Mordecai Johnson coming to the law school, and he talked about [Mohandas] Mahatma Gandhi [Indian civil rights and peace activist], and he said, "When  Mahatma Ghandi died, who was a lawyer, all of his possessions could be put on top of his briefcase."  Well, that's not quite what I think my class wanted to hear, but I've never forgotten it. And I remember Thurgood Marshall coming to our law school--where he was a graduate, obviously--and with tears in his eyes, he said, "This is Charlie Houston's law school."  Charlie Houston was his dean. And can you imagine between the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott and the sit-ins of '60 [1960s], you hearing that from Thurgood Marshall. And the really best part about the law school was the dry runs for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund that took place there. And we would go as students. And then when they would take a break, we would just gather around William T. Coleman and [William Robert] Bob Ming, and eavesdrop as they discussed the legal issues of the day. Just to be in their presence--[Constance] Connie [Baker] Motley [federal district court judge], Jack Greenberg--was a wonderful thing. Then that, of course, was the uniqueness of the Howard University Law School.
Speaker 2: And did you--what about those things you think sort of formed you there? You know, socially--you got married, right?
Speaker 1: I did, yeah. That was quite nice--I said to Shirley on the steps of Founders Library, I said to her, "If you marry me, one day I'll be somebody."  I kept my promise.
