Story_ID: 611409
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Geraldine Whiting Johnson [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E and the Whiting is, W-H-I-T-I-N-G and the Johnson is, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on April 11th, 1919.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: In Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm retired. I'm a retired educator.  I have been a teacher, a principal, an assistant superintendent and a superintendent of schools.
Speaker 1: All right and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mostly in Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date.
Speaker 2: Today is the 28th of April and it's 2010 [sic. April 29, 2010].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now you're in Bridgeport, Connecticut, and you're at The Watermark at 3030 Park Avenue, which is senior, senior resident organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Residence (laughter).
Story_ID: 611410
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.  The first question is.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I haven't thought about a favorite food. Well if you give me some good filet mignon, that would be great (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I guess blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well I've been to a lot of places.  I think maybe Hawaii would--was a wonderful place to visit.
Speaker 1: And the last one is.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like, hurry up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 611411
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edward Farrar] side.  But, we'll start with your mother's side first.  So, can give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Alice A-L-I-C-E Whiting, W-H-I-T-I-N-G Farrar.  And after the Alice put Gertrude in there because she was Alice Gertrude.  She had another--Alice Gertrude Whiting.
Speaker 1: Okay, Alice Gertrude Whiting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whiting and then Farrar.
Speaker 1: Farrar, okay.
Speaker 2: F-A-R-R-A-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did--is her maiden name--
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Whiting.
Speaker 1: Was Whiting. Okay.
Speaker 2: She was Alice Gertrude Whiting [Alice Whiting Farrar].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And then Farrar is the married name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  November 28th, 1893.  Okay and--now--and she was born in--
Speaker 2: She was born in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what--where in Virginia.
Speaker 2: Fauquier County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: F-A-U-R-Q-U-I-E-R [sic.], I think it is.  Fauquier County.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well I can only trace her as far as I know to--my--to her mother which was our grandmother.
Speaker 1: And what, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mary Lily Williams Whiting [Mary Williams Whiting].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know your, your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Very well.  Yes, at one time before she died she lived with me.  But she was a person who lived in Connecticut and did her work as a, a cook and a helper in Westport, Connecticut.  And very often visited the family. In fact weekly visits to the family in Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we knew her very well.
Story_ID: 611412
Speaker 1: Did she talk about growing up in Virginia and what it was like and, and did your mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] talk about it?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  My father [Edward Farrar] talked much more about Virginia than they did.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother grow up in Virginia or was she just born there?
Speaker 2: She came through Connecticut as a, as a young per- as a young child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandmother [Alice Williams Whiting] actually grew, you know, reach adulthood in Virginia?  Or did she come her--well I don't know.
Speaker 2: She actually, she actually came her more as a, as an adult, yes.  She really grew up in Virginia and enjoyed Virginia and came as--practically as an adult.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: So she really didn't talk much about life in Virginia?
Speaker 2: And she didn't talk very much to us about--my father always, you know, it was when daddy was a boy.  And he told us all kinds of stories about--down on the farm.  And we listened and enjoyed his stories.  But mother had very little to say about growing up in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, she went to--she went to several years of high school in Bridgeport.  So, you know, she came to Bridgeport as a young person.  And went to school even--at least to high school--several years of high school in Bridgeport.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--well what did your mother say about growing up in Bridgeport?
Speaker 2: Not, not too much.  Not too much, she was very busy with seven children.  And it was more--her conversations were more pearls of wisdom for us to know how to navigate in Bridgeport, Connecticut.  And how to stay out of trouble.  How to get an education, how to be prepared for life.  And she didn't talk that much about, about her childhood.
Speaker 1: That's, that's important.
Speaker 2: Oh very important (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they're probably experiential, you know, in terms of how they--
Speaker 2: Very much--I'm sure she was sharing what the tradition was of her own childhood in, in helping--in bringing her family up.  And had many things to tell us that would help us to grow up in Bridgeport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Now was she able to--did she finish high school here in Bridgeport?
Speaker 2: She didn't finish high school. She had two years of high school in Bridgeport.  And then she married at a young age which was the traditions of those times and started her family. And then with seven children coming along at different times, she had a very, very busy life, and became a beautician, opened up her own business, was organist, taught her kids music (laughter), and had a lot of things to do. And I don't remember having many conversations about mother when you were a girl--as I say my father had lots to say about Virginia and how he was raised on a farm.
Story_ID: 611413
Speaker 1: Your mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] sounds very talented though.  She's a beautician, she's a organist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very talented.
Speaker 1: --and she--what kind of business did she have?
Speaker 2: She had a--well she had her beauty parlor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She, she went to--went to beauty culture school, got her license to be a beautician.  Started a--allowed a beauty parlor to be started on one level of our home.  And later on took that business over as her business.  And so she was very successful as beautician (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, in those days I wonder if she was--did, did she study under the Madam C.J. Walker method or the Annie Malone method of beauty culture?
Speaker 2: She got her--she went to school in New Haven [Connecticut], and so I, I think the instructors in New Haven had certainly gotten their training from Malone and others, you know, Walker and those names became very well known in the beautician businesses that were started up in Bridgeport [Connecticut] and in New Haven.  But we were so proud of her when she got her license to be a beautician.  And the beauty parlor was right on the second floor of our home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so it brought a lot of people into--through the home?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 611414
Speaker 1: Was your mother involved in very many organizations?
Speaker 2: Well at the time we had YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  And she was very, very key in, in going to meetings at the YWCA, which was not only an institution to promote fairness to women and blacks and whites alike, but it was very much a social.  We had--for the YWA- CA- Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [Phyllis Wheatley Branch YWCA, Bridgeport, Connecticut].  Because at that time the black YWCAs or the black women were not invited or even welcomed to be part of the overall YWCA which was strictly white women.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know at some point the YWCAs really made a all-out effort to get rid of racial discrimination.  But it hadn't occurred at that point.
Speaker 2: Well, not, not as I grew up.  Later on it became--and in fact in Bridgeport [Connecticut], the YWCA building 60 Beach Street, Bridgeport is still standing.  It's not a YWCA. I mean long ago other buildings became YWCAs and YWCAs where strictly integrated.  So of course that's not a separate institution any longer and hasn't been for years.  But mother use to go to meetings with the YW- at the Phyllis Whitley YWCA.  We went over to the YWCA to take dancing lessons.  We went over to the YWCA to be little Bluebirds. They, you know, they had a club for the Bluebirds and that was a children, the black children in Bridgeport, young girls who wanted to be a part of that.  We went to the YWCA camp during the summer, which was in Trumbull, Connecticut and had good times together with many friends that we grew up with in Bridgeport.  So it was really an access to a social institution for us and mother was very involved in that.  So I would say with family and with church as a, as an organist--she was an organist for the A--the Walters Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church in Bridgeport for fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's the name of it again?
Speaker 2: Walters Memorial--
Speaker 1: Walters Memorial, okay.
Speaker 2: --A.M.E. Zion Church.
Speaker 1: Now, oh A.M.E. Zion.
Speaker 2: And she was their organist for fifty years.  And she had rehearsals to go to every week, choir rehearsal.  She played for their services on Sunday morning and Sunday evening, and this--we don't--we didn't have cars in those days.  She'd take a trolley go across town to church come back home and in the evening go back across town (laughter) because in those days they had not only morning services, but evening services.  So she was busy. Then during the week she had her children to take care of and she had her, her customers (laughter) her beauty parlor customers to take care of.  So since it was, since the beauty parlor was in our home, we were up and downstairs.  We got to know people, you know, who came in and out.  They all knew us and so we would, we would come home from downtown and we'd say, "Mom, So and So spoke to us--I didn't know who she was." And my mother would say, "I don't care whether you know them or don't know them, you are to say, 'How do you do?'"  (Laughter) So we were taught good manners.  Because everybody knew us, they knew mother. She was in church.  She had customers and so we, we, we were pretty well known.  They knew Alice's [Alice Whiting Farrar] kids (laughter) and if we didn't know them we were taught to respond very respectfully.  Because she had to let us know everybody was going to know us (laughter) and they did.
Story_ID: 611415
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Edward Joseph Farrar [Edward Farrar].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Mecklenburg County, Virginia.  M-E-C-K-L-E-N-B-E-R-G [sic.], I think it is.  Leck- Mecklenburg County.  And he was born in 1887. I believe it--was it '78 [1878] or '87 [1887]?  I have it all written down over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--can have more accurate data.  But any.
Speaker 1: Well, well what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well I never, I never met my grandfather on his side.  But, his, his, his father was Plummer, P-L-U-M-M-E-R Farrar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Plummer Farrar?
Speaker 2: Plummer and Annie, A-N-N-I-E [Annie Farrar].
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind--well a couple things is there a story behind the name Farrar?  That's an unusual kind of name, is it French or?
Speaker 2: I think, I think it is French.  And I'm, I'm sure it's the name of slave owners, you know, the--that, that's part of the history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think it's a--kind of a southern--I haven't met many people named Farrar here.  However, there was Geraldine Farrar who was an opera singer, who I heard sing on the radio when you could hear an opera.  I, I have heard her sing on records and I've heard her sing.  But when I was thirteen years old it might've been--I wrote to her.  And I sent her a picture of me because I knew this name Geraldine Farrar the opera star.  So I wrote her a letter and I let her know.  I sent her a picture, I let her know that there was another little Geraldine Farrar in the world.  And she wrote me back and sent me her picture, thanked me for writing to her.  But, you know, I knew no other Farrars and we didn't hear it in our neighborhood or, you know, in any of our associations, we didn't know any other Farrars except family, you know, family Farrars who had come here in the area from Virginia.  So we thought it was an unusual name too.  And we knew that in Virginia in southern Virginia, in that Mecklenburg County there were numbers of Farrars white and black.  But there didn't seem to be many in our area in the North.
Story_ID: 611416
Speaker 1: Did he [Johnson's father, Edward Farrar] grow up in Mecklenburg County [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's where he grew up.  And then came to Bridgeport [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: And you said he had lots of stories about when he was boy and what things were like?
Speaker 2: Well whenever, whenever we would be sick and kind of separated from the family so that we didn't pass our germs to everybody, we had either a spare room or a spare bed, bed that someone who was ill would, you know, would, would have to sleep apart from others and be apart from others trying to get well.  But my father would always come in, sit on the bed and say, "Do you wanna hear when daddy was a boy," (laughter)?  We'd say, "Yes we wanna hear a story," and he would begin his story.  "When daddy was a boy down on the farm, there were cows and the cows went, 'Moo, moo, moo, moo'" (laughter), and he'd go through all the animals, you know, that they had on the farm.  And we loved that, we loved to hear his stories about what he had to do or what he had to do in the garden, what he had to do helping take care of the animals, what he had to do taking things to market.  So we knew daddy grew up on a farm and we just loved to have him come and tell us stories.  Then he always had his pearls of wisdom, what you should you do and what you shouldn't do, and what he believed in and what he thought was good, and what he thought was bad.  He was really a talking father.  He believed if you, if you borrowed something, you should return it.  Better still, he would say don't borrow, don't lend, don't borrow.  But if you do, you know, if you borrow, you return, if you drop it, you pick it up.  You don't, you don't make litter, you know, you drop it, you just pick it up.  All kinds of, you know, smart things that you, that you ought to do.  And having a big family and wanting them to grow up and get an education, you know, my mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] and father really had what we today call pearls of wisdom.  Things that you should remember to do or not to do.
Story_ID: 611417
Speaker 1: He [Johnson's father, Edward Farrar] went to school in Mecklenburg County [Virginia] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I don't think he ever went to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He became a power--well they called it at the Bridgeport brass shop [Bridgeport Brass Company, Bridgeport, Connecticut] a power engineer.  But it was not an engineer--he was not an engineer for having gone to an engineering school or a college.  He learned what he knew from, from people that he associated with, you know, who, who saw him as a very constant, regular kind of person.  And he could learn from people.  He not only could learn he could teach, you know, and share what he knew.  So he was at the Bridgeport brass shop where they had many machines.  And they got to know his ability to manage their machines and to be responsible for certain operations.  So they called him a--they called him a power engineer.  And he was very proud to be a power engineer that worked for years, fifty years at the Bridgeport brass shop.  On a, on a constant shift of working from two o'clock in the afternoon to ten o'clock at night.  And he, he went to work on a bicycle.  We didn't, we didn't have a car, he rode his bicycle to the brass shop, and then rode it back home.  And was highly respected for, for what he could do in helping the brass shop with their machinery.  So he, and he, he earned well in those days of--the salary that they made in those days.  If we talked about them now, they'd be a pittance (laughter).  But in those days, it was considered good money, not high, not high money.  But I remember one day when I was in eighth grade [at], we had an assignment, what do you par- what do your parents earn?  Let's talk about salaries and how you use money to support either, education or family or what, and I asked my father, you know, "I have to know how much, how much do you make?"  And this was years ago, I probably was twelve years old.  And he said, "I make three thousand dollars a year." You know, you wonder what was three thousand dollars (laughter)--didn't sound bad.  But anyhow, that wasn't a lot of money.  But he was very constant and that's the only job I ever knew my father had, you know, going to the brass shop.  Every day, two to ten [o'clock] and I think he had Tuesdays off.  Didn't have Sunday off, had Tuesdays off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had to work on Sunday?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Had a work day off.
Story_ID: 611418
Speaker 1: Let me backtrack a little bit and ask the question how--is, is there a story that you know of or story told about how your parents [Alice Whiting Farrar and Edward Farrar] met?
Speaker 2: No I don't--I would, I would imagine my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Williams Whiting] had something to do with it because that's the kind of--it, it wasn't unusual--I have pictures of her and--in her party dress and I have picture of them as they--I don't think they were married.  They were probably courting, getting ready to get married.  But at that time, there weren't many blacks in Bridgeport [Connecticut].  And I, I have a feeling that at some occasion, may have been a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] occa- at some occasion they both had arrived in Bridgeport and it was--I think when I grew up there may have been maybe a thousand people in Bridgeport, that's all.  There weren't many people.  You got to know people that were here.  If they were nice people they met, they invited, they invited people to each other's homes. They had good times together and I think at some social occasion, you know, they, they met.  But I don't know a story about it.
Story_ID: 611419
Speaker 1: Now when you consider their personalities and their talents, and their--and their ambitions and dispositions who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: I probably, I probably take after my father [Edward Farrar].  Because he, he talked a lot and I, I was one who asked a lot of questions (laughter).  Mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] was busy doing everything and daddy--I, I remember getting on his lap.  He had wavy hair and I loved to comb his hair and he let me do it, you know.  And I was number three in the family from the top going down to the youngest.  I was number three and I liked to talk and I asked a million questions and my father always liked to give advice and talk et cetera.  And I just thought he was, he was really something, you know, "Can I, can I comb your hair, can I--," or he'd lace my shoes, you know. I just, I just thought he was the cat's meow (laughter).  But, you know, mother too, but she was always, you know, she was--she didn't sit still.  If daddy was in the kitchen sitting, you know, I had to engage him somehow to talk.  Mother would be back and forth, up and down doing everything under the sun, so.
Story_ID: 611420
Speaker 1: We were talking about you and your relationship to your father [Edward Farrar].  And would you describe yourself as a daddy's girl sort of I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess I would have to say yes, you know, you know, both mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] and daddy used to call me Mouth Almighty (laughter) that was my nickname, Mouth Almighty, because I was always talking, I was always asking questions.  I was always giving opinions (laughter) and, you know, I didn't realize it at the time, but I think, I think my father thought I was pretty smart, he didn't say that but, you know, he, he always answered my questions. And they probably talked behind my back, you know, but there was no objection to sitting down and having these conversations (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now can you kind of run down your brothers and sisters for me.  I don't know how many but can you start at the first one and put--place yourself in lineage?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were seven children.  Lilyan [Lilyan Farrar Russell], six girls and then finally, one boy at the, at the end.  But Lilyan was the, the oldest, the first child and Edna [Edna Farrar Grant] was the second child.  I was the third and then after me Doris [Doris Farrar Randall] and then Natalye [Natalye Farrar Clark] and then Laurayne [Laurayne Farrar James] and the Joe [Joseph Farrar].  And my, my parents really wanted everybody--the, the amazing thing I think is that everybody got a good education and had the opportunity to learn and to be encouraged to, to get their college degrees, or their technical degrees but prepare to do the kind of work that they wished to do, so that they could enjoy life and make a contribution to life. And so we were one of those large families that were well provided for.
Story_ID: 611421
Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you lived in and, and can you give me some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: We lived, we lived in the East End of Bridgeport [Connecticut].  We were the only black family on our street.  I would say that we lived in mostly Italian neighborhood.  It was, it was a street where people practically, 100 percent owned, owned their own homes, took very good care of their homes.  Most of the houses were two family or some three family houses, but mostly, mostly two family, some one family houses, a variety--there were no apartment houses but, you know, they were all family houses.  Most families had a little garden, took care of their flowers, their shrubs and their little gard- . My father [Edward Farrar] had a big garden, a whole plot because he raised all of the vegetables that we ate, and he raised the vegetables. We ate them.  (Laughter) We canned them.  We preserved them so that wintertime, we'd have a lot of vegetables that we could go down--. My father had grapevines, fruit trees, made his own wine, picked his own fruit in the summer.  We had a plethora of good things that we could, we could grow on.  I would call it a friendly neighborhood.  If we went one block away from where we lived, we were called names, because in those day there were people who were ignorant who would call names.  My mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] would say to us, "If you--if you were called a name, remember I gave you a name. They're not talking to you. You don't recognize it. You don't answer because they're not talking to you. You put your head up in the air and you walk on." That was one of her pearls of wisdom. That you don't have to respond to that kind of behavior. Usually if--we were not on our street when we were called names, we were somewhere else in the neighborhood when we would get called names and this is where my mother and father agreed that they had children that had to be taught how to live wherever, and had to have the skills to overcome some of the prejudices that we would, we would be facing.
Speaker 1: Now did--was there overt, you know, kind of racial discrimination in Bridgeport or, or did you have--was public transportation for instance was that--
Speaker 2: Oh we, we could ride anywhere and sit anywhere.  We could not--when I grew up, we couldn't swim in the swimming pools. We couldn't skate in the skating rink. We couldn't eat at the counters. This was Bridgeport, Connecticut.  There was a, a five and ten cents store downtown in Bridgeport.  We couldn't go and sit at that counter, the five and ten and even order a hamburger, nothing. You couldn't sit at the counter. You couldn't go into the restaurants and sit. You couldn't eat in the restaurants of the department stores.  Yes there was--I would say there was overt, racial discrimination.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is--what you're describing?
Speaker 2: This is in the '30s [1930s] and early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Certainly in the '20s [1920] (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is isn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'm thank--
Speaker 1: This was an unusual circumstance in northern cities (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This, this was New England.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was Connecticut, which is pretty far up in New England, but there were those discriminatory practices.
Story_ID: 611422
Speaker 1: Well tell me about starting school.  What was the name of your first school?  Were you prepared (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To go to school?
Speaker 1: --at home or did you start--
Speaker 2: No, no the schools were open and I went to a school that was right around the corner from my home. You didn't have any school buses. You walked to school, so I had to walk a block away to go to kindergarten.  I started kindergarten at McKinley School [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  At that time I had an aunt, who was a teacher in McKinley School.  Now there were no such things as black teachers in Bridgeport [Connecticut] at that time. But my aunt and several other people applied to be teachers and were accepted as teachers at that, you know, during that period.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the first black teachers were hired in the '30s, [1930s] would you say?
Speaker 2: I, I star- you know, let's see, I graduated from McKinley School in 1928.
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): You graduated from high school [Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] in '36 [1936]. But you started kindergarten in probably '23 [1923] or '24 [1924].
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1936.  Let's see that's, yeah that's '24 [1924], I'm sorry.  I went all through McKinley School.
Speaker 1: You went--yeah you went through--you okay.  All right--okay so you finished McKinley was k through six [kindergarten to sixth grade] right?
Speaker 2: K through eight [kindergarten to eighth grade].
Speaker 1: K through eight, okay.
Speaker 2: That's was k through eight.  Then I went on to that.  But my aunt was--and there's a question about this so I'm not going into those dates and things.  But there were three, there were three women who were very good friends and they became teachers in Bridgeport schools which had--never had, had black teachers.  And I remember that in kindergarten I use to go and say hello to my aunt.  But because she was in the same school.  She married.  However, at that time they didn't allow teachers to continue to teach if they married.  They only had single teachers.  So, but when I started school, she was teaching in the same school.
Speaker 1: Now, what's your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Lillian Whiting [Lillian Whiting Hamilton].
Speaker 1: Lillian Whiting, okay.
Speaker 2: That was my mother's sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, she--I--we, we--I know I don't want to say she was the first black teacher, because there were several others and they're claiming that they all did it together.  So please (laughter) we're not gonna get into that argument.
Speaker 1: She's certainly one of the first black teachers.
Speaker 2: She was, she was one of the first.
Speaker 1: In the history of (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was part of that group.
Story_ID: 611423
Speaker 1: Did you--I take it you liked school a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think my [maternal] aunt [Lillian Whiting Hamilton] inspired me, you know, to be a teacher.  I always--we played school at home and I always wanted--you have to be the pupil. I'll be the teacher, (laughter) let's play school.  We used to play house and play school.  I don't think kids play any of this stuff anymore.  But we'd play house and play school and that's fine, yeah we'll play school.  And I was like, "I'm gonna be the teacher."  So I think I always thought that I ought to be telling other people what to do. (Laughter) I, I guess that was it.  But anyhow, I think I got a very good education.  I think there was some prejudice, you know, I raised my hand, you know, sometimes we are treated like we're invisible.  Well I think many times because I put my hands up I knew the answer.  But it's like I wasn't there and I had to argue about my marks.  You know, I'd take my report card home and I'd say, "Mother [Alice Whiting Farrar], I think I should've gotten so and so." She said--and she would say, "Don't tell me, tell the teacher."  And I would go back and I would say to the teacher, "These are my test papers. Why did I only get 80 [percent] and so and so."  Because I average my marks and my marks came out much higher than eighty.  And the teacher would say, you know, "Well Geraldine [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson], I'll look at that again."  But, and that would be the end of it, you know, because I didn't know how to insist on things and many times I'd raise my hand because I knew the answer or something and it's like I didn't have my hand up.
Speaker 1: On, on the average how many black students would be in the class with you?
Speaker 2: How many black students?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh very many times I was the only one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Many times.  I came through school--the whole school system many times the only, the only one in a classroom.  We didn't have lots of blacks in Bridgeport [Connecticut] when I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: My, my kindergarten teacher and her name was Ms. Penny [ph.].  Ms. Penny my first teacher in kindergarten [at McKinley School, Bridgeport, Connecticut].  I thought Ms. Penny was wonderful.  I think one of the reasons was that finally I'm in school.  And this is what school is like, I just loved the kindergarten and I thought Ms. Penny was great.
Story_ID: 611424
Speaker 1: What activities in school did you enjoy the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I, I liked just about everything.  In kindergarten [at McKinley School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] we had a little rhythm band.  You had to shake something, or strike something, or blow on something.  I, I enjoyed all the music experiences. I think I loved the music and I loved reading the stories or when the teacher would read stories to us.  You could sit there and listen to stories.  Great--I loved the library.  School didn't have a library, but the stories that you could get from the library.  I think, you know, that kind of thing really.
Speaker 1: Can you remember which books were your favorite?
Speaker 2: Fairy tales, fairy tales. I'd go to the library and sit on the floor and read all the fairy tales, you know.  Good stories (laughter) take you to another world. I like that.
Speaker 1: Now what other--no, so--were you involved in all those Y [Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA)] activities you were describing before?  Camp and Bluebirds, Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and all those activities.
Speaker 2: We were a family that was kept very busy.  I think of our family as a wonderful mother and father [Alice Whiting Farrar and Edward Farrar] and children that were in encouraged to do lots of things.  We--my mother taught all of us to play piano.  She played piano, played the organ at church [Walters Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Bridgeport, Connecticut].  We all played piano.
Speaker 1: Did you brother--younger brother play too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Played piano, he became a wonderful musician and could do improvisations and he played the saxophone.  But in addition to playing piano, she allowed us to learn other instruments.  It cost a lot of money to take lessons.  But you know, you often think about how they scraped enough together to send us or take us for music lessons.  Lilyan [Lilyan Farrar Russell] played the piano and she didn't play any other instruments.  But she spent a lot of money taking wonderful piano lessons and playing in recitals and things.  Edna [Edna Farrar Grant], who's the next one down, played violin.  And she carted her violin across town to get lessons.  Jeri [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson], that's me, I played the cello, my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Whiting Williams] thought that I ought to play another instrument other than piano.  Played piano--oh we played piano too.  You weren't allowed to abandon piano because you could use it anytime.  But I went across town, my father took me every Saturday morning for cello lessons.  I learned to play cello and when I was about sixteen, I gave a cello recital that other people could come and hear me play the cello.  Doris [Doris Farrar Randall] played the Hawaiian guitar.  Loved the guitar, she played the guitar.  Natalye [Natalye Farrar Clark] played piano, she didn't play--she--well she played organ too.  She became a pianist and played the organ for our church.  Laurayne [Laurayne Farrar James] played piano and Joe [Joseph Farrar] played saxophone.  But everybody played piano.  And if you wanted to you played another instrument.  So we had a house full of musicians.  Lots of noise.
Speaker 1: Did you all ever play together and get together?
Speaker 2: Oh we, we play--we formed a Farrar sisters trio.  And it was Lilyan on piano, Edna on violin, and Jeri on cello.  We played all over New England. We played in Hartford [Connecticut] and New Haven [Connecticut], Bridgeport [Connecticut] and we had--we practiced together. We had programs made and we played for, for many organizations for their programs et cetera.  So music has been a big part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, it--and it kept us busy.  We didn't have time to get in trouble (laughter) homework to do, music to practice, chores. We were a family of chores to be done.  You had work to do, if you lived there you had to work.  You keep your room clean, change you beds, help, help shake the baby asleep.  Help--when the baby woke up--all kinds of things that we had to do as a family.
Story_ID: 611425
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school, you started--
Speaker 2: Went to Harding High School [Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Harding High School, okay.
Speaker 2: Good high school, I think we learned well.  I had some problems with one teacher who didn't want me to be a teacher.  And she was there to help girls who wanted to go to the normal school.  They had to take courses with her about why you wanna be a teacher and what you hope to do et cetera.  I signed up for her because, you know, I knew I wanted to be a teacher.  And that's where I felt I was really invisible.  She didn't think I ought to be a teacher and whereas she didn't say it, she didn't really include me as one of the pupils that could actively participate.  And she did everything she could to get me a scholarship to one of the black universities [HBCUs] in the South.  Knowing full well that I was gonna go to the normal school right there in the city.  One of the reasons being because when you graduated you got a job on your position in the class--graduation class.  If you were number one, you'd get the first opening et cetera, down the line.  And I was looking for a job of course when I would come out and I was gonna go to the normal school so, you know, she wrote and got applications for scholarships, etc.  And I had to tell her I'm going to the Bridgeport Normal School [Bridgeport City Normal School, Bridgeport, Connecticut].  And there was, there was a fair amount of prejudice as I went to school, through high school with the--with teachers who I guess couldn't quite decide, you know, where, where I was coming from.  Not used to having people face them and ask some questions.
Speaker 1: Did you have to do a lot of argument about--did you have ar- argument about your grades?
Speaker 2: Yes, arguing about my grades and about decisions that they were trying to make for me that would be more comfortable for them.  But not for me and well I had planned--my father [Edward Farrar], you know, if there was some statements made, one of the teachers told Lilyan [Lilyan Farrar Russell] I wouldn't have you wash my kitchen floor.  And I--and Lilyan hadn't done anything, you know, it--something that went on and she just had to say this to my sister.  And that brought my father up to school immediately to the office.  "How dare you, how dare you," and Lilyan hadn't done anything that would require a statement like that made to her.  So, those kinds of ridiculous things did happen to us.
Story_ID: 611426
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to participate in some of the regular kind of high school activities when you were in high school [Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Not the social ones.  We didn't go to the high school dances and things like that.
Speaker 1: Did most of your social life take place through the Y (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the community.
Speaker 1: In the community.
Speaker 2: In the community.  Church affairs, social affairs of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] which was a real bonus for us.
Speaker 1: Now where you an officer in the A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] church as youth?
Speaker 2: No, we went to--we went--one of or numbers--one of our white neighbors said to my mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] one day, "We know you're the organist of a church and we know that you, you are not gonna take all your children on the trolley across town. Would you like for us to take your children to our church that you walk to three blocks away?"  And mother said that's a good idea, so all of us where christened and brought up in the Newfield--it's called United now.  In the Newfield Methodist Church [Golden Hill United Methodist Church, Bridgeport, Connecticut], which is only three block away from where we lived on Wilmot Avenue.  So this wonderful woman who, who's family went to Newfield Methodist Church took us down each Sunday walked us with a group of children down to the Newfield Methodist Church.  So, and we were the only blacks in the church.  But nobody cared whether you were white or black.  We grew up in that church.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay so you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went down to Zion [Walters Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Bridgeport, Connecticut] where my mother was for a lot of things.  But that's where we were christened and grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you get leadership op, opportunities in the church, you know, the youth--various youth functions?
Speaker 2: The church didn't have that many social functions for the, the young people were involved in at the time.  When my, when my brother [Joseph Farrar] came through, he, he joined the scouts down at the church and he was always down at the church for Boys Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  But when he was down at the church for Boy Scouts, we over at the YWCA for dancing lessons and things like that.  So we had our--I think we focused more with the YWCA than the church for social activities.
Story_ID: 611427
Speaker 1: You said you gave a concert, a cello concert.  How old were you, you were fifteen?
Speaker 2: I think I was sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I looked for a picture of it.  Because I wanted that so badly I have a picture of the dress that somebody made for me and the cello and I'm just--
Speaker 1: Well did the concert have something to do with the schools or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no my, my cello teacher just thought I was ready to be shown to the public.  And so he had me do, you know, since I could play all this music, he wanted me to do it for the pu- and he--we did it. I did it at the college club. There was a club of white women who--that had a beautiful kind of estate house that lived together, because remember the teachers had to be single. And he wanted me to do the concert in their lovely, lovely living room, dining room reception area.  So I did it for family and friends and public that wanted to come.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did, did you ever consider becoming a--or did you think you had the ability to become a concert cello--cellist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I didn't think I was that good, but I always wanted to play with the symphony and I did get to play with the symphony for ten years at--with the Connecticut Symphony [Connecticut Symphony Orchestra; Greater Bridgeport Symphony], which I thought was absolutely wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay we'll get into that, now what, what year was that when you started playing with the Connecticut Symphony?  Just so I don't miss it when we get to it.
Speaker 2: That--I--that was, that was in the '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 611428
Speaker 1: You were gonna go to college here in Connecticut, right? I mean here in--
Speaker 2: Yes I could. I could go to the Bridgeport Normal School [Bridgeport City Normal School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] absolutely free.  You know, these were free opportunities to, to go to.  Either I have to get scholarships going to whatever college or, or when I knew that I wanted to be a teacher.  I knew how I could get my education, right here in Bridgeport [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from Harding [Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-six [1936].
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-six [1936], okay.  And you started at Bridgeport Normal School.
Speaker 2: Right away.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: A normal school--explain what a normal school is for people who don't know.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know what normal school is except that usually the normal school was considered a college for teachers.  And it could be--at that time it was three years--they only had three years in Bridgeport and you had to go to New Haven Teachers College [New Haven State Teachers College; Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, Connecticut] for your fourth year and then you got your degree from New Haven Teachers College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the normal school only was a three year school.  You didn't get a degree though. You had to, you had to go to a col- another college to get that fourth year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But didn't you get a normal degree in normal school.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know in a lot of states it's like associate degree.  You, you could teach, you start teaching with a normal degree.
Speaker 2: Well after a while you couldn't--you--it was demanded that you get a degree from a teachers college.  And many of the people would start the teachers college in their freshman year and you just go four years.  But, those of us in Bridgeport knew we could get the first three years at Bridgeport Normal School.  It finally became four years but, not when, when I was going.
Speaker 1: So do you think when you look back on it, it was a--like a--sort of a, a way to help a low income people get started in college?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was more about, it was more about the beliefs that, that teacher education should be either--should--it should be focused on, on teaching.  Rather than, you know, you get your B.A. and then you decide what you wanna--how you wanna go and specialize.  If you're going to a normal school you are headed to be a teacher.  And so some cities opened up normal schools.  But then they, they weren't satisfied with that, they thought it ought to be called a teachers college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now they're called university.
Story_ID: 611429
Speaker 1: In normal school were there, were there certain teachers or, or students that stand out in the, in the Bridgeport Normal School [Bridgeport City Normal School, Bridgeport, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Were there--the, the head of the normal school--I had, I had been told that I couldn't go to the normal school or, you know, in high school [Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] there wasn't much in encouragement about going. But when I got there the head of the normal school, Dr. Kiely [Margaret Kiely] made it a point to tell me how happy she was to have me there and how welcome I was to be there. And I'll never forget--she became the president [sic.] of Queens College in Long Island, New York.  But she, she made it a point to come to me and to shake my hand and to tell me how happy she was, and it made a lot of difference to me that somebody would do that, so she became a real favorite of mine.  And in later years when she would praise me for some things that I had done in the community (laughter) I, I would have to tell her that she was a person who had encouraged me on.
Speaker 1: Sounds like, from what you described from high school, you didn't get a lot of encouragement in high school, because you had to fight your way through.
Speaker 2: No, no, absolutely, so, you know, I, I came through with a time where there were these biases and these prejudices.  And along the way there have been a few people that have, that have taken the time to, to nudge and to say, we're so happy or, we appreciate what we think you're accomplishing, what you're giving to the community or, what you're doing in the community and that helps lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I connect her to, to the normal school, because she became the president of the school, and still a, a member of the community who had the thoughtfulness to, to compliment me or, to say they were happy that I was involved with them.
Story_ID: 611430
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-six [1936], you started Bridgeport Normal School [Bridgeport City Normal School, Bridgeport, Connecticut] and then you went over to New Haven Teachers College [New Haven State Teachers College; Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: In 1940.
Speaker 1: In 1940?
Speaker 2: For my last year, and to get my degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, all right.  How, how was the experience at New Haven Teachers College--was that--were there very many other black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that was a commuting college, that was a commuting college, and there was only one other black there with me, one of--student from New Haven [Connecticut]--black student from New Haven, who went to New Haven Teachers College, and so that was the other--that was another student who was getting her education completely at New Haven Teachers College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay, so, all right.  So was there like a concentration in terms of what you concentrate on teaching, was it elementary education, or, or?
Speaker 2: Well the normal school and the New Haven Teachers College were for new--were for elementary education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a major in elementary education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And you could teach from kindergarten, all the way through up eighth--all the way through eighth grade.
Story_ID: 611431
Speaker 1: Did it take you long to get your first job?
Speaker 2: I think it was thirty--let's see 19--I graduated in 1940 [from New Haven State Teachers College; Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, Connecticut], and I got my first teaching job in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you teach in 1942?
Speaker 2: Pro- Prospect School [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  I taught first grade in Prospect School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Little elementary school, forty-one kids in the classroom.
Speaker 1: Forty-one.
Speaker 2: Big class, cute kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were these kids--they were mixed race school as well?
Speaker 2: It was in the South End of Bridgeport [Connecticut], where numerous black families were by that time, and I would say that I had a class that may have been 50 percent from the South End of Bridgeport and they would, they would've been black kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the only, only black teacher in the school and--
Speaker 1: Was the school changing basically into mostly a black school when you started?
Speaker 2: I wanna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You think it was trend?
Speaker 2: When I, when I, when I started--because it was in the South End of Bridgeport, it would've continued to be mostly a blacks.  Well it would change into a black school.
Speaker 1: Right that's what I'm saying.  Okay.  So you were the first black teacher at the school, at that school at that time or?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the only--I was--there were very few black teachers in Bridgeport at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right so what, what--are there any stories from those teaching days that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: No, I think it was welcoming school.  I think we all worked hard to encourage the kids in that neighborhood that may have not of had a lot of experiential activities that were the positive kind, you know, that you take to school, that you would have to have encourage the kids to come to school regularly, to do their homework et cetera.  It was before the time of a lot of PTAs [Parent Teacher Association], you know, this was early in, in the educational history of Bridgeport.
Story_ID: 611432
Speaker 1: Well, was the teacher more of an authority figure in those days than (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh much more.  If the teacher said, it was believed, you know, I mean--and teachers were highly respected and well thought off.  The only thing is that I think teachers felt that they, they needed to give kids a opportunity to have various kinds of experiences, and maybe their families, because they didn't know how to do it or couldn't do it.  They needed, they needed to know what went on in the city [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  They needed to have little trips to the various points of interest in the city and the kinds of things that you would do for own kids.  You would wanna help schoolchildren to have, because you knew that those are the kinds that built their skills, their ability to converse, their ability to hear things and make it part of their knowledge.  Trips that we would, you know, take the kids on and things that we would do to try to fill that void that we thought was there that they probably didn't have.  We used words like underprivileged and disadvantaged, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you think in those days that, that people that sent their children to school actually looked forward to broadening their children's experiences in the school--I mean did they realize they came from kind of a narrow background? Or did they?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether they completely realized what kind of education their kids were getting.  But I think they trusted the school to do the best they could to broaden the experiences of those kids so that they could truly learn and, and, and keep going successfully.  So I think the respect for schools and teachers, et cetera was there as I started.  And mostly in my career, I think I've seen a respect for education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--is it--how was it different then than it is today--I mean for--I know you haven't taught for--probably in a classroom for a long time but, what are your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm not sure I could go back, because the attitude toward education in our cities I think merits a lot of looking closely at the need to heighten the level of respect for the educators and the need to know different systems.  And now, now we've got another kind of system that's coming in.  So that--my understanding, is that young people are doing less reading and there, there's another kind of knowledge that's there now, that you can tap into for getting information and for getting, you know, for honing your skills in the computer world and in the digital world.  It's, it's, it's very different.  I can't, I can't go there.  I don't, I don't know enough about it.  But I think it's very necessary for young people to know all of these things and to be able to get information from more than reading, reading a book, you know.  Now you can tap into so many things, very different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just wish that the respect for all kinds of education could be engendered.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, where most families intact with mother and father?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, mostly mother and father--the families are different.  And, and, and you can't--you--if you ask children today what is a family?  You have to be prepared for many different answers.  It isn't the kind of family that we use to have or there very--there, there aren't too many of that kind of family, very different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in those days was it common for the grandparents to be in the fam-in the family? I mean the family, mother, father, may include extended family to or what?
Speaker 2: Well in our family are grandpar- our, grandmother who--our, grandfather wasn't alive.  But our grandmother was very key in our family as we came up, you know. If grandma came to, to visit or grandma came to live, it was very important that, you know, she was a very important part of the family.  And so, you know, a lot of respect there, a lot of participation.  It wasn't expected.  However, the grandma would bring the family up and have the responsibility of the family.  And more of that now than used to be.  Grandma was just a revered part of the family, part of the family structure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So things have changed quite a bit from those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, very much so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 611433
Speaker 1: You taught at Prospect School [Bridgeport, Connecticut] for how long?
Speaker 2: Where did I go from Prospect?  Oh I went over to McKinley School [Bridgeport, Connecticut] from Prospect.  I think I was at Prospect maybe for about four of five years.  Then I, I felt I couldn't talk in more than one syllable (laughter) because that's--you're teaching kids to read.  And I, I called the superintendent [of Bridgeport Public Schools].  I said, "You know what? I really wanna teach an upper grade, because I, I can't even talk anymore, other than in very simple language."  And I knew that there was vacancy in the very school that I had attended as a kid, McKinley School.  I knew that there was an eighth grade where that teacher was gonna become a principal.  And I wanted that classroom.  So I called the superintendent and I said, "You know, what I wanted?"  And he said, "You're a wonderful first grade teacher, and we have a hard time getting first grade teachers, and I really don't think I want to move you."  So I said, "Well if you don't move me, you're gonna have a very disappointed teacher, who will be going back to school in September."  And so, you know, that was the end of the conversation.  At the end of the summer, he called me and he said, "Are you still a disappointed teacher?"  I said, "Yes, because you hadn't called me."  He said, "Well I--you know what, I'm gonna send you over to McKinley School, the school you wanna go to."  I said, "Oh thank you, thank you, thank you."  So I went to McKinley School and taught with teachers who had taught me at McKinley School.  Now the very teacher who had ignored me when I was there, welcomed me to McKinley School.  Then they wanted to know why I couldn't call them by their first names.  And I said, "Because you were my teacher and I just can't call you by your first names."  Well, anyhow I taught there for a number of years.  And one day my supervisor said to me, "May I see you out in the hall after, after your class?"  And so I thought, "Gee what have I done?"  So I saw her out in the hall after the class.  And she said, "Geraldine [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson], I think you ought to be a school principal."  I said, "Me?"  She said, "Yes, I think you should do whatever you have to do to become a school principal."  Well in those days you had to take a civil service test to become a school principal.  So I got myself together and that's when I went down to NYU and to UB [University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut] to get my graduate degrees.  Got all of that and then I took a civil service test.  I came out number one on the test, and so they had to give me the first principal vacancy, they had to give me the job.  So that's when I became a school principal.
Speaker 1: So this is 19--is this--
Speaker 2: Well this is when I went down--this is when I went down to--
Speaker 1: Is this 1959?
Speaker 2: --New York, yeah.  Went down to New York University [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--you came out in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was studying school administration.  That's what I was taking, so I had to get that and then I--then I got the--my mas- my master's in school administration at UB also.  But that's called a six year professional certificate.  That's beyond your master's degree.
Speaker 1: It's called a master's in school administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that again is in school administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's how I became a principal.  She said, "You know, I think you oughta do it."  And, and every time she would see me in later years.  She's not alive now.  But she would say, "Oh you've done so well."  And I'm saying you are the one who nudged me into it.  So, you know, you have that kind of thing that happens, that's, that's wonderful when people will nudge others that they see, that they think have a talent or something that can be further nurtured and developed et cetera.  So I'm--now I--that, that took me back to McKinley School where I had started my education. (Laughter) So, you know, you never know that, that circle was an interesting circle (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now you're the principal.  Were some of the teachers who you--who taught you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I--I'm teaching right along with them.  They're the ones who say, "Now how, how come you can't call me by my first name?"  I'm saying, "Me call you--you were my teacher, you know, of course." And they were older than I am, so I wasn't about to be calling them (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 611434
Speaker 1: You're the principal of the teachers that used to teach you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well how was being a--how did you like being principal?  I mean did--I mean and what things did--what challenges were ahead of you?
Speaker 2: I had--I wasn't a principal at McKinley School [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  I was at McKinley when, when my supervisor told me to go and be principal.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  So what was your first job as principal?
Speaker 2: I, I had a little school called Wheeler School [Bridgeport, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I loved being a principal.  I was invited by the superintendent of schools to come downtown out of a principalship and, and work for the city doing Title I programs [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, Title I].
Speaker 1: So well--just one second though, what, what year did you start as, as principal of Wheeler School?
Speaker 2: I think it was 19--about 1961.  I think it was 19--about 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the superintendent gave me a second school, Washington--oh I'm sorry the first school was Washington School [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  And then they, then they added on Wheeler School, so it's Washington and Wheeler.
Speaker 1: So they added it on?
Speaker 2: He added (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were the principal of two school?
Speaker 2: They, they gave me two, two small schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to split time between the two?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when the superintendent asked me to take a second school.  And was surprised--had the nerve to be surprised when I said to him, you know, "What additional pay am I gonna get?"  You know, after all if you ask somebody to take two schools, divide their time, report on progress and all that.  Wouldn't you expect that you would have an additional salary?  I'm not saying it would double your salary, but you'd have an additional salary.  He was very surprised that I even asked, and of course I got it, because he had asked me.  And I took that--I enjoyed the two schools.
Story_ID: 611435
Speaker 1: And then the same superintendent asked me to come out of principalship and come downtown and develop developmental programs out of Title I funds [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, Title I]. That's where the funds in those days that came from the national government, to try to help bring up kids of disadvantaged families, to have all kinds of experiences, all kinds of reading programs to enhance their education.  So I became the director.  I came out of a principalship to become the director of developmental programs.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're director of developmental programs.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The, the Title I programs that are--that were sponsored by the federal government.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is all at Bridgeport school system [Bridgeport Public Schools]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In all kinds of ways (laughter).  So that's what took me down to central office of the Bridgeport Board of Education to do their--those programs.  And from there I became assistant superintendent.
Speaker 2: Now did you miss--I mean I--most people would think it's a big deal of becoming an assistant superintendent and to be part of administration.  But did you ever miss not being in the classroom or, or--
Speaker 1: You miss, you miss not dealing with the kids, you know, because it's highly administrative.  But I, I couldn't believe, however, that I was the director of a program and here was few million dollars that I could say to the boar of ed- education this how you ought to spend it on kids.  We did all kinds of wonderful things that would enhance the education of many pupils.  So when you did Title I programs, we put--we had strong parent groups.  We had all kinds of--we did libraries in the schools, which we had never had before, you know, these kids could have libraries right there in their, in their school.  We did assistance in the school--parent, parent assistance. We did a, an arts camp over at Pleasure Beach in Bridgeport [Connecticut] during the summer for kids.  We, we did after school programs.  We really tried to enhance the cultural and the educational background of kids.  But we included all kinds of things that parents could understand, that they should do for their children, too.  So wonderful programs were developed that many of which are still, you know, operating to help families to give their kids experiences.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So in--now you went back to school again right, in '69 [1969] is when you got the--is that correct--is when you got the--you received your master's in school administration?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], okay.  So that, that was while you were working at--
Speaker 1: Not that's, that's when I had--I think--that was when I got my--the, the certificate for the six year, the six year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah six year teaching certificate at the University of Bridgeport [Bridgeport, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 611436
Speaker 1: Now let me backtrack a little bit more and just talk about the climate here in Bridgeport [Connecticut].  And--now all the, the civil rights issues that you described in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] were, were there--was there movement in the community to eradicate those problems during the '60s [1960s] like it was in the rest of the country during the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: They, they laid down in front of buses when, when they--when the board of education [Bridgeport Board of Education] decided, the, the board of education needed a superintendent [of the Bridgeport Public Schools].  Now, I'm down there working in one of the offices right across from the superintendent (laughter).  But anyhow, we needed a, we needed a new superintendent in Bridgeport.  And my developmental programs staff, I had a pretty big staff, encouraged me to apply and I did.  You know, I said--I, you know, I don't wanna be a superintendent, I, I love what I'm doing.  But they insisted that I apply to be superintendent and I put in an application.  The board structured a committee of citizens, parents, and professionals that they call their search committee.  The search committee took all kinds of applications.  Mine was among them and the search committee came out with the recommendation that you hire [HistoryMaker] Geraldine Johnson as your superintendent.  She knows the system. She's down here in central office working, everybody knows her, we know what she's doing.  And this is people who were not on the board, this is people from the community, we recommend her.  The board said--oh first they said they were gonna open it only to people inside the system.  That's when I applied, so know they decided they would open it again to anyone even outside the system so they got all kind of applications from all over.  They structured a new committee to review applications.  So we had to interview again and I put my application in, interviewed and the second committee came up with a recommendation of Geraldine Johnson.  The board said we don't think so. At that point I said, "I'm gonna sue you."  So I went got a lawyer. They got all prepared to have a suit.  Now the, the City of Bridgeport and a number of black organizations.  They, they raised hell, they, they laid down in front of school buses (laughter) they had a whole thing about how come you don't accept your committee's--your search committee two times for Geraldine Johnson.  And the board of education became extremely embarrassed.  And they finally said, "We think we better take Geraldine Johnson as our superintendent of schools." A real insulting kind of thing and, of course, a preju- a prejudicial kind of thing.  So there was an awful lot of negative reaction to the--to our regular board of education which had acted so stupidly about their selection.
Story_ID: 611437
Speaker 1: Okay, so to summarize, you sued the--you were gonna sue.
Speaker 2: I didn't get to sue them because they retreated immediately, because they, they knew that they, they had, had--that the board of education [Bridgeport Board of Education] had, had two committees to do their search, and that they had come out with me as their choice.  The, the board didn't really have a leg to stand on.  I could've been frightened enough to have done nothing about it and they would've just made a different kind of appointment of somebody of their choice, but.
Speaker 1: But the community stood be- stood behind you and from what you're saying, and pushed for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--but I have to say that after I became superintendent [of the Bridgeport Public Schools], the board was very cooperative, you know, I--it stopped after that--I mean any negative behavior, I didn't seem to have to experience after I became superintendent.  I mean they backed right, right down.
Speaker 1: So do you think it was mainly fear of what--you know, of never having had a black person, a black woman in charge?
Speaker 2: They hadn't had a woman and they hadn't had a black.  They weren't sure they wanted to take that on.  But they became--I mean they became very friendly.  I see some of them even now and I mean they (laughter)--it's, it's almost as if it didn't happen so.
Speaker 1: Was it a very bitter kind of controversy when it was going on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not after, not after.
Speaker 1: I mean before.  Was it sort of bitter?
Speaker 2: There wasn't.  I even had a meeting with them.  I asked the board, "I would like to have a meeting with you and nobody else, because I have some questions to ask you."  And they, very willingly had their--had a meeting, invited me to it.  And I said, "I want each one of you to tell me why you would object to my being superintendent, each one."  Now the, the vote wasn't 100 percent against my being superintendent.   So those who had voted yes, you know, could just say, we thought you'd make a good superintendent.  The others said, "Well we weren't sure that you would be strong enough."  They didn't say as a woman, but you know, I got the point, we're not sure you'd be, you'd be strong enough.   Another said, "We thought you would wanna stay forever, we'd have a hard time, in other words, getting rid of you," and, you know, those are the kinds of statements that, that got made.  And I just said when they got all through, "Thank you very much for sharing with me what your particular thoughts were in terms of me, but the next thing that you hear is gonna be from my lawyer, because you've not said anything that should refute what your committees did.  You appointed committees to do your search and they came up with my name two times, from inside and then from outside when you opened it up to everybody.  I applied twice, you have denied me twice, and you--and if this your reason, the lawyer will," you know, "you'll have to explain that before the law, 'cause I'm gonna sue you."
Speaker 1: That's when they?
Speaker 2: They, they dropped, dropped it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They said, come on be our superintendent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now now--
Story_ID: 611438
Speaker 1: Before we get into you becoming a superintendent [of the Bridgeport Public Schools], I wanna back track a little bit and, and get into your private life.  So, now did you get married along the way at some point or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married in 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you meet your husband?  Tell us a little bit about?
Speaker 2: I, I met him, as his father was the pastor of one of the churches that my mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] was organist of.  We had a family of girls and this pastor had a family of boys.  He had a whole family of boys, so for each one of our girls, there was a boy of almost the same age, et cetera so I met him--he was--his name was Robert Carson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had one child [Adrienne Farrar Houel] and there she is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's in the room with us.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had one child.  However, we divorced.  I can't think of the date now, but anyhow.
Speaker 1: Was it in the '60s [1960s] or, or?
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL):  Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 19--yeah it was 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so at the time you became superintendent you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, nope, I, I don't think so, I, I divorced, then I remarried.  I, I married a dentist.  Doctor--what's his name (laughter) George Johnson [ph.], and I became Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--it--so this is 1960 or, or when was it?
Speaker 2: Maybe it was about 1963.  That didn't last long at all.  But I didn't change my name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had become Johnson and I just kept Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is 1963, but, but that didn't last long and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that didn't last at all.
Speaker 1: But, but, so by the time you were superintendent, you're not married, you're, you're--
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't have a husband at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well so what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could give full time to this (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And your, your daughter was grown by that time too I guess and she was out of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, she was in college.
Speaker 1: She was out of--yeah, right, you were out of col- college by then right?  Way out?
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 611439
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1976 you're superintendent of the Bridgeport Public Schools.  What were the challenges ahead of you and what did you have to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to, I had to, you know--I had been, I had been the head of developmental programs and we had started a lot of things.  If I hadn't been superintendent, I would have been really taking care of those programs that I had started.  So one of the things that any superintendent sitting in that chair would have to do, was deal with the, the reading rate in the city [Bridgeport, Connecticut], the condition of our schools in the city.  I know we, we made sure that, that there were things for kids to do after school, the attendance, the attendance which needed to be increased so that there wasn't truancy, and negative kinds of things that, that kids would just think that they didn't have to get an education.  So I did--I don't know we, we didn't build any new schools at that time.  But we, we, we did try to take good care of, of, you know, the schools that we had.  And I'm trying to think what else went on that was significant in that particular time period.  I, I think what we were trying to do, was to be sure that we had a level of achievement that we wouldn't have to be ashamed of.  Right now we're so low in our achievement, but our reading and our arithmetic--we just needed at that time to be sure that the basics.  We talked a lot about basics.  You wouldn't talk about that today.  You'd talk more about some of the new systems and getting kids to be able to work their way through systems.  In my day, it was not--not when I went to school but when--in my day of teaching and in leadership, it was trying to be sure that the kids could find their way through reading, writing and arithmetic.  And if--now you tell me they're not even teaching writing.  You know, I, I would've had a heart attack back there.  But we had systems to go through, it was very different.  I could not go back, unless I went back to school and learned something about new ways of teaching, new ways of trying to motivate teachers.
Story_ID: 611440
Speaker 1: When I became superintendent [of the Bridgeport Public Schools], we had teachers who were so upset about salaries that they had a teachers' strike.
Speaker 2: Now this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I went up to jails and visited to, to say to teachers.  Will you give this another thought?  You know, they were in jail because they wouldn't sign contracts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the note I have is '78 [1978] is a big teach- teacher strike?
Speaker 1: Yep.  I was a superintendent at that time.
Speaker 2: Three hundred teachers went to jail?
Speaker 1: Yep, they went to jail.  I know they went to jail 'cause I went up there, and they were there and I had relative who were there (laughter).  And they were there because they had refused to sign their contracts.  They had refused to agree to what was being asked of them and what they did and I can't think of it now, was illegal and they went to jail.  So it was, it was fraught with discontent, and we finally got out of that and got teachers back to classrooms, and tried to heal some of the wounds because they were absolutely upset that they had to go to jail.  And they should've been and they were, so trying to smooth that out and get people back into a mood of feeling hey, we have to deal with these kids and really help them to get an education and do their best job was part of it.
Speaker 2: Okay now, did the teachers' salaries come from a school levy or was, was it a budget pro- what, what was the issue?
Speaker 1: Well there, there was a budget--there's always a budget problem and it's because, you know, education is a state mandate and the state puts a lot of money into education.  Education doesn't get it all.  Whatever comes back in a per pupil assessed amount that come to the city, you know, how many pupils do you have?  And for each pupil you get a certain amount of money, so that gets multiplied by the number of pupils and that's the money that you get back from the state and you're supposed to spend it on education.  But many times the city or a town will take the money and make it part of its budget and only give education part of that money.  The reason being that they say, you know, as a city, we to have to spend money on schools and on this and on that which, you know, we help you pay for school buses, we help you pay for--not that much in those days.  But we help you to have education.  We own the school buildings, you know.  We, we give you property, you know, there's school property involved.  So the school system never gets all the money that it should, ever.
Story_ID: 611441
Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked through nine--from '76 [1976] to 1981 and what happened in, in that, that you--I mean how did you leave the position [superintendent of the Bridgeport Public Schools]?  What happened?  Did, did you just get tired (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I always said that I was going to retire at sixty-two years of age (laughter).  That always was my, you know, my goal and I just felt, you know, it was time for me to retire, things are changing, let somebody else think about how to go from here up into the future, and so that just--it, it--the numbers were good for me, and so I, I thought, you know, this is--I have climbed the ladder.  I've enjoyed it, and while things are okay and I've made it through, you know, some of the tough times and I'm enjoying what I'm doing.  It's a good time to think about the sixty-two, so I'd retired at sixty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay had things started to change then--I know when you started out, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president.  And I don't know who was governor of Connecticut and when you left there was a--we were in the middle of the--be- beginning of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration and I don't know who was governor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't think who was governor now.  I know Grasso [Ella T. Grasso] was, was governor near part of my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I remember a terrible, terrible snow storm in Bridgeport [Connecticut] and I was one who always called the schools in the morning.  I had to call school on or call it off because of the weather and I remember a terrible snowstorm where I didn't get home until two o'clock in the morning.  By time I saw that all the schools buses had taken the kids home, I couldn't get my car through the snow to get home.  So, you know, I had to wait for the police to come and rescue me from one of the gas stations in order to even get home to my house.  And I thought hey, it's time because all kinds of weather you had to declare school on and off, or send kids home because it was snowing or raining to, you know, there's a lot that had to be taken care of.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, speaking of Governor Ella Grasso [Ella T. Grasso].  She was the first woman governor of Connecticut.  She listed you as one of the--100 most distinguished women in Connecticut in 19- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she had a big ceremony for us celebrating women who had done all kinds of different things in Connecticut.  So it was during her time I was superintendent [of the Bridgeport Public Schools] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, but being a woman and being black too, do you think you caught double trouble?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, and when I went around the table to ask the board of education members [Bridgeport Board of Education] about their reasons, you know, someone said, "Well we didn't think you'd be strong enough to handle some of the problems."  Well, now that's like saying because you're a woman (laughter) so.
Story_ID: 611442
Speaker 1: You came back, you came out of retirement to become the interim superintendent of Fairfield schools [Fairfield Public Schools]?
Speaker 2: Well that was minding my own business having a good time.  And I get, get a call about--from, from a former superintendent in Fairfield [Connecticut] who knew me, "Jeri [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson] we want you to come and be our interim superintendent."  I said--they had--they send these letters to a lot of retired superintendents.  I never answered the letter and I get these calls, "Please come."  And I thought, gee this is somewhat different from Bridgeport [Bridgeport Public Schools] where I wanted it and couldn't get it."  So I went for--went to an interview with the Fairfield Board of Ed [Fairfield Board of Education].  And when I said good night to them, I said, "You know thank you for inviting me, I've enjoyed talking to you and if I never hear from you again it's quite all right."  Well, they called me the next morning and said, "Please--would you please come," so, anyhow.  I went, I had very good year with them.  You know, they were looking for one and they kept asking me, "Are, are you a candidate?"  "No, I'm not," (laughter) but, anyhow I had a good time talking with them.  And I had a good year with them and I have to tell you the suburban education is different from urban.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what the difference?
Speaker 2: Well, parents were in my office all the time, telling me what they wanted for their children.  And that is different and they, they make many demands, and they check on it, and the kids learn.  They pass those tests and they do well.  So, you know, and it makes a difference, parents get into this whole thing about education, very important that parents become involved and stay involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And we've had--we've structured a lot of parent groups.
Story_ID: 611443
Speaker 1: So did you do consulting work from time to time and that sort of thing and make presentations to educators?
Speaker 2: If you wanna know speeches, yeah all over the places.  Not as a consultant 'cause I didn't get paid for this.  But--
Speaker 1: But you're invited quite often?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I've done a lot of talking about education.  I think it's very important that the public know that it's, it's, it's crucial that their kids be, be educated and prepared to make success of their lives.
Speaker 1: Now one of the things that happened since you been retired is that a school was named for you in 2008 [Geraldine W. Johnson School, Bridgeport, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Well, I'm ve- I'm very flattered and very honored to have a school.  It's a beautiful new school.  Can take care of more than seven hundred to eight hundred kids.  Goes from pre-kindergarten to grade--all the way up to grade eight.  They're gonna have a graduation soon I think next--in the next two weeks.  And I'm gonna go.  I go over there frequently, wave to the kids, read stories, and I know that when I--there in a line and they all turn around at one time. I know the teacher has said, "That's Mrs. Johnson [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson] over there," (laughter) 'cause they all turn around and wave.  So anyhow, we try to do some, some interesting things with the kids.
Story_ID: 611444
Speaker 1: Since you've been retired you, you said you done a lot of travel.  You, you told me off camera (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I did that before I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I been to South Africa, I've been two Alaska to see what our--one of our new- newer states was like.  I've been to France a number of times.  I've been to the Greek islands and been to Norway, Sweden and Denmark, I've been to China and Japan, I've been to Australia.  I've been, you know, to most of--touched different parts of the world.  And my mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] has gone with me to a lot of those places.  She loved to travel and I'd say, you know, "Mom I'm going to Norway, Sweden. Would you like to go?"  She loved to go.  And so she, she was a well traveled person and enjoyed travel very much.  And then I was in a profession that had the summer off.  So that's how I spent a lot of my summers, you know, seeing a little of the world.  I also would talk to the kids about my family, you know, what we were gonna do for Thanksgiving, for Christmas and, and, you know, for holidays, they were fascinated.  They wanna know how people live and so I talked to them about my family, my kid [Adrienne Farrar Houel], you know.  This is what we did or this is what we're gonna do.  The kids are sitting up and their looking at you.  They need to know, you know, what do people do?  What do other families do other than their own?  You know, then they wanna tell me what their family did, you know, sharing the stories were very important, and I tell I--and I went to something, I took my mother.  They were fascinated, you know, they really need to hear a lot about how people live and what, what other cultures across the world, what do, what do people do.  What did it--you went on a trip, what did it look like?  What did you do?  Who did you see?  (Laughter) Where did you go there?  So--and I talked about the Great Wall of China, the kids are fascinated.
Story_ID: 611445
Speaker 1: Today we've got a new [presidential] administration on the national scene.  The superintendent of schools, Arne Duncan trying some new ways to prod school systems all over the country to do--what do you think of the initiatives of the new administration and what do you think it going on in Connecticut these days and in Bridgeport [Connecticut] specific?
Speaker 2: Well they had this No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001].  And the teachers don't like it at all.  I think they're misinterpreting what even means.  No, no child--I, I have heard [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman.  Have you ever done a review with her?  Wonderful person, you know, to hear her lecture is just unusual.  I think she was the one who created that term no child left behind. I've, I've heard her talk about it.  And, and I thought it was her term.  What she meant was you take every child and wherever they are, you work with them to promote them to another point in their life going up.  You don't leave 'em down there that's what she means.  Now can you, can you argue with that?
Speaker 1: No, it's hard to argue (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You--but you have to take them where they are and you have to make sure that you've increased another step or, you know, steps for them to go up.  You don't consider them a failure and leave them there without additional help if they can get to climb some ladder.  Their--it may take them longer, but give them the time that they need and give them the skills that they need to make those steps.  That's what she's talking about, you don't leave them down there.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is that the No Child Behind policy of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it gets misinterpreted.
Speaker 1: By the implementers of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the teachers, by the administration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know it's characterized by test that determine whether you reach a standard (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's, that's to use to measure but--and you would like to see--for each child you'd like to see steps.  But then begin to talk about what you're gonna do to help them make the next step up and give them credit for making their little steps up, don't leave 'em behind.
Speaker 1: In your opinion was it funded very well?  I mean in terms of--I know I've heard complaints about it--whole lot of guidelines but no funding to back it up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, now they're trying to measure in such ways that teachers are becoming very frustrated about measuring and saying we're gonna give you funds according to the depth of your steps--the results of your steps.  And teachers are really upset that schools are gonna be penalized if they haven't made certain, you know, steps.  It's like a penalty, you're not gonna get this and you're not gonna get that.  I, I'm not sure what the answer should be.  But, I don't think that enough effort and enough time is being granted or given to help lots of kids make the steps that they ought to make.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Speaker 2: See I don't think they're doing homework.  I don't think the parents are getting involved.  And I think the kids are getting left behind in education, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I know they'll, they'll leave 'em in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 611446
Speaker 1: You served on a number of boards and you're a member of lots of organizations.  One organization I'd like you to talk a little bit about is The Links [The Links, Incorporated] 'cause I think you're a prominent member of The Links here.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: So could you give us a little insight?  And what is Links and what, you know, what role do you play?
Speaker 2: Well, Links is a group of, I would say, you know, business and professional women.  Many of whom have been very, very successful.  I remember when Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge], who was head of one of the big corporations, was one of our members.  But she'd said to travel the world, so I haven't seen Ann recently.  They have--their purposes is really to help--to bring women together, professional and business women together, to try to do programs for the community.  They have different facets that they, that they promote.  They promote many things in the arts, they promote many things that are civic in the communities that the members represent, you know, and we are a Fairfield County [Connecticut] group, so it's, it's kind of a big, you know, representative organization.  The fellowship of, of black women together just enjoying each other as another (laughter) thing that they try to do.  More recently our Fairfield County group has raised thousands of dollars to get scholarships to young people, and they've given substantial scholarships to students who have good educational scores on, on test, but need money, you know, to--for tuition in, in whatever colleges they would like to go to.  So I would say, you know, it has its social benefits, it has its facets that they support.  And they have their, their scholarships that they award and that--that's very primary in their, in their--in the work that they do.  And its gre- it's, it's a fairly large organization because they have more than forty some members as their membership.  I think that they do very good, very good work.  I've been a Link for a long time.
Story_ID: 611447
Speaker 1: You also--I know you were also director of the Council on Adolescent Pregnancy [GBAPP, Inc., Bridgeport, Connecticut], the scholarship chairperson of the Ettinger scholarship in Norwalk [Connecticut], secretary of the board of the--of a ABCD [Action for Bridgeport Community Development, Inc., Bridgeport, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Oh that is years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when it, that began, I was their secretary.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  A member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I'm a life member of WAC- NACP.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Member of the advisory council of HECUS.  What, what is HECUS?
Speaker 2: Higher education H-E-C-U-S.
Speaker 1: H-E-C-U-S yeah.
Speaker 2: H-E-C-U-S., Higher education council.  Just cross that one out, because that was years ago and I can't, I can't even remember what those initials were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Woman of Distinction named by the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], and been on the People's Bank [People's United Bank, N.A.] and the United Illuminating Company, that's the power, power company here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you also, years, years and years ago, you were appointed to the Connecticut parole board [Connecticut Board of Pardons and Paroles] by Governor John Dempsey [John N. Dempsey] in '68 [1968], yeah so you've been busy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well I've been on a lot of committees and councils and things like that, I, I really have been.  Not so much now, but over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think giving back something to the community, very important.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of people--more and more people are doing that now.  I think they're seeing a need for it.  I hope that, you know, I hope it continues to go on.
Story_ID: 611448
Speaker 1: So when you look back over all your activities and achievements, all these many years.  Is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, if you could go back and do it again?
Speaker 2: I, I can't think of anything that, you know.  In my personal life, I could have done some things differently.  But I think I've had a very good life and had some real challenging things that I've had to face and had a lot of help in facing them, you know, I, I think you don't do these things all by yourself, you have to find some colleagues that will help, help to nudge you along, or to support you in what you're doing, you can't do these things alone.  I've had a lot of good friends, a lot of good associations to be part of and, and maybe there's been a lot of work that needed to be done, but you join hands and do these things together.
Story_ID: 611449
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little 'bout--now you've got, got one daughter, she's here right now, so watch what you say about her, we're gonna (laughter).  She's writing.  But can you tell us about your daughter and, and your extended family here in, you know, here in, in Bridgeport [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Well I, I brought the magazine that had my daughter's--part of Fortune magazine (laughter).  Adrienne [Adrienne Farrar Houel], she, she's been a good daughter and she's been honest with her mother, you know.  She tells me occasionally who I am and what I do or don't do, (laughter) so I think she's doing some interesting things now trying to help the world stay green.  You've heard of the color green? Well she's all into that green.  I can't tell you that I understand all the things that she talks about (laughter) anyhow she's into the green thing and training people how to help to keep the world the way it should be.  And she has a nice husband [Christian Houel] and three lovely children [Alice Houel, Jennifer Houel and Gregory Houel].  I have grandchildren that's been a very nice part of my personal life and we have some very good times together.  But it used to be that kids went to school and then would go back home and do something else in the hometown that they came from.  Well, I have grandchildren that are all over the world.  One is in China right now and the other one is just getting back from Portugal and Spain and places where- wherever he went, and then one is Australia, trying to see what kind of grapes they have to make wine like French wine.  (Laughter) So, you know, it's, it's a different world and so, you know, I, I look at what young people are doing in life today.  Adrienne took dancing lessons, she took piano lessons and--her kids have taken tennis lessons and spent summers with me and I've gone to visit that part of the family a number of times in France and enjoyed having in--kind of an international family and so.  I don't know what else you want told about you (laughter).
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): It's your interview.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): It's your interview.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  Well anyhow, I had a good kid and that helped.
Story_ID: 611450
Speaker 1: Once again when you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I've, I've had, you know, I think I'm very grateful that, that people call me a role model.  If I've been a role model that, that's very, very good.  Because, you know, a lot of people, they know me all over this area [Bridgeport, Connecticut].  And, you know, I can be any place and someone will come over and tell me, "You know, I know you.  I know you don't know me, but I know who you are and can I talk to you for a minute?"  Then someone else called me an icon, and someone else, you know,--they say that I've been a good role, role model and I think that--if you can be a role model and help other people, nudge them.  I was nudged by a number of people 'cause I hadn't thought of, you know, I might wanna be a teacher, never thought of being a principal or being a superintendent of schools.  But each time, somebody said to me, "I think you ought to," and it made me go ahead and do, so to, to be that, and then somebody else said to me and I, I was very pleased, "You know something, you're a living legend."  I said, "I am?" (Laughter) So, you know, if you can be that, if people think you're that, you don't have to think you're that yourself.  But, if that's what people think you are, I think that if you can be thought of that way or remembered that way, boy that, that's really saying something.  I, I think that, that's to me very flattering (laughter), very satisfying or, you know, very good.  And I'd like for many people who are doing something that seems to be worthwhile, to be, to be called something and let other people know that they're making a contribution.  I think you have to be part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much for submitting to this interview and (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well I probably talked far too much.
Speaker 1: No you did fine.  It's been a pleasure talking to you.
Speaker 2: Well I think you've asked good questions.
Story_ID: 611451
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh is there anything I didn't ask that I should've asked?  Can you think of anything?
Speaker 2: No, I think you covered that very--I think you covered that very well.  I really do.  But my, I, I, you know, we're very proud as a family that--my mother [Alice Whiting Farrar] and father [Edward Farrar] raised seven kids, all of whom had good education and all of whom have made contributions, you know, that's very gratifying for all of us to know.  I think they felt good about their kids and I think if you can feel good about your kids, you're lucky (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: And today especially.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Even though our day was a little different earlier.  But I know many people are crying over their children.  My mother and father didn't have to cry over their kids.  We were pretty obedient, respectful kids.  We did get some spanking along the way (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Not beatings, spankings.  You had to do what you're told to do (laughter) and sometimes I was mouthy.  Got spanked and.
Speaker 1: So, mouth, Mouth Almighty right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mouth Almighty (laughter).  They didn't say shut up or anything like that, they just, you know.
Speaker 1: Well that's a funny way of (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 611452
Speaker 1: --Picture of my mother and father and their, their children.  And then there's seven--Adrienne [Adrienne Farrar Houel] is right there, that's, that's Nat [Natalye Farrar Clark], that's, that's a sister.
Speaker 2: Let's go left to right.
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Sister Natalye, sister Doris [Doris Farrar Randall], Jeri [HistoryMaker Geraldine Johnson], that's me.  That's Adrienne, Edward Al Farrar [Edward Farrar] our father, Alice Farrar [Alice Whiting Farrar] the mother, Joseph Farrar, the baby brother, Barry Carter which is a nephew of mine.  Barry--that's his mother, my sister, Edna [Edna Farrar Grant].  That's my sister, Laurayne [Laurayne Farrar James] and that is, who is it?
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): That's Eddie.
Speaker 2: That's Edna's son Eddie [Edward Carter].
Speaker 1: Okay 'bout what year is this shot?
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): Isn't that their thirty-fifth anniversary?
Speaker 1: That's thirty-fifth anniversary.
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): Thirty-fifth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 1: Mother and father, their thirty-fifth.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISSUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's picture of my mother and father.
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): It's kind of upside down and backwards.
Speaker 1: Oh that's my mother and father at their thirty-fifth anniversary.
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): I think that one was earlier.
Speaker 1: That's, that's mother and father and baby boy, Joseph and the other children.  That's Lilyan [Lilyan Farrar Russell] sitting on the arm of the chair, Edna is next, Geraldine is next, Doris is next, Natalye is next and Laurayne is on the other arm of the chair.  So that's their whole family and it's in order.
Speaker 2: Those are our grandparents and my father's mo- mother, Annie Farrar and his father, Plummer Farrar and that's down in Virgin- in, in Virginia their home in Virginia.  I don't know the year that that is.
Speaker 1: That's my mother's father Sam- Samuel.
Speaker 2: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): Whiting.
Speaker 1: Yes, I know it's Whiting but his first name. Where's the notes that I had?  Where's the sheets that I made out for this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The questionnaire, because I've got the names, their names are on there.  Turner, Sa- Samuel Turner Whiting [Samuel Whiting].  And Mar- and Mary was she on there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's Mary Lillian Whiting [Mary Williams Whiting], that's our grandmother.  Did I write on the back? Let me see that again.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION): The name is on the front.
Speaker 1: This is grandma's picture.  This is our, this is Mary Lily Whiting again, that's grandmother.  That's Mary Lillian Whiting.  She was living with me at the time.
Speaker 2: She's about how old, what year?
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): She died when she was ninety-two.
Speaker 2: She was in her mid-eighties at that time.  That's Edward Al Farrar and Alice Farrar and this probably was when they were first married.
Speaker 1: Oh, this--there's a caption 1940.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well here they are again, I think you already did that one, but around 1940.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We, we think maybe this is her engagement dress and her party dress.  That's, that's our mother.
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): That's the one she made, isn't it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember having--this has 1912 on it.  Now this is my mother as a--
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): This is Alice Farrar. It's Nana.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know it is, but I'm trying to think of the association of what when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (ADRIENNE FARRAR HOUEL): (Simultaneous) You know it was either her 105th or something, it was one of those hundred year birthdays.
Speaker 2: This was at one of her--at her--there was one for her ninetieth.  And then there was a ninety-nine.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There was a ninety-nine, a hundredth and a 105. I don't know which one that is.
Speaker 2: That's me, I don't have a date on that.
Speaker 1: Was that high school graduation [from Warren Harding High School, Bridgeport, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No, I think its college.  I think that was college graduation [from New Haven State Teachers College; Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven, Connecticut].
