Story_ID: 50375
Speaker 1: My name is Chuck Smith, I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Okoro, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Okoro Harold Johnson, and Okoro is O-K-O-R-O, and of course Harold and Johnson is--
Speaker 1: Just spell it for us.
Speaker 2: --H-A-R-O-L-D, and J-O-H-N-S-O-N, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 31st of May.  May 31st, 1902--two thousand and two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the address of where this interview is taken place?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Hundred South Michigan.
Speaker 1: City?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Five, twenty-five, twenty-five.  I just made 20--seventy-seven years on the 25th of May.
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a dramatist.  I teach drama, I direct drama, I--and I'm presently teaching now.  I've retired from the other aspects of it, and I'm teaching  the--I've taught the adult drama classes since--for thirty-one years since ETA first began.  Also taught at Columbia [College, Chicago, Illinois], and I taught at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] and Chicago Cultural Center and around.
Story_ID: 50376
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, a few questions that we ask all the other people that we interview, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  Let's say soul food.
Speaker 1: What kind of soul food?  Favorite dish?
Speaker 2: That's hard.  My favorite dish, I guess, would be chicken.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Summer.  And favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My vacation destination?  Well, the place I've been, I think they're other places I'd like to go, but I haven't been, but my favorite was West Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "You can't take it with you" (laughter).
Story_ID: 50377
Speaker 1: Okay, Okoro, your parents, can you give us the names of your parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's name was Earl Johnson and my mother's was Nellie Johnson, Nellie Harris was her maiden name and Nellie Harris.  They both were from Meridian, Mississippi, and eventually Hattiesburg [Mississippi] is where they ended up, and they married in Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Brothers and sisters.  My oldest brother was Earl, Jr. and the second James Arthur, and my oldest sister, I have two sisters.  There were seven of us, five boys and two girls.  And my oldest sister is Ernestyne, she's still living.  And incidentally, Earl, Jr. and James Arthur are both deceased now.  And my oldest sister is Ernestyne, and have twin brothers, Willard and Wilbert, and then my youngest sister who's living in Hattiesburg now, Irma.
Speaker 1: How do you fit in?
Speaker 2: I'm the third.
Speaker 1: You followed?
Speaker 2: I followed James Arthur, yeah.
Story_ID: 50378
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your parents?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents--my immediate parents, my mother [Nellie Johnson] and father [Earl Johnson] were uneducated.  My father was a great mechanic.  He was an excellent mechanic, worked for the Chicago Herald American.  But they would not hire him as a mechanic, they--
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago Herald American, what is that?
Speaker 2: --It was a newspaper, which the Chicago Herald American is the newspaper that eventually became the [Chicago] Tribune.  And they would not hire him, and they called him a laborer.  But he was a fantastic mechanic and all the other white mechanics, whenever they got into trouble, they would come to him.  And they really showed complete disrespect for him.  I took him a Christmas dinner once and I asked for my father, Earl Johnson, he said, "You mean the old man?"  And I said, wait a minute, he has a name.  His name is Earl Johnson.  And then my father got angry with me because I started a rumpus at his job.  But he was a very--he believed in his family and his ambition was to have a house for his family.
Speaker 1: How did he get to Chicago [Illinois], he was from--
Speaker 2: He left home in Hattiesburg [Mississippi] very young.  He railroaded, I mean, you know, elbowed and came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: --At what age?
Speaker 2: Very young, I don't know the exact age, but it was very young.  I would imagine about sixteen, seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that where he met your mom?
Speaker 2: In Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: He met your mom in there?
Speaker 2: There in Hattiesburg.  They married in Hattiesburg, yeah.
Speaker 1: So when he came to Chicago and then sent--
Speaker 2: And then sent for her, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --And he was like seventeen?
Speaker 2: Around seventeen, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then about how long was it before he sent for your mom?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure the time.  Yeah, I know he sent for her as soon as he got established with a job and that sort of thing.  But, like I say his ambition was to buy a house, and he eventually bought one and he bought one from a Jewish fellow that--Arpel(ph.) was the name, and he ended up paying for this house at least three times.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Story_ID: 50379
Speaker 1: I did his income tax and he and I went over it, and he ended up paying for this house.  And the way, the thing what happened is it was all during the depression and that sort of thing and of course when money got tight, they would--he would let him owe him money, but he would charge him interest.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And the interest would build up and you know that way he ended up paying--
Speaker 2: So when he came to Chicago, do you know where he got a job or he would just labor or--
Speaker 1: --He got this job with the Herald American very early in his life.  I don't know if that was his first job.  I'm not sure of that.  But he got the job very early.  He worked for them thirty-some odd years.  And--
Speaker 2: --What year was this.  Got any kind of a time frame?
Speaker 1: Well, my oldest brother was born in 1918, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so it was close to, you know, around there, '17 [1917], '18 [1918].
Speaker 2: Your mom had come over a few years earlier?
Speaker 1: A few years after he got here and she worked very little.  She--she took care of the children, you know, seven children and she--she worked once or twice, doing very lenient--
Speaker 2: Before the house do you know where the family was staying?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Where were they staying?
Speaker 1: They were renting in the '30s on, I think, Vincent.  And then they eventually got the house at 4615 Evans.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which is where--
Speaker 2: He bought the house during the depression or before the depression?
Speaker 1: --During the depression, I think.  It went during the depression and that's 19, 1920, '23 [1923].
Speaker 2: He had a job, he was working?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was working.  My mother always said that he had odd jobs up until he got this regular job.  So, you know--
Speaker 2: You were born in--
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-five.
Speaker 2: --In the house?  Did they have the house in those days?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  He didn't have the house when I was born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you remember the house?
Speaker 1: Uh-uh.  Not where I was born.
Story_ID: 50380
Speaker 1: So, what--
Speaker 2: What happened was that the family--the children was kind of farmed out.  I was sent with my grandmother to Mississippi at age four, at four-years old.  My sister went with my aunt in Texas.  She was around two.  And you know that was a way of dealing with the depression.  And the--and so I stayed in Mississippi from age four, with my grandmother, from age four until I was nine, five years.  And I came back in 1933, I think it was.  But--
Speaker 1: --When you came back, you came back home?
Speaker 2: Came back home--
Speaker 1: With your parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, uh-huh.  And I came back [to Chicago, Illinois] the year of the World's Fair [1933].  And I wanted to see the World's Fair and that was my reason for coming back, but I came back and went to school here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, tell us about the--
Speaker 2: But let me say this, that the period of time in Mississippi was the basis of my life.  It was I mean my grandmother was very religious, extremely religious.  We went to church all day like in four times on Sunday.  I mean we stayed at church and Sunday school and eleven o'clock service and the three o'clock service, BYPU and the evening serv--even ate there at the church.
Speaker 1: --What is BYPU?
Speaker 2: Baptist Young People's Union.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it established, I think, a moral basis of my life, because what happened was, after I got back to Chicago, I went crazy and got caught up in the city.  And the only thing, survival, was to go back to Hattiesburg [Mississippi].  I went back to Hattiesburg at twenty-two years old.  I left DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and got messed up at DuSable and got in trouble, caught up with the drugs and the whole situation at DuSable.  And my whole salvation was to go back to Hattiesburg.
Story_ID: 50381
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go through this.  You first came back from Mississippi at the age of nine?
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: And then where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Forestville [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: Went to Forestville?
Speaker 2: Went to Forestville then I graduated and went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And--
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Forestville, do you know the year?
Speaker 2: --Let's see, it must have been 1939--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then on to DuSable?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause I was supposed to graduate from DuSable in 1943, and I didn't.  I ended up dropping out, and wouldn't even let me back in DuSable.
Speaker 1: Got any memories about who was around during those DuSable days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to, you know, I start--got in the band the first year, and Gene Ammons was in the band, he was the, I guess maybe a senior, but he was in later, and Johnny Griffin and I got in the band together, the same year, but Gene Ammons was the star of the band.  And I remember a situation that we all loved Lester Young.  I played saxophone, Johnny Griffin played saxophone, Gene Ammons played saxophone, and so we all idolized Lester Young.  And we went to the Regal Theater and Lester Young was at the Regal and we came back to school that Monday morning--this was on Sunday.  Monday morning we came back to school and Gene Ammons got up and threw his horn up in the air like Lester Young and Dyett said get that God damn horn out of the air, and said you gotta learn how to play the MF first.  And he just jumped all over him.  But I didn't stay in the band too long.
Speaker 1: What instrument were you playing?
Speaker 2: Tenor.
Speaker 1: You played Tenor?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got--I was--that was one of the biggest mistakes of my life because I thought I had a good ear.  I could play anything I heard by ear, and at that time I got the idea that learning music would spoil your ear, you know, which was stupid.  But I--and then Dyett was a disciplinarian, very strong disciplinarian, and you had to walk the chalk line.  And so I ended up dropping out of the band, but I kept playing, and I played on even when I went to Mississippi, I was playing.  That was one of the salvations.  When I went back to school, I went back to Mississippi at twenty-two years old in the eleventh grade, and I finished at twenty-two.  But I was playing saxophone and they were coming back from the--from Vietnam, the soldiers were coming back, so I was--I was--
Speaker 1: Vietnam or World War II?
Speaker 2: --No.  From Korea.
Speaker 1: From Korea?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so it wasn't a fact that you know I wasn't the only older person in school and which was one of the salvations, you know, I wasn't sticking out--
Speaker 1: This is back in the Mississippi?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 50382
Speaker 1: Tell us about like your grandmother, was that your father's [Earl Johnson] mom or your--
Speaker 2: My father's mother
Speaker 1: Your father's mother?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit--
Speaker 2: Now she--see my mother [Nellie Johnson] and father had no education past high school or even, I don't know if they graduated from high school, but my grandmother, she saw to it that all of her remaining children, the children that didn't leave home and this was the girls, that they went to college.  And all three of them, her daughters, she saw them through college.  Two of 'em went to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] and the third one went to Texas.  But that was the basis of--you see if nobody in your family has ever gone to college, it's not a big thing.  The impetus is get a job, you know.  But when--with my grandmother she understood the benefits of coll--and as I say, she's very strong influence and though they didn't have a whole lot of money, but she found ways to get those three girls through college.  And they in turn influenced me. You know you got to go to college.  Ain't no messing--no other alternative, you got to go to college.  So when I went back Mississippi, you got to go--and I finished school--the high school in Mississippi, you got to go to college.  So it was--two of my aunts had gone to Tougaloo.  It was right outside of Jackson, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 50383
Speaker 1: So, you know, I went to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  And went to Tougaloo for two years and then I went to--came back to Roosevelt [College now Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] and I finished at Roosevelt--went in the [U.S.] army first and then--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Tougaloo, two years of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, Tougaloo.  Tell us about--you went there and you started in Tougaloo what year?
Speaker 1: Tougaloo, in what, class of '47' (1947).
Speaker 2: What did you study?
Speaker 1: I was in social studies.  I was in social studies and then when I got into Roosevelt, I got into political science.  And my degree from Roosevelt was in political science, but it came out of social studies at Tougaloo.
Speaker 2: At any one of these schools, Tougaloo or Roosevelt, was there any indication of or any spark of interests in the arts?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And matter of fact, Tougaloo is where the first situation came.  I was a Edgar Allen Poe fan and I had learned The Raven and they had a situation when the freshman came, they had to entertain the upperclassmen.  And if you knew anything, if you could do anything, you did it on freshman night to entertain the upperclassmen.  I did The Raven.  And the instructor, the drama instructor, was there and saw me do The Raven and right after that, he came straight to me and said look, I want you in drama and he said now normally we don't take freshman into it, but I got a play for you and I want--like for you to do it.  And the name of the play was The Fool by Channing Pollock.  And the theme of the play was what--what would happen if Christ came back to the world today, how would--what would happen?  It's fantastic play.  And that was really my first play, and I had the star lead--had the lead you know.  So that was my first dealing with theater, and of course when I came to Tougaloo [sic, Roosevelt], I got in the drama class, Joan [Abena Joan Brown]--and that's where I met Joan.
Speaker 2: I thought when you came to Roosevelt?
Speaker 1: Roosevelt, yeah.  And that's where Joan and I met.
Speaker 2: What Joan are we talking about?
Speaker 1: Joan Brown, uh-huh.  We were both in the drama class at Roosevelt, together.  And we sat around waiting for a black part to come along, a maid, butler, or something, and it didn't.  So we went out into the community and got into Drama Incorporated, which was a community drama group, and it was really headed by a lady named Lillian Tompkins who was a costumer for the Shubert Theater and--but she was into theater and she formed this Drama Incorporated.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: It had to be '49 [1949], had to be '49.  I came to Roosevelt in, let's see I stayed '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  I came to Roosevelt in '49.
Story_ID: 50384
Speaker 1: Now, in these days you got out of Roosevelt [College now Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] with a degree in political science?
Speaker 2: In political science.
Speaker 1: So, where did you work when you got out of school?
Speaker 2: I was working on the railroad all the way through the school.  I worked as a waiter on the railroad for ten years.  So I worked on the rail--had a great job.  I would--was able to get on the train at night and say, seven o'clock at night and do my homework, go to bed and get up and go to Battle Creek, Michigan.  Get up in Battle Creek, Michigan, load--stock up the train and come back to Chicago [Illinois] by nine o'clock in the morning.  I had--and I had to--my first class at Roosevelt was at 9:25.  We did this twenty-days days on and eight days off.  And it worked perfectly, you know, that the--and then I could come in with money.  I didn't even have to worry about my paycheck, you know, I'm making tips and it was--it was really great.
Speaker 1: When did you start on the railroad, I mean, how did that began?
Speaker 2: My brother worked on the railroad.  My brother worked on the Santa Fe, James Arthur.  He had been working on the Santa Fe--
Speaker 1: Older brother or younger?
Speaker 2: Older brother.  And he worked on the Santa Fe, and he--and I first started, as a summer job, you know.  And he--I didn't go on the Santa Fe, I went on the Grand Trunk.  Grand Trunk and Western, which was a Canadian National, which is the United States side of the Canadian National.  And of course we did run up in Canada.
Speaker 1: Now this was even before Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, College] or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, this was after--after I came here and started at Roosevelt.  And my whole time during Roosevelt, I worked on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Were you a porter?
Speaker 2: I was a waiter.
Speaker 1: You were a waiter?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, as I said, the money was good, I was able to study at night and you know I did--all I served was breakfast coming back from Battle Creek, Michigan, serving breakfast and got in at nine o'clock and went--my first class at Roosevelt, 9:25, just had to walk right over from the Dearborn Street Station, and walked right over there at nine twenty-five.
Speaker 1: When did you leave the railroad?
Speaker 2: As I said I worked there for ten years.  I worked the railroad, so if that was '39 [1939], I went into the army, you know, for--and I mean, that was '49' [1949].  I went in the [U.S.] army in 1950 and got out in '52 [1952] and came back and worked at the railroad for six or seven more years.
Story_ID: 50385
Speaker 1: Okay and your [U.S.] army days, you served where?
Speaker 2: In Germany, uh-huh.  I was in Texas first, at Fort Hood Texas, and Fort Sill in Oklahoma, for school, and Fire Direction School, it was the 16th Armory Field Artillery.  And I had a little more education, I guess, than the average one in the--cause I was in school.  I fought the army like--I fought going to the army like everything.  I mean I did not want to go into the army.  I wrote President [Harry S.] Truman and everybody, trying to stay out the army.  And what they did, see if you were in school, you know, you didn't have to go, but they waited until the summer and got me in between and I had already registered for school, and I told em, I said I registered for school.  They said, no, you got to be in school, going to class, you know.  And like I said, I wrote everybody and I ended up having to go in, so.  But after I got in, everything worked out for me.  I went to Germany and played soldier, you know.  There was no war going on.  And I got to see Germany, France and you know Europe and, two years.
Speaker 1: So you got out before Korea, before the Korean Conflict, right?
Speaker 2: The Korean Conflict was going on, 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, you just lucked out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they sent me to--I was sitting up in Fort Hood, Texas, watching them--these soldiers going to Korea every morning, and you know, I'm--and they all packed up and lined up and going and I said oh, hell, one of these days, you know.  But then my whole outfit, they shipped my whole outfit, which was artillery outfit, to Germany.  They were talking about the Russians were coming through the Khyber Pass, or something.  So they sent this outfit to Germany.  And I--I was about to say I ended up--I wanted to get in the--in special service band, cause I was still playing.  And but I had a little bit more education, I think, than the average person, and so they sent me to artillery school in Oklahoma, Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  And I ended up as a fire directions specialist.  I learned--you know the funny thing, I was in school, I could not deal with trigonometry at all.  Got in the army, they taught me trigonometry like that, I mean, it all just, partly because it was practical, but the other part was that they had good teachers, you know, but then we saw the practical application of it and firing a shell here and plotting out where it would land, you know.  So that's what I did.
Speaker 1: And you got out of the army in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two.
Speaker 1: In '52 [1952].
Story_ID: 50386
Speaker 1: Came back to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Came back to Chicago, got right back on the railroad, went on to school.  I went--went back to Roosevelt [College, now Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] and I finished in--what is that by then what year did I finish Roosevelt, '50 [1950], what '54 [1954], it must have been '55 [1955], in '55.  Then I went to graduate school at Roosevelt [sic, DePaul University].  I was going to law school.    And I tell everybody this, I was going to law school because of Perry Mason, you know, I loved Perry Mason.  And so I got into law because of Perry Mason.  All of a sudden I found out that Perry Mason was an actor, Raymond Burr was an actor.  Now he wasn't a lawyer, so I switched over to--
Speaker 1: Did that sort of get you back into the arts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it wasn't--that wasn't--it wasn't quite like that, but yeah.  I was going to--I went to State Way Gardens, and this was really the beginning of my interests outside because the drama group at Drama Incorporated, they had--none of them would let me direct them.  You know I was in the same group, I was in the group with a lot of actors, but they would not let me cause I was one of them.  So I had to go to the park district to--and I got a job at the park district to make some money while I was going to law school, but I ended up spending more time in theater, just naturally, than I spent in the law school.
Story_ID: 59648
Speaker 1: A group had the place at 82nd and Cottage Grove, and it was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --The Israelites--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Phil Cohran, they had, what did they call that, Transitions East.
Speaker 1: Transitions East, that was it, yeah.  I did--did one of the first plays of Transitions East, yeah.  I had forgotten the name of it.
Speaker 2: So what about Drama Incorporated?
Speaker 1: Okay, you ready?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Drama Incorporated was a community theater company, and it was a group of people who wanted to learn and wanted to practice acting.  And it was going on before I, you know, while I was in Roosevelt [College, Chicago, Illinois] and Abena [Joan Brown] was in Roosevelt.  And I think Abena found out about it first, but we both got into it around the same time, and it offered us an opportunity to not only do theater, but to learn theater.  We were--we had several teachers and the way--the interesting way that we would pay for our teaching was we'd find a teacher and then we would chip in two dollars a session.  It was something like sixteen, seventeen people into--that were in these classes.  So, we started out with Wesley Johnson, who had a Ph.D. from Goodman and who nobody would hire.  And--so we had--they didn't even want him, you know, in the school at Goodman, but he stuck it out and went through--and he ended up an alcoholic.  He ended up at the NRA Theater out on 58th and Prairie and--as the janitor.  Ph.D., from Goodman and--but he taught us--and he was one of our teachers. And then we had a Jewish woman, I can't think of her name, but--
Speaker 2: Was this an integrated group, or was it--
Speaker 1: --No, it was all African American group, but an all-black group.  But Lillian Tompkins was the--as I say, she was the key person, the inspiration.  One of the things that--we did a number of plays, I know we did "Eloise", we did--
Speaker 2: --This was the '50s [1950s], right?
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  What was the--"The Fugitive" and some of the other plays.  But we did a number of very good plays. Then we ended up going over on 52nd right off of Stoney Island--right off of Stoney Island, and we bought--rented a place.
Speaker 2: Where were you before?  Where was it before?
Speaker 1: Well, we didn't have a place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We went to--we did a play at--we did most of our plays at the Lincoln Center, which is now Center for Inner City Studies, on that stage, we did--so we had a number of different teachers, but they were all very qualified teachers.  And two of 'em were white, one black, but we paid them the same way.  Everybody would come up with two dollars--
Speaker 2: You'd meet at Lincoln Center all the time.  That was sort of like--
Speaker 1: --Well, we would meet, sometimes we even went out to this lady's house at 6800 North--6000 North--we'd go out to her house, we'd meet at different places.  But very religious about meeting, you know.  We had a certain--I think we met once a week and we paid the two dollars, and that's the way we learned.  We really got, you know, the training that we needed.
Story_ID: 59649
Speaker 1: --Were there any other black groups around?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  There were a number of black groups.  Sky Loft (ph.) was the biggest.  Sky Loft was at 51st and King Drive.  And I had even gone to Sky Loft to get into Sky Loft, and I really don't know what happened, but I think the people at Ebony (unclear) was, you know, that that--just was more interesting and I got into that.
Speaker 1: Sky Loft, were there any others?
Speaker 2: Sky Loft and Center Aisle.  There were a number of theater groups because theater was--there was quite a few interesting black theater.  Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] would hold a soiree every year--once a year, and they would pull the black groups together, and they would do one-act plays and give awards to--so it was for--
Speaker 1: Where, did they do it on campus?
Speaker 2: --No, they did it at 46th and Ellis, at that church.  I remember most of them were there, at that church.  And that's where Center Aisle was located.  And David Crowder had studied playwriting at Northwestern and he was in--and Ray Stubbs, who--he was one of the main actors, but he was--both of them were with Drama Incorporated.
Story_ID: 59650
Speaker 1: And so out of Drama Incorporated Abena [Joan Brown, HM] and I formed ETA.   Now ETA was Ebony Talent Associates.
Speaker 2: What year did you start it, I mean really start it?
Speaker 1: In the early '60s' (1960s).  And Val Gray Ward was in it, Useni Perkins was in it, and those two people I mentioned, David Crowder and [Ray Stubbs]--
Speaker 2: And you're the founder, the founders were?
Speaker 1: --No, I was not the founder of Ebony-- of--no, I was not the founder.  Of ETA?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I was among the founders, yeah, yeah.  I was among the founders of ETA.
Speaker 2: You were an original member?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Of ETA, yeah.  Abena and I were among the original founders of ETA, yeah.  And then the situation happened that we were sued by Johnson Publishing Company for using the word "ebony", "Ebony Talent".  And he took us to court and we stayed in court back and forth, and at that time, we were trying to build our own theater and he kept us in court and the judge said, well, you know, look, he says the word "ebony" is a generic term.  And I'll  eventually--the judge called us in chambers, he say, but this man's got too much money.  He will keep you in court and you all don't have the money, you know, to fight--say why don't you go head and settle with him and, you know, so we changed the name from Ebony Talent Associates to ETA.
Speaker 2: Now this is what year?
Speaker 1: Seventy-one, 1971.
Speaker 2: You started Ebony Talent Association in what year, what year was that started?
Speaker 1: This is Ebony Talent.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What '69 [1969] is Ebony Talent.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine you started?
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, '69, yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you have a home?
Speaker 1: Well, Archie Western was the attorney and he had an office downtown on Washington and--but we, our office was in his office.
Speaker 2: What did you do?  What was the function, what was the mission of Ebony Talent Associates?
Speaker 1: The mission was basically to put on theater, to learn, study and to create theater, to have a black theater.  Our statement was "Black Theater Promoted by Black People".  That was our mission statement.
Speaker 2: Did you have a production?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were doing productions all the time.  Then I went to Stateway Gardens and a lot of--we did some of the productions in Stateway Gardens.  We were doing them all around, you know.  But we didn't get--we didn't get a home until 1978 and that's when we went to--when Dempsey Travis got this theater here, where we are now.
Speaker 2: Which is?
Speaker 1: At 76th and South Chicago.
Story_ID: 59651
Speaker 1: All right. Now Ebony Talent Association, was it a talent organization, you know, was it not only a theater, was it a talent--
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you what happened.  "Raisin in the Sun" came to Chicago [Illinois].  I guess this was '69 [1969], I think it was '69' (1969), anyway, "Raisin in the Sun" came to Chicago.  I was at Stateway Gardens and had a drama group at Stateway Gardens and they--the persons who got the--the extras, the contract to get the extras was a modeling agency downtown.  They had no black people.
Speaker 1: --So, we're talking about the film?
Speaker 2: The film, yes.  Sabee's(ph.) Modeling Agency.  It was downtown, and he got the contract to get the extras.  He didn't have any black people, even in his modeling agency.  So he--somehow he got my name and that I was--had the drama group at Stateway Gardens.  And so he invited me down and they wanted to hire me and then he--do you know any other actors?  I said, "how many" because I had a drama group with like twenty-eight some people.  And so I said yeah, how many you need?  And he said well as many as you can get.  So I brought over twenty-five people down to this modeling agency.  And they worked the whole film as extras and I was a principle, but everybody else was extras.  And then when the money came he said--I said well look, I know you got to--you gon' split the money with Ebony Talent, cause we were the ones who got you the extra people.  Oh, we can't afford to do that, that our overhead's too high and blah, blah, blah.  And so we said now this don't make sense, you know.  Here we are getting the talent for something and then he wanted to take half of my money.  And so we said let's start a talent agency and so we brought the agency into--the talent agency into Ebony Talent.
Story_ID: 59652
Speaker 1: Now, you say you were at Stateway [Gardens] also.  Was this the same time as Ebony Talent [ETA]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was in law--as I said, when I was in law school, I went to Stateway Gardens just to have a part time job and make some money while I was in law school, cause I'd gotten off the railroad, and I found myself spending more time at Stateway Gardens in drama than I was at law school so I just ended up--I went to DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] for two years in law.  And I ended up getting adjusted to them, spending--so I informed the drama group there at Stateway Gardens, the first drama group that was there--
Speaker 1: Give us an address?
Speaker 2: --Fifty-eight--38th and State, 3759 South State--3758 South State.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: It was what, '60 [1960]--'59 [1959] when I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '59'.  So--
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you do at Stateway Gardens?
Speaker 2: --Well, the first play that I did was "Green Pastures".  And I brought a church in to do the music, the choir, one of the churches down on State Street to do the choir, and I did "Green Pastures" and put wings on the angels, and James Spinks was Noah.
Speaker 1: Now tell us who James Spinks is?
Speaker 2: James Spinks was ended up in "Car Wash".  And he was--he was just a--he lived--I don't know if he lived in Stateway or in the community, but he heard we were casting and he came in and he got into--and that was my first play and that was his first play.  He had never done the stage before, and he played Noah.  And with his big self, you know how big he was.  He's knocking over scenery, but it went over well.  So then the next play I did was "Raisin in the Sun".
Speaker 1: Were you paid at Stateway?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah.  I was paid by Chicago Park District as a drama instructor and I had--it was a political thing.  I had to go to a--to a alderman and get a letter and all of that just to get the job you know.  And that's a whole 'nother story, but I--So I did "Raisin in the Sun" and they had--the drama group would meet every summer.  They would have the--all the drama instructors would get together.  Now there was Theater on the Lake.  And no black person has ever directed at Theater on the Lake.  So I asked 'em why.  I said why is it that there's no black person at Theater on the Lake?  And she said because they're not any good enough.  I said wait a minute, I'm as good as anybody you got and I'm better than most.  And I dare you to come out and see my play and tell me otherwise.  So she came out, brought an entourage, about fifteen people on a Sunday afternoon.
Story_ID: 59653
Speaker 1: This is the people from Theater on the Lake?
Speaker 2: Theater on the Lake, yeah.  Ruth Schwartz(ph.), was her name.  And she brought about fifteen people to have company for coming into the black community.  And she saw "Raisin in the Sun".  And all from that point on, "you've got to come to Theater on the Lake".  So I did--ended up doing five plays at Theater on the Lake.  And "Purlie Victorious" "Hat Full of Rain", and then I said wait a minute, why am I doing these plays down here?  I should be doing plays in my own community.  And I told her that, I'm not going back to Theater on the Lake anymore, I've done five plays there.  I've done what I thought, you know, and by that time Theater--they had integrated then, you know, they brought, I think, another director in.  But anyway, she got mad, well, here we go let you in, now you gonna desert us, you know.  So I said, well, I just don't feel that I should continue doing plays at Theater on the Lake, I need to do plays in my community, you know.
Speaker 1: So, Theater on the Lake, you were sort of like drafted to go to Theater on the Lake, instead of Stateway Gardens?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The park district, if you were in the park district, the park district theater groups were selected.  The best of the park district theater groups were selected to do summer theater at Theater on the Lake.  And they had, I think, around six or seven groups do over the summer.  And so as I said, she told us that we weren't good enough that's why they didn't have a black--have a black person that never directed there because there were no black people good enough.  And she had nerve enough to come out and tell me that, you know.
Speaker 1: So that was just a summer thing?
Speaker 2: Just a summer thing, yeah, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 59654
Speaker 1: The rest of the year you were at--
Speaker 2: At the park, yeah.  And we did our plays at the park.  And then they would come out and see em and--and then invite you out to Theater on the Lake, you know.
Speaker 1: --Okay so then we formed ETA and you--when did you get the location, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: That came about--the impetus for that came from Lillian Tompkins, who the person was an impetus for Drama Incorporated, said you've got to own your own theater.  We've been vagabonding around, going all different places, doing plays, and she said you've got to own your own theater.  Well, that was years before we finally ended up getting it.  And so, by 1971, we had founded the organization.  By 1978 is--we got the grant from Washington [D.C.], National Endowment [for the Arts].  Vantile Whitfield came on the scene.  Did you know Vantile?  Anyway Vantile Whitfield got the job of--at the National Endowment, and that was to bring black--more black people into the National Endowment, and we were one of them and our first budget was 12,000 dollars.  And so that was in--and we found this place with Dempsey Travis was the person who--he, you know, real estate, and he found this factory.  It was a--it was a factory there at 76th and South Chicago.  And we did--from 1978 we did all the plays up front in which is now the gallery until 1988.  And in 1988 my play, "The Billie Holiday [Story]" play was the first play that went into there.  And--
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of those early productions in the gallery?
Speaker 2: --Well, one of my--I did "The Regal Theater" in the gallery and it went over very well.  "The Regal Theater" was probably one of the better plays that we did at the time.  It was--what happened was Runako [Jahi] and I were driving down King--
Speaker 1: Who's Runako?
Speaker 2: --Runako is now the artistic director of ETA and he was a student at the time.  But we drove--we're driving down King Drive and I saw the Regal.  It had been closed.  But there was this big gaping hole in the side of it and we stopped and we got out the car and went up into this gaping hole in the side of the Regal and got upon the stage.  And I start crying.  Tears just start pouring down.  And I said, look at--look what has happened to this--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: --It must have been--I did the first "Regal Theater" in '87 [1987], so it must have been around '85 [1985] or '86 [1986].  And I wrote--so I said we got to do something to, you know, to hold onto this, and so I wrote "The Regal Theater".  And I got lucky.  One of the television stations heard about it and they put the audition on television, and I got everybody in the city, Barbara Lasure(ph.), Sherry Scott from Earth Wind and Fire, Takia Kuma(ph.).  And I got the best people and Bernard Mixon and Kevin McIilvane and all these--so we did every group that has ever been to the Regal, but not every group, but we did most of the groups--the good groups, The Temptations, everybody from The Ink Spots to The Temptations, now the groups that had been in the Regal.  And just between you and I, that's where Jackie Taylor (ph.) saw--first saw using the--The Entertainers and so did Ed Gardner (ph.).  Ed Gartner came to see the four shows.  He kept coming back, brought his wife back and later on he set up the Regal Theater at the--
Speaker 1: The new Regal Theater.
Speaker 2: --The new Regal Theater.  But you know he never admitted that he was inspired by the show.  And I--cause I came to him, I said look--looks like when you open it, you would do the Regal Theater, do our show at the opening, you know.  Naw, uh-uh, uh-uh.
Story_ID: 59655
Speaker 1: Do you remember the very first production that ETA put on?
Speaker 2: The very first production that ETA put--
Speaker 1: In the space, in the new space, the very first show?
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sam Cooke?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Sam Cooke.  It was before Sam Cooke.  I think it was "S.C.L.C."  "S.C.L.C.: Second Coming Last Chance", yeah, and I had written that.  And we did it first out to Transition East.
Speaker 1: Which is where?
Speaker 2: Transition, 83rd and Cottage Grove.  And then we got the theater during that same time, and we put it on cause Runako [Jahi] was there and we did it.  I think that was the first play and we moved it from Transition East into that building.
Story_ID: 59656
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm going to backtrack a little bit.  This is back in the late '70s [1970s].  Let's go back a little bit.  You've got a lot of history here in terms of television.  You were the first black director?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's an interesting story.  Richard Durham, who was at the time, the editor of Muhammad Speaks, which was a Muslim newspaper.  And he had heard about--that this--they were getting ready to do a television show here in Chicago [Illinois], and he also had heard about the--they were teaching black directors in Boston [Massachusetts], WGBH, in Boston.  So he knew--he told me, he says, why don't you go to Boston and take this course.  I said, fine you know.  So I went to [W]GBH in Boston.  It was about a six, seven-week course.
Speaker 1: This is what year?
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: Seventy?
Speaker 2: --No.  The six--huh?
Speaker 1: Seventy-four?
Speaker 2: No Bird.  This was before Bird of the Iron Feather.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bird of the Iron Feather was what, '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: In '69 (1969).  Yeah, so this had to be '67 [1967], yeah.  And this was '67' (1967).  And I went to GBH in Boston and I took this course.  So then we came back and they were just getting ready to do this first black Chicago--the first black soap opera for Chicago.  Channel 11 had gotten a 600,000 dollar grant from the Ford Foundation to do black television.  And so they start auditioning and that sort of thing, so we--I went out to audition as an actor, and they gobbled me up as an actor.  And--but I said, after I got in, I said, I don't want to be no actor, I'm a director.  And, "oh, well, we have our directors".  I said you got white directors?  "Well, yes."  Are you gon' have white directors in a black television (unclear)?  Well, these are our directors and blah, blah, blah.  I said, no, you can't do that.  And so we started that whole thing and that you can't have white directors directing a black television show.  That was the beginning of it.
Story_ID: 50396
Speaker 1: Okay.  "Bird of the Iron Feather", the first black television soap opera in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we have to understand that there were no black people in television at this time.  This was 1967.  There were no black people in television anywhere.  I'm talking about directors, behind the scene persons, in lighting, there were no on-camera persons, black persons.  The one on-camera black person was Jim Tillman, who did a show called "Our People" at WTTW around the same time.  But it was directed by a white person.  So they wanted to have their white directors to direct "Bird of the Iron Feather" and we said no.  And so, in order to enforce--they were insisting, we were insisting, so we went to a community organization called the Coalition for United Community Action, and this was '60s [1960s] remember.  And they got into dialog with WTTW about this show.  And we start putting demands on WTTW in terms of--their idea was to do a hundred television shows for $6,000 each and using student writers and using unpaid tele--actors, and so we said, no, you can't do that.  If you're gonna do a black television show in Chicago, the first black television show that ever been in Chicago, you gon' do it right, and you gonna do it with quality.  So now--so this idea of a black--of the student writers has to go.  There we have professional writers, and Dick Durham, Richard Durham, was as we said at the time, he was editor of Muhammad Speaks, but he had written for the black--for the white soap operas.  He'd written for the "Long Ranger" all under assumed name of course, I mean, they would not allow his name, but he's ghost writing.  And we said, so we've got people who can write, you know, we've got people who can direct and--so I told them, I said, well I've been to GBH [WGBH Boston], which is your sister station, and I've learned--I've taken directing, so I'm ready to direct.  I have fifteen years of directing in the theater, and so putting that together with television, I'm ready to direct television.  No, no, no, it takes five years, you gotta have five years of directing training.  I said look, I've taken this course in Boston [Massachusetts] and they--I have a certificate that says I am qualified.  And so, I'm insisting that.  They wanted to hire me as a drama coach to teach, I mean, to coach the actors for the white directors.  I said, I'm not gon' do that.  I'm a director and that's what I want to be.  So they said, well, no.  And so then the Coalition got the Black Stone Rangers together and put 'em on a bus and went out to WTTW and took over the station.  We had eleven demands.  And on the top demand was that Harold Johnson would become a director.  The other was that in every capacity where there--in every capacity of the production, if you don't have--we want a black person in every capacity, if you don't have one, you train one.  So that was one of the eleven demands.  And so finally they agreed under this pressure.
Story_ID: 50397
Speaker 1: Ed Morris was the station manager.  And he come running--they had Clarence McIntosh, was your black man out front, doing all the dirty work.  And he was--that this is the way, this has gotta go, and this is--
Speaker 2: He was a lawyer or--
Speaker 1: --No, he just--he just worked for the station.  He worked--had been working for the station.  He was a black person working for the station.  He was one of the producers.  So they made him producer of "Bird of the Iron Feather".
Speaker 2: --And Ed Morris was the--
Speaker 1: Station manager, uh-huh.  So when we went out there with the Black Stone Rangers, Ed Morris come running out.  We had never seen Ed Morris.  He had been behind the scenes all the time, and he came running out, what can we do, Harold, what can we do, what can we do?  I handed him the eleven demands, and he signed them right away.  So that put me in line to direct.  I was supposed to sign the contract come Wednesday.  My wife's mother died in Birmingham, Alabama, and they were having the funeral that Wednesday, so I told 'em I had to go to the funeral and I would sign the contract when I came back.  When I came back they had gone to New York and gotten Leroy Inman (ph.).
Speaker 2: Who is he?
Speaker 1: Well, Leroy Inman was a--was a black person in television.  But he got him to be the drama coach, the job that I would not take, and I was out, completely out.  And so here we go again, and Archie Weston, we were gonna sue the station, the lawyer, who's ETA's lawyer.  And we went through this community's organization [Coalition for United Community Action] anyway and so they finally agreed that I would be a director.  And so they said, what's gonna happen with Leroy Inman now?  They said hire him as a director too.  So that meant we had two black directors and two white.  And that's the way it went down.  Now the--the--one of the white directors would not train us.  You know, we had to be trained into their way of doing things, so they said, how long is that--well--well, we'll tell you when you're ready to, I said, no, no, no, I will tell you when I'm ready, and I will do it in a month.  I'll put on my first show in a month.  And they said, oh no, it takes much--I said in one month, I will put on my first show, and in a month, I did put on--I chose the script, put on my first show.  They had opened up the communication all over the whole station, waiting for me to fall on my face and letting everybody hear this--me directing this first show. I didn't know that, and the--so I went through--I did a twenty minute tape just straight through, without boom.  And somebody hollered, "Harold, that was great."  And I said, "what--why are these people on the intercom" and found out that they had intercom all over the station.  So I went on and did the show and Abraham, Lou Abraham, was standing behind me, the person who had taught me.  Oh he was--every morning he would come down, come on Harold, we gonna do this, we gonna do that, and so when--after I shot that first show, I turned around to shake his hand, and he refused to shake my hand.  And Ed Morris was sitting next to me and I said, what's wrong with him?  And he said, don't you know?  I said, no.  And he said, come on, let's step outside.  And he took me outside, he said listen, you just did in one month, what it has taken him fifteen years to do.  And you did it better than him.  And I said, but he taught me. He said, yeah, long as he was teaching you, you were under him, but now you're equal to him and he can't take it.  I said, well I'll be damned.  I've never heard of anything like that in my life.  And, he's a Jewish fellow too, and he--so I--he came out of the--out of the director's booth and passed by and he said Harold, don't you come in my--in the studio when I'm directing anymore.  I said you kiss my (laughing). I said, look, I'm a director now.  So I will come in there anytime, and Ed Morris is standing right there by me, I said, anytime I want to, I will come into that station.  And you know he would not speak to me after that.  And like I said, I've never seen anything like that in my life.
Story_ID: 50398
Speaker 1: How long, how--what do you think of the production itself?
Speaker 2: The production, well, it started out rough because we did have a lot of people just getting into the whole thing from acting, from the directing, from the lighting, from a lot of different points, but it was rough, the beginning.  However, the opening, things were done by the white directors and they were--they got the most criticism.  We got into it and after we got into it, I think that it became--it smoothed out and we got very good reviews.  However, we also got a lot of criticism and most of the criticism came from whites and the black people loved it.  Black people loved it, the white people couldn't figure out what it was--why are you doing this and you know, what--and they didn't change the language, the language was you know a little rough, but it was TTW [WTTW Chicago], so we didn't have the language problem, you didn't have the problem you had on commercial television about language, so--
Speaker 1: How long did it run?
Speaker 2: It ran for twenty-one segments and had twenty-one half hour segments.  And we did it every Wednesday night.  And it got quite a bit of publicity.  And then they--after it went off the air, they claimed that it was overloaded by--by the demands that the community had put on it, and by demanding that you know to have black directors, black writers and said they were overloaded and instead of one hundred, we could only do twenty-one segments, half hour segments.  But then the quality was a whole lot there--we had Muhal Richard Abrams was the--was the artistic--was the musical director, Oscar Brown, Jr. did the lyrics for the opening song and so, you know, we said it's gonna be quality, if you gonna do it, let's do as quality.  And I think it ended up as quality television for you know the time that it was.  So after the--after it closed, the only--the only program that they would not--Dick Durham [Richard Durham] wrote a program about the--the Black Panthers, the Fred Hampton killing, murder, and that was the only one that they refused to do.  The rest of them they let us have--we didn't get to have any artistic, you know, interference along that line.  I mean I think we had fought them back so hard that they just, you know just stopped the fighting.  And then the program has been so well received in the black community that, you know, they let up.  They weren't opposing it.
Speaker 1: Was Dick Durham's piece on [Fred] Hampton, was it ever filmed, or was it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --It never got--
Speaker 2: Never got filmed.  And the most amazing thing, and Dick Durham was a brilliant, brilliant person.
Speaker 1: --He was a writer?
Speaker 2: He was a writer.  And he wrote the story, and I don't know where he got the story, but he wrote the story as that the FBI had put the--set up the whole Fred Hampton situation.  While we were out there, they came in and set up guns, lined up guns, this was the night of the murder, this was 1960 and they lined up the guns before it ever--the thing ever happened.  And at WTTW they were going to shoot the fact that they--and Dick Durham had written the whole thing out that there was an FBI informer in the house that had--had said where Fred Hampton's bed was, he had written all of this in this--in this program.  But they refused to do that.  That was the one episode that they refused to do.  And we ended up ending the thing in 19 what '60 [1960], I think, yeah.
Story_ID: 50399
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you ever--anymore television experience after that?
Speaker 2: I went to every station in the city asking for job, telling them my experience, telling 'em where I got the training, they said, "no".  And come to find out that TTW [WTTW Chicago] had put out the word that I was a trouble maker and so nothing.  Now, since there were not black--there were still no black directors, there was still no black people behind, there was still no black programs, there was still no black on-camera people.  So we turned around, in 1971, we challenged the license of every television, radio station in the City of Chicago.  We formed an organization called TCB, and we brought a--got a fellow from Washington [D.C.] who had done this before, who had challenged the--before the Interstate Commerce Commission.  The Interstate Commerce Commission licenses--license all of the television and radio stations throughout the country.  They have to come up for their renewal every three years.  So 1971 was renewal.  And so we formed this organization and challenged every radio, television station in the City of Chicago and won, and won.  And behind that they had to hire black people, black programming, black on-camera personnel.  And that was the whole thing, because we challenged them because they had no black program and no people, no black technicians or on-camera personnel.
Speaker 1: It didn't lead to any jobs for you though?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, they wouldn't--they wouldn't touch me.
Story_ID: 50400
Speaker 1: So back to theater for you?
Speaker 2: Back to theater, yeah.  I went back to theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're at ETA and how was moving from the gallery area at ETA to the theater?
Speaker 2: Well, the gallery area was still being used and we wanted to do Ted Ward's "A Candle in the Wind" which is a big play.  And I had gotten the job, by that time out to Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And I was--had also gone to--for my master's degree, I was out to Governors State [University, University Park, Illinois].  So I was working at Chicago State as technical director.  I  had--Darryl Goodman was my assistant and I--
Speaker 1: Darryl Goodman is?
Speaker 2: --Is now the technical director for both Chicago State and ETA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--so we did--since we couldn't get it into ETA, it was too big for that--that front room up there, we couldn't get in the back, it wasn't developed, so we went out to Chicago State to do "Candle in the Wind".
Speaker 1: And this is about 1979, right?
Speaker 2: Uhmmm, yeah.  And William Marshall, we got William Marshall to do the lead in--of "Candle in the Wind".  Very excellent production and he did a very good job as the leader.
Story_ID: 50401
Speaker 1: So the new theater had been built, but it was just--wasn't big enough for a--
Speaker 2: The new theater had not been built.
Speaker 1: --I see.
Speaker 2: And we were still doing stuff up in--into the--were still doing it up in the gallery. Now that's where we did "Kintu and the Law of Love".  While I was working out to Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], we had the--they had the CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] program came up in the summer program, so I had written this play, "Kintu and the Law of Love".  My son had run into this African folk tale in one of his books, this eleven-page folk tale.  And so I took it and developed--adapted it into a full length play, and with music and--and I wrote a number of songs for it.  And we put it on out to Chicago State first with the summer, the kids from the summer program, and they were being paid by CETA.
Speaker 1: What's CETA?  Explain CETA?
Speaker 2: It's--CETA was the federal program.  I've forgotten what the--CETA meant, but it was a federal program that paid young people for the--for working in the arts, and it was, yeah, Comprehensive Employment Training Act, CETA, yeah.  But they paid salaries for summer programs and it was just to give young people summer work, really.  Summer program and it's federal program.
Speaker 1: This is the late '70s [1970s], mid to late '70s?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  And so we did "Kintu and the Law of Love" and we got--use the dancers from the dance companies and they came and trained the young people.  They didn't bring their dancers, they trained the young people to do the African dances.  And then the drummers heard about it and they got into it.  So all of the top drummers in the city came to help us and they--some of 'em weren't even being paid, but they got enthused about the program and "Kintu and the Law of Love" became a big, big hit.  And we ended up--I did it later on at South Shore Cultural Center.  But the--we ran it all summer at Chicago State, and during that same summer, I got the job in the--with Robert Altman.  I did Robert Altman's movie, "The Wedding" [sic, A Wedding], and I brought the people from "The Wedding".  Altman hired a bus to bring his whole cast out there to see "Kintu and the Law of Love".  And yeah, they was quite enthused about it.
Story_ID: 50402
Speaker 1: Some of the other experiences.  You have a Broadway?  There's a Broadway experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did--Woodie King [HM] cast me in "Checkmates" written by Ron Milner out of Detroit [Michigan].  And Woodie King is from New York, New Federal Theater in New York [City, New York].  And he came to direct the play for ETA.  And he cast me in the role.  And the play went over very well here.  And after that they went to California, they did it around the country.  I didn't go with them.  But they did it around the country and they came back, they wanted to take it eventually to New York.  Now, they wanted me to do the role in New York and on Broadway at the 46th Street Theater.  But the producers wanted a name.  They had gotten Denzel Washington and Ruby Dee [HM] for the casts and they had a big problem about the female because they thought Woodie King wanted to get Elizabeth Van Dyke, who's his girlfriend at the time in the role, so they wouldn't hire her.  They got Marsha, what's Marsha's name, from Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Jackson.
Speaker 2: Marsha Jackson from Atlanta.  And then they--Paul Winfield, was the person that they got in the part that I had done.  And so, they got me as an understudy to Paul Winfield.  I became the understudy, so that's how I got on this Broadway thing.
Speaker 1: How was that experience?
Speaker 2: Great.  I enjoyed it, very much and I got, you know, I experienced--whole--the only problem about it is that I never went on.  And the reason, Paul Winfield was ready--had been chosen for a award in Washington, D.C.  He was supposed to go to Washington to receive this award, so all of sudden--he was making 5,000 dollars a week.  And so all of sudden if I had gone on in his understudy, I would have made the 5,000 dollars and--his salary.  So he said he couldn't afford the money.  And so, Woodie said it's not the money, can't be the money, and he said, I'll tell you what you do, you tell him you'll go on for your regular salary, which was just 925 dollars a week.  He said you'll go on with your regular salary, but you know, and he can keep his regular salary.  So we went to the producers and told 'em that.  And they said it's cool with us, you know.  If Paul Winfield is for it and Paul said, "no".  And he said--Woodie said, look, Paul Winfield knew that we wanted you in the first place and he was not gonna give you a chance to get on that stage.  And Ron Milner could not stand Paul Winfield, he could not stand him, and Paul knew that.  And so he said no.  So I didn't get on and at the end of the--end of the show, he wrote on my poster, maybe next time.  Yeah.  But the experience was great, New York and I saw--I got to see professional theater, I got to work in professional theater, I got to rehearse in professional theater, I rehearsed--when I anticipated going on I rehearsed with Ruby Dee and Denzel and you know.  And, so you know--and Darnell Williams was also Denzel's understudy.  Darnell Williams was Jesse on "All My Children" and he was Denzel's understudy and I was Paul Winfield's understudy.
Story_ID: 50403
Speaker 1: Tell us about--you got a master's in theater?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the Governor State [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois].  I--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Oh, that's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was in '80 [1980].  I had been working at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] as a technical director, and I wanted to work at Chicago State as a teacher instead of technical director.  And so I--he told--they told me you don't have enough, you know, enough credits, enough--so I went out to Governors State and got the master's.  And when--when I came back and got the master's and I say "Candle in the Wind" was my master's thesis.  And after I got the master's, we found out that there were two white direct--there were three white directors at Chicago State.  And here again they were fighting--they did not--I had done more plays as a technical director than they had done in the whole time they had been there as they were the teachers.  They were doing scenes and they were doing--but they never did full-length plays.  And I came in I did five, boom, boom, boom, every year I was there.  And then "Kintu and the Law of Love", and then "Candle in the Wind" you know had gotten such popularity and then they said no, uh-uh, they were not gon' have me.  And [Benjamin] Alexander was the president and he went along with this whole thing.  He--and the black professors out there, they had a whole big thing, but Alexander who he believed in integration and--
Speaker 1: He was like dean of the college?
Speaker 2: He was the president.
Speaker 1: President of the college?
Speaker 2: He's the president of the college, but he would not--he went along with the whole thing, not to hire me as an instructor.
Speaker 1: So you never got on?
Speaker 2: Not as--yeah, I did later on, but that was a little half thing and one semester and you know.  I did--I did one semester, every two semesters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was after Alexander left.
Story_ID: 50404
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were discussing some of your casting choices and the fact that some of your shows that you use a lot of non-actors?
Speaker 2: Well, that was something that I really got into and I found it to be very, very rewarding.  Starting with the Regal Theater, I brought people in, a number of people in, who had never done theater before, but they were either singers or they were performers and I did 'em, brought 'em, Moms Mabley in--but they--it worked out perfectly well.  The Regal, did the same thing with Sam Cooke, Alambus(ph.) Dean, who had never done theater.  He came in and did Sam Cooke in "[A] Change is Gon' Come", fantastic job.  LaDonna Tittle was in "[A] Change is Gon' Come".  She had never done a full-length play before.  I did "Jazz-Set" which was written by Ron Milner, fantastic play, incidentally.  But it was a spiritual--of a spiritual nature.  And I said, this is not an actor, this is not something for an actor to do, because an actor would come off phony.  I need someone who is deeply rooted in the spiritual aspects.  So Sherry Scott, who was with Earth Wind and Fire and Light Henry Huff, who was a musician in the city, and I asked Light to do that and I asked Sherry to do it.  And it worked out so beautifully.  Light Henry Huff was, I mean, he brought that spirituality to it and it was just whoo, just powerful, it just boom, blew up on the stage.  And I never will forget that performance that Light Henry Huff did with "Jazz-Set".  "Jazz-Set" was a very interesting concept.  Ron Milner wanted to do a play like jazz musicians would perform like they're doing solos and they're doing fours and doing eights and they--back and forth and I didn't understand it when I first read it, I didn't know what he was about.  So I went to Detroit [Michigan] and spent four days with him at his house and he went over the play with me and over--and his--were notes and so forth.  Then when I cast it he came to Chicago [Illinois] and was assisting me with the casting.  And then he explained to the cast, directly to the cast what the play was all about.  That's why I asked him to come so he could interpret it directly to the cast so they would understand exactly what he was after.  And this spirituality was one of the things that--that was so strong, the leader was a very spiritual person and he was a saxophone player.  The other thing about this play is they were all musicians, but nobody had real horns.  They had horns made of wire.  All the drums, the piano, the saxophone, the trumpet and the bass fiddle was made of wire.  And we found a young man, talented person, who made these instruments, I mean, life-sized bass, life-sized piano, all made of wire, fantastic.  And the music was--Vince Willis wrote the score behind it.  So when they were speaking--if the trumpet for instance was speaking then the trumpet music was playing behind it while he was speaking.  And that was his rap, was his solo, his you know, and it was done like a jazz set, and that was the name of it, beautiful.  But I was--getting back to Light Henry Huff.  Light had never done a play at all, and Sherry, I think, Sherry had done the Regal Theater and maybe a couple of other plays, but Sherry Scott was fantastic in it.  The same thing happened with "Billie Holiday".  I just did a--Billie Holiday and Lester, in "The Life of Billie Holiday and Lester Young".  And I got a young lady, Nuombia(ph.), to played Billie Holiday.  I met her out to Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], and she was in a singing group.  And then I heard--was at the other place and I saw Bruce Robinson, saxophone player, so I put these two people together as Lester Young and Billie Holiday, turned out fantastic.  The whole thing for me has been that you find out when you use artists, all these people had been artists in one form or another, but artists can be artists in many different forms, and it always worked out, it always worked.  It never went sour on me, not once, that I put a person into a play that had not done theater before, and it worked out, so.
Story_ID: 50405
Speaker 1: You also have a unique relationship with playwright, Joe Turner?
Speaker 2: That was--yeah, that was a very interesting situation.  I saw--Joe Turner did a play, "A Change is Gon' Come: the Trial of Sam Cooke", did it over to Chicago Theater Company.  And I went over there and saw it was a trial.  And I told Joe, I said, this is Sam Cooke.  And people are interested in music.  They're not interested in a trial, you know that how Sam Cooke died and the trial on his murder.  So this is you know, and people hadn't come, he didn't have a big audience.  So I said, look, let's get together and do this play over.  And I put Sam Cooke--brought Sam Cooke into it and the songs that Sam Cooke wrote, and we--and found Lambus Dean, who could sing so much like Sam Cooke you could even think he was Sam Cooke.  And we put it on with the music and it was a terrible--tremendous hit, I mean, it just boom.  And people went crazy about Sam Cooke, LaDonna Tittle was in that.  And we did it at ETA.  And it was such a big hit.  Abena [Joan Brown] wanted to close it and she has a schedule you know and so she had to close it 'cause she had a sched--another play coming up.  So I said well we can't just put a cap on the oil well.  So I said I'd like to take this play out somewhere else under the auspices of ETA.  And she says no, she says because I can't control it.  I said oh, you know, I'm co-founder of ETA, what you know--so, she said no.  So I said well I'm gon' take it and we went out to the Beverly House, which was a nightclub and they had space out there and we set up a stage--
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: --At 103rd and, over there near the school, near--near 103rd and right near the--
Speaker 1: West 103rd.
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Story_ID: 50406
Speaker 1: And it ran there for a year.  We ran the play [A Change is Gon' Come] there for a year.  Joe Turner had written this play.  Joe Turner is an excellent writer, incidentally.  I mean the writing of the play was so well done, that was contributed to the--to the play cause he had--he had a good play. It was just a play and I turned it into a musical.  And I think that together, the fact that it was a good play and musical bringing Sam Cooke and the music into it.  And so we--during the time that we were doing it at ETA, the person--well the night that we closed at ETA, the--somebody who had seen the play called Bobby Womack who had played with Sam Cooke and who ended up marrying Sam Cooke's wife was living in California.  This person called Bobby Womack and told him I just saw a play about Sam and he said well was I in it and he said, yeah, they mentioned your name.  And so he calls his--called his manager who was Ted Shine was in New York and he got Marge Corschack(ph.) to call us and said, I was asking about the play, we heard that this play was such a great thing.  Tell us all about it and blah, blah, blah, and found out that she was just a shield for him, and that she reported back to him about the play and next day he called and told us to cease and desist, not to do this play because we were using Sam Cooke's music and he had the right to Sam Cooke's music.  And so I said look, I got the rights from Sam Cooke's family.  He said Sam Cooke's family don't have the rights, I got the rights.  And so I said okay.  And ETA wanted to do the play over as the best play of the season, you know how they did the next season.  So in between I took out all of the songs that Sam Cooke had written and used songs that Sam Cooke had sung and had--you know popular but he did not write.  So I called the--all the companies, the publishing companies, and got permission to use these songs, five dollars a piece.  And made the list and who--got the permission--from whom they got permission, and then I wrote eight songs and Rufus Hill put the music to it, and we put the play back on.  He came, this Shine fellow, heard about it, came back here to Chicago [Illinois] to find out--he was--mad as he could be.  We going over his head, puttin the play back on, blah, blah, blah, and he came and he saw that he couldn't do nothing because we not using, not one of Sam Cooke's songs, not even "A Change is Gon' Come".  And so he--then he says, well look, I'm gone put this--I want to put this play on Broadway.  And he asked us to give him the--a copy of the script and a video tape of the play.  So we wouldn't do either, we would not give him--Woodie King [Jr.] had told me that he was a crook.  And he had been the--he had been Sam Cooke's manager, and he was the manager of the Monkees, and so he was a big time manager in New York.  And he--but he was so out done, he couldn't do nothing about it.  And so he wrote a big article about--that he was going to take this play to New York and finally to end the situation, the Chicago--he had did an interview in the Chicago Sun Times, and he came up--out and said, I had no intentions of taking the play to Broadway, I just want to find out how they got Sam Cooke out of the hotel.
Story_ID: 50407
Speaker 1: --hat's your relationship with Harold Washington, you were working on his campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I was a member of The Artists for Harold Washington.  When Harold was running in 1983, we formed an organization called The Artists for Harold Washington and it was (unclear) Houseinni(ph), Perkins, Phil [Philip] Cohran, and a number of the artist groups, member of this.  And so we--Delores Woods, who was his secretary, wanted to do something at DuSable [High School]. So we came up with the idea of doing a hijinks.  Now [Walter] Dyett had done a hijinks every--a play with the students every year called "Hi-Jinks" and what it was it was a musical, of course, with the jazz band, but it was the students, and his comedy, musical and he had done it every year.  And it was extremely popular in Chicago [Illinois].  Matter of fact it was--it was so popular like, some of the people that's the only theater that they'd every seen is what Dyett would put on at "Hi-Jinks".  And so when Harold was running, we said we would do a "Hi-Jinks".  So I put--got together with Delores Woods and some of the other musicians and we put on a "Hi-Jinks".  We got DuSable students just as Dyett had done, we got a band and we put on a musical for Harold Washington's campaign,  we called "Hi-Jinks".  Harold Washington went to DuSable, incidentally, and so did I and so that was the tie in that he had graduated from DuSable in--so we did the "Hi-Jinks" for him, it was very successful, very--
Story_ID: 50408
Speaker 1: Now, the first play at the new ETA was "Second Coming Last Chance?
Speaker 2: --Yes.
Speaker 1: And you wrote (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "Second Coming Last Chance" was S.C.L.C. and the--of course that was about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And what I wanted to do with this was to see if I can do a comedy out of a serious situation.  And so we had two winos who wanted to make Martin Luther King a saint, after his death of course.  And they didn't know anything about making a saint, so they went about the whole idea of making a saint, making Martin Luther King a saint.  So this that I wrote was the prologue to, and incidentally, Runako [Jahi] did this, this prologue.  But it's "Second Coming Last Chance".
Speaker 1: Now, we ain't saying we is and we ain't saying we ain't.  I mean that Martin Luther King was a profit or a saint.  But ain't a prophet one who prophesizes about the future in store for man?  Well, now he did say that we as a people would reach the promised land.  Now that promised land could be heaven or what you get when you pay your dues.  It could even come after death, but he didn't say whose.  Then that promised land could be America, but I wouldn't bet no revolution on it, cause after the polluters get through with this, who in the hell would want it.  But then that promise land could be the Africa that guard they talked about, yeah, now that could be our promised land if we run the money changes out.  But you ain't gon' get me to commit myself and subject my soul to fire by saying that Martin Luther King was a prophet or a messiah.  But I will say this though, that if he was, somebody gon' be in trouble.  You can't keep on killing no prophets, I mean, especially double.   Now, I can see God being merciful, I can even see him being cool, but I know as great as God is, he ain't no damn fool.  Now he sent his Hebrew son to save the world, and they nailed him to the cross.  Supposed then he sent his darker one and with cross halves, they ripped him off.  In that case, he came once, he came twice, couldn't believe again they do it, well, just suppose his second coming was our last chance to bring peace to the world and they blew it.
Speaker 2: Second Coming Last Chance, yeah. And the play, it was a comedy, and one of the situations in the play, you know, there was a lot of looting going on at King's death and so in the play, this husband and wife was running down the street with a couch that they had just broke into the furniture store and coming down the street with the couch on their head.  And the lady stopped them and said, hey wait a minute, you got my husband's couch, and they said wait a minute, what makes you think--we just got this couch out of the furniture store, brand new, what you talking 'bout?  She said look, we had our couch in lay-a-way.  And he said, look, what makes you think this is your husband's couch?  She said 'cause it's got my husband's name on it.  He said what is your husband's, looking at the name on the tag, he said what is your husband's name?  She said John M. Smithe.  So it was that kind of stuff that went on and the winos was making the King a saint, you know, so.
Story_ID: 50409
Speaker 1: Yeah, Okoro, playwright, director, poet.
Speaker 2: Well, I've written a number of--and most of my poems were lyrics of songs.  And you know I never learned to write music.  So--and that was a big mistake that I made, playing music and never learned to write music.  But I've written a lot of poems and as lyrics to songs and so it's--I'm a poet, that's the way it came about.  A couple of 'em was in the play that I just did.  The--"Don't Get Around Much Anymore" and one of 'em was "The First Blues".  I don't know if--I won't look for it.  But I think I know--
Speaker 1: The first blues came from the hole of a slave ship.  When a man was snatched from his home.  He didn't have time for rhythm and rhyme, just a grunt and a groan and a moan, that's the first blues a man's ever known.  The first blues came from slavery, from blood, from sweat and from tears.  Now those are the blues that man cannot lose in a day, in a week or in years.  Those are the first blues, those damnable worst blues, when a man loses something that's his, when a man loses freedom, that's his.
Speaker 2: Julian [Marvin] Swain [HM] sang that song in "Don't Get Around Much Anymore".  Another one was "Chicago".
Speaker 1: When the fun is gone, you're all alone in Chicago.  Hear everything they say, my friend can be found not if you black or brown.  This town can be so cold, Oh, God how cold.  All I wanted to fill my dream was a home, a little green, but when I found a grassy spot, they said go back to your own lot in the ghetto where grass won't grow cause you're black.  There's a great facade, tree-lined front yard in Chicago, a sparkling lake that will take your breath away, but stray to the back yard, where life is hard, oh, God how hard.  When I saw this wide, wide space, I knew I could breathe free.  I didn't know that a narrow place was reserved for one like me in the ghetto, where air won't blow 'cause I'm black.  I love this town but then I found nobody here wanted me around, but I'm gon' stay and make a new day for this town, Chicago.
Story_ID: 50410
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, Okoro?
Speaker 2: As a person who loved theater, who theater came from my heart.  It was something that came from the heart.  It was something I discovered within myself and I found out that it was something that I loved, something that I could do well and I found out that I could contribute to other people that way by bringing out the talent of other people, involving other people in theater, having other people to enjoy theater as a part of their life.  Not only that but also using theater as you see from the song like "Chicago" or from "S.C.L.C.", using theater as Paul Robeson put it as a weapon that I can speak about our situation through theater.  And that's one of the things that I've tried to do cause all of my plays have been either a musical or they have been something with these struggle and, or both.  And I found that this is something, a voice.  Theater is a voice that you can speak with, and that's the way I'd like to be remembered by, just a person who used the voice.
Story_ID: 50411
Speaker 1: What do you think your parents would think of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my mother [Nellie Johnson] would be very proud.  My mother used to come to every little thing I'd recite.  And--she'd do these teas on her club and she'd bring me out to recite something, and so she would be extremely proud and she saw me do a couple of plays.  And my father [Earl Johnson], very quiet person, he was proud, but he was not enthusiastic, you know, he didn't--but my mother would just love it.  She loved every little thing that I did in theater, yeah.
Story_ID: 50412
Speaker 1: What do you think of this oral history project that the HistoryMakers is doing?
Speaker 2: I think it's fantastic because it honors people like myself who may not ever be--people don't know what you've done, you know, that you've done things and it's just there, it's gone down the drain, nobody knows anything about the first black person to do television in Chicago [Illinois], you know, maybe nobody cares, you know.  But I think that this unearths situations like that.  And it's a very excellent teaching mechanism that--to let our young people know that there are people who, you know, who have done things and that you can do things.  And I think that the history--our history is so important.  We have a very rich history, but a lot of it is verbal, a lot of it is not recorded, most of it is not recorded and especially the things, the everyday things that go on in our lives, it's not recorded anywhere, and I think that this is a fantastic project that has a great deal of meaning and I think it's a great deal of benefit.
Story_ID: 50413
Speaker 1: In the state of the black artists in today's Chicago society, how do you see it?
Speaker 2: It has grown.  The state of this black artist has grown tremendously.  When I first--well early theater, we've done plays where there were five people in the audience, and two of 'em was our mothers.  And--but now, ETA has 85 percent capacity.  Black people are going--there's several theater companies and black people are going to theater in droves now.  Black people have learned that theater can be, not only educational, but it can be enjoyable.  And I don't think that we knew that.  We thought of theater as something like opera, you know, it was thought of like opera, so therefore it wasn't for us, but when we start telling our stories, when we start telling the black experience and I think that then black people became interested and that's what ETA has been about, telling the black experience.  And more and more people have gotten involved in theater from the acting point of view, from the musical point of view and from the audience point of view.  And now, black theater is an art form, a very important art form.  And it's history.  It's our chance to tell some of the many, many stories that we have as black people, and we do have some great stories.  And so I think that is has grown and I think it's grown in importance to be very important heart form.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to say before we conclude?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we said it, you know, I think we've said it all, except that I'm very happy about an experience like this.  I just think that this is a wonderful, wonderful project and I'm so glad that the young lady, Miss [Julieanna] Robinson--Richardson came up with the idea and that it's--I've noticed some of the other people who've been interviewed for this, and I think it's just fantastic that--and I think it's going to do a lot for bringing people to the minds of younger people, letting younger people know what it's existed as history.
Speaker 1: That's about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 50414
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead and begin your description?
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Okoro Harold Johnson.  And this was at the Harris YWCA.  We would do--in the summer, we would do outside festivals in the parking lot and this is one of those outdoor festivals in the parking lot of the Harris YWCA at 62nd and Drexel, incidentally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My son, Robert Johnson, and myself.  And Robert went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and he was in--got into television at Howard.  And he was the person, that as a eighth-grade student, brought me the story of "Kintu and the Law of Love".
Speaker 1: Great.  Next?
Speaker 2: This is at the South Shore Cultural Center, and that on the right is my lovely daughter, Nailah, and the fellow on the other side was an employee at the South Shore Cultural Center.  And this was around 1990 when I was working at the South Shore Cultural Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a party and from my left--from my left to right is a Ajoke, who was my second wife and myself and Abena Joan Brown, who is the co-founder with me at the ETA Theater and a young man name Steve, and we had a party and partying.
Speaker 1: Could you spell a Ajoke and tell us, if you remember what year this might have been?
Speaker 2: The spelling of A-J-O-K-E, Ajoke.  And her name was Laura Johnson--was Laura Middleton before we married and she's the mother of Nailah.  The year must have been in around 1974 or '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay, next?
Speaker 2: This--are you ready?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: This picture is my present lady, and it was taken in Mount Bayou, Mississippi, and this is the wall that they have on the outside of the--the mayor's office and in Mount Bayou, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, next?
Speaker 2: You want to put em up there or you gonna  put em--that's where you want it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is at the 47th and King Drive, at the Root Festival.  That's Kwako who's from New York, and he had come to Chicago one summer and we were out enjoying the festival.  This is Dorothy Tillman's festival at 47th and King Drive.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  How's that man's name spelled, K-W--
Speaker 2: K-W-A-K-O, Kwako.
Speaker 1: LARRY CROWE:  K-W-E-K-U? Okay.  All right?
Speaker 2: This is from S.C.L.C.  This is of the fellows who was trying to make Martin Luther King asSaint and this me, of course, Okoro, and this was a costume for S.C.L.C. "Second Coming Last Chance".
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: "Second Coming Last Chance" must have been, okay, 1979, yeah.
Speaker 1: Next?
Speaker 2: This is the good old days, the young days.  I was about twenty-two years old and that was my first wife, and I don't think we were even married then.  This is in 1960, and Virginia, is her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We did--this was in Gary, Indiana, 1979, the same year we--that was--we did "Kintu and the Law of Love" for the Mayor [Richard G.] Hatcher, in Gary, Indiana, and this picture was taken over there.  It was not in costume, this was after the show.
Speaker 1: Okay, next please?
Speaker 2: This is my mother, Nellie Johnson, on my left and my Aunt Irma, we called her sister on the right.  And this was very--pretty early picture, it must have been around 1950, '50 [1950] no, no, 19, yeah, right around 1950, cause I just come back from Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next one.  (Off camera discussion).
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, Iva Johnson, who I told you was the stalwart of the Johnson family.  She was a very strong, religious woman and she is the third from the left and these are here three daughters.  On the left--far left is Irma, which is Sister, next Aunt Velma and then on the far right was Goldie.  And all of these three are the three that she sent to college in very lean days.  And the two on each end went to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], and I went to Tougaloo after that.
Speaker 1: All right, next?  Anytime you're ready.
Speaker 2: This is my father, Earl Johnson.  This is the mechanic. And this is around 1980, he died in 1983, but this is around 1980.  And he was eighty--he died at eighty-eight years old.  So at this point he was about, probably eighty-five.
Speaker 1: All right.  Next one, please?
Speaker 2: Tell me now, what's the supervisor's name, Neal, Ron--? --Ron O'Neal, okay.  This is Woodie King, Jr.  On the left is Woody King, Jr., Abena Joan Brown, next to him and Ron O'Neal, who was Super Fly and then myself on the far right.  This was a picture in 1979.  Woodie King, Jr., he was the person that directed "Checkmates".
Speaker 1: Next.  (Off camera discussion).
Speaker 2: This is the famous Club DeLisa in 1956, and I'm the center person and my first wife is to my right there, Ginny [Virginia].  And over on the right-hand side, the third person from the end was my brother Earl and his wife, Thelma, and they were the partiers and they loved to party, and Club DeLisa was a famous place to do that in 1956.
Story_ID: 50415
Speaker 1: Go ahead, please?
Speaker 2: This is at the Blue Note in 1960.  And on my left is Earl, my brother, his wife Thelma, their friend, Ginny and the famous Louis Armstrong.  He was at the Blue Note, he was playing there during that time, and I'm on the far right.  We were partying again.  The Blue Note, was incidentally, in the downtown Chicago on Ran-- Are you ready?
Speaker 1: --Okoro Harold Johnson, one of the most recent pictures, this is taken in the last two years, in fact.  And this is just a picture that used as a head shot.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  This one here.
Speaker 1: We can talk about the whole thing.  I won't mention everybody.  But this was some of the talent that ETA had under their--when they first started as an agent.
Speaker 2: Okay, upper left?
Speaker 1: Upper left.
Speaker 2: That's Harold Johnson and James Hughes. James Hughes anything else (unclear)? Yeah, this was Otto Rogers from Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah and Val Gray Ward [HM].
Speaker 2: He still on, he's still on, he's still up top.
Speaker 1: So what do you want me to do now?
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: Ron, what is it--Ron Wilson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ronald Wilson, Joan (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: LARRY CROWE:  Somebody with an Afro Sheen can.
Speaker 1: Okay, you want to do those?  I can name 'em.  Her name is what?
Speaker 2: Her name is hidden, oh, this one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Hold on a second, it's under here.
Speaker 1: Lynn Cox, yeah.
Speaker 2: As soon as I read it--
Speaker 1: Yeah it came to me.  Okay, let's go over them.  Let's start at the top and then go down.
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: So, what do you want me to do now?
Speaker 2: I don't think you have do anything, except for this man, I need his name.
Speaker 1: Well, I think we need to tell why we have all these pictures.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead whenever you're ready.
Speaker 1: This is a group that ETA--when ETA became an agent.  These are some of the talented people that we had.  And--well James Hughes and I were doing "Just to be Simple" and his friend, Ira Rogers, to the right, Ron Wilson and Abena Joan Brown and there's a young man doing Afro Sheen and there's Abena Joan Brown, who is the co-founder of the ETA Theater.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We didn't get down to it, yeah.  Val Gray Ward.
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a very famous writer, one of our black writers, Useni Eugene Perkins [HM], who is the son of artist, Marion Perkins.  And he's written a number of plays and very, very talented young man.  Next to him, to his left--to his right is Val Gray Ward who founded the Kuumba Theater and these were some of the great talents that ETA had and were advocating.
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion) The--can you start with "Checkmates"? OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  It's really going to be difficult for us reproduce this.  I can't text like this, I can't--it won't resolve, we don't have enough resolution.  It has to be scanned.
Speaker 1: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead describe where you're at.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a review from the Chicago Defender, February, 1987 and this is "Checkmates".  The play is "Checkmates", this is the play that eventually went to Broadway, but it started out in Chicago and the play was directed by Woodie King, Jr.
Speaker 2: What about this photo, sir?
Speaker 1: These are two characters from--this is two characters from the play.  This is myself and what's her name?
Speaker 2: Mattie (unclear).  Weslyn Brauner(ph).
Speaker 1: Weslyn Brauner, yeah that's who that other person is.  And these are in character.  Now these were the older couple in the play who was offset by a younger couple who had trouble in their life and this is the one who married for forty years.
Speaker 2: You wear that hat all the time, so you're in character when you weren't in character.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was my famous.  Ready?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's go.
Speaker 1: This is a review of the play, "Jazz-Set" written by Ron Milner and the--it was reviewed by Earl Calloway of Chicago Defender.  The persons in--Cliff, was the trumpet player, but the female singer is Sherry Scott of Earth Wind and Fire.  And they both did excellent jobs of--
Speaker 2: Okay, next?
Speaker 1: --This is a shot from "S.C.L.C." [S.C.L.C.: Second Coming Last Chance]  And on the far left with the Houston Astro shirt is my son who was about 10 years old at the time.  And as I he was the person who brought the--the play to me and this was after the play, we had done at the Transition East.  This was done at Transition East.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  Okay, anytime you're ready?
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a shot from "Bird of the Iron Feather".  This was--I was directing the play and Channel 11, WTTW and I--we see Ira Rogers, right where I'm pointing to, LaDonna Tittle.
Speaker 2: Where's Ira?
Speaker 1: Ira, right there.  LaDonna Tittle and there's--
Speaker 2: You can keep describing with the pointing card.  Okay you can point now.
Speaker 1: Douglas Alan Mann.
Speaker 2: Let's start from left to right?
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Douglas Alan Mann, and I don't know who that is.  This is Bernard, who was the star of the show, and next to him is Ira Rogers and LaDonna Tittle and this is Okoro who's directing the show--the television show.
Speaker 2: Do you know who this is?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's Doris Ward who was a music instructor for the [Chicago] Park District and she's deceased now.  And Gloria, yeah, I've forgotten Gloria's last name, but--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a great shot.  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: This is Okoro Harold Johnson when I first went to Hattiesburg, Mississippi in 1947 and this is in Hattiesburg and I was cool cat from Chicago at the time.
Speaker 2: You were getting too cool in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah, much too cool in Chicago.  I had to cool out.
Speaker 2: That's it.
