Story_ID: 22252
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state our full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Gregory Stephen Jenkins, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, S-T-E-P-H-E-N, J-E-N-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 13th, 1963, born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My title is professor in the Department of Physics and Astronomy here at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June 29, 2012.
Speaker 1: Alright, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C., Howard University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Thirkield Building.
Story_ID: 22253
Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always are supposed to ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Senegalese, a Senegalese dish called Thieb boulette [sic, Thiou Boulette].
Speaker 1: You have to spell this for us.
Speaker 2: I don't know how to spell it. I know how to say it (laughter) T-H-I-E-B, Boulette, which is a French word. So it's probably B-O-U-L-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, Royal Blue, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation and work, Senegal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No. I have too many, so I don't wanna say (laughter), no. So I would say a lot of things.
Story_ID: 22254
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Senia Boney, maiden name, Boney, Jenkins. S-E-N-I-A, B-O-N-E-Y, J-E-N-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, I missed the spelling of the first name.
Speaker 2: S-E-N-
Speaker 1: S-E-N-
Speaker 2: --I-A.
Speaker 1: --I-A. And the rest of it?
Speaker 2: Boney, B-O-N-E-Y and Jenkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: J-E-N-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Alright. Is there a story behind her first name?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there is or not. I don't know.
Speaker 1: I've just never seen it before, so I just, you know--but that was just me though.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So I just thought there might be a story. Was she named after anyone in the, in her family that you know of?
Speaker 2: I don't know that question. I don't know the answer to it.
Speaker 1: Well, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is December 31--December, sorry, December 30th, 1923, and she was born in Rose Hill, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: For me, there is, I don't have much knowledge. I know that my mother's mother, my grandmother passed away before I was born. And I know that my grandfather had also passed away. I know their names, Hannah and Oscar--sorry, Ernest Boney. But I don't know much about them. I've been told stories by my aunt about them, that they were sharecropping and, but that's probably the extent of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, they're from the Rose Hill area?
Speaker 2: Yes, and we still have plenty of family there. So we have family reunions when we go back there every year or two.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about your mother, you know, leaving Rose Hill for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they migrated, as far as I know, in the '40's [1940s], starting with my aunt. And then her sisters and brothers, probably about half of them migrated North to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My understanding is that they lived together, and they all worked. And this was around the War time period, second World War [World War II, 1939-1945]. So they lived together, they worked. I think my mother at some point worked with the government, possibly as a welder. And then they made their lives there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother and her siblings are the ones that really migrated--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Philadelphia and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And their parents stayed on the farm, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, their parents and a number of the brothers, so about half stayed in the South. And the others left.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have a chance to finish school during all this time?
Speaker 2: She finished high school, and that was the extent of it.
Speaker 1: Now, did she finish in Philadelphia or--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I think she finished in North Carolina before she migrated.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, did she, now, she worked as a welder, you say?
Speaker 2: Well, I think during the War. It's my understanding, based on conversations with my aunt, that she did welding, some welding, you know, with respect to the Wartime efforts. And after that, you know, had a family, and she was pretty much at home. And then also doing domestic work, you know, to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, well, are there any stories from that side of the family about life in North Carolina or about the migration itself or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was difficult. My, my sense was always one that they were escaping something that was bigger than them, that they didn't have opportunities there, and that there were, that they were under, always under some constant state of fear or threat. They, they really didn't talk a lot about the South. It was home for them. But one could take away that they didn't see a future there, that they had to go North.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's a curious, I mean that's something that even during slavery days, people would talk about the South with some kind of love of the country, but they didn't wanna go back--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --because of something, you know. Interesting.
Story_ID: 22255
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Kirby Fable Jenkins, so K-I-R-B-Y, F-A-B-L-E, J-E-N-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: His middle name is, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Fable.
Speaker 1: Fable.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Is that a story behind that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know (laughter). Both of my parents passed away when I was fairly young, so I didn't really get a chance to know, you know--there were probably questions, I'm sure I would have asked if I was twenty, that I never got a chance to ask.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting middle name. But what was your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 2nd, 1924. And he was born in--what's the name of the small town? It's near, it's not Sumter, not far from Columbia. I have to get the name of this small town, but he also migrated. So we never went there for a family reunion, and, which is why the name of his town is not fond to me because we never went there. We never went there.
Speaker 1: This is in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Near Sumter or Columbia?
Speaker 2: Near Columbia. And the name, I know, but it's not sharp in my mind. I wanna get that right. If I--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, we can get back to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But are there any--
Speaker 2: I can call my cousin. She knows and my sister. They know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about the ancestors on his side?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that my father's mother, my grandmother, she lived a long time. So, unfortunately, she lived to a hundred, but when she was 100, I was eighteen. And there was not much in terms of being able to find out from her what, how things were, about the past. But her father was, my understanding is that he was one of the senators from the Reconstruction period. And they showed me pictures of him and his sister.
Speaker 1: Her father was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, her last name was Holmes. And her father, her father's name was J. P. Holmes. This is what I'm told. But even on my father's--
Speaker 1: Well, I just wanna dwell on that a minute just to pin it down on some level if you can--I don't know how far we can, but J. P. Holmes then would have been part of the South Carolina legislature--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: --during that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: That is my understanding.
Speaker 1: During Reconstruction days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, that was really a big deal in South Carolina. That's when they had Robert Smalls and Martin Delaney ran for governor there. I mean there were a lot of blacks involved in politics down there 'cause, the population being so great--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Mississippi had a lot of representation if you can believe that now (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --and so did South Carolina, I mean a lot of black people. So, okay, so that's, so his name was J. P. Holmes, and he was in South Carolina legislature. So, anybody wanting to look, follow up on that can. So are there any stories about him in the legislature?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know many of the stories. I, the pictures that I've seen of him is that he was a really handsome-looking man and had very distinct features which gives you the sense that he was on point with everything that he did. But once again, I think the big issue for me is that the, you know, I didn't really have a chance to ask a lot of questions.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, you know, a lot of families don't talk a lot about history anyway. So I don't know if your family was like that, but a lot of history is not discussed.
Speaker 2: I think there's always an opportunity in certain situations, you know, like family reunions. But we really just started having family reunions on my father's side recently, not--but they were all gone. So essentially, that whole generation, with the exception of I have one uncle and one aunt. They're all gone.
Speaker 1: Alright, so your grandmother grew up in that section of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what about your grandfather? I assume he had passed long before your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. And they migrated to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Thomas.
Speaker 1: Thomas, that's Thomas Holmes?
Speaker 2: Thomas Jenkins. He's Thomas Jenkins, yes.
Speaker 1: Jenkins, oh, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Because, yes, he--my understanding is that my grandmother had married, probably two or three times. And her maiden name was Holmes. And I think she also became a Johnson, and I think he passed away and then she married my grandmother, Thomas.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she moved to Philadelphia with Thomas Jenkins?
Speaker 2: I don't know if Thomas was alive when they moved. I know she was in Philadelphia, and my father was in Philadelphia. And many of his brothers and sisters were. So it seems like that great migration piece where lots of folks moved North.
Story_ID: 22256
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your father [Kirby Fable Jenkins], born in 1924. So he was born in the South, and he was part of the, he was brought to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he moved to Philadelphia, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, about how old was he when he got there?
Speaker 2: Gotta find that out, but I know that he, he was, you know, he was a soldier in the Second World War.
Speaker 1: Now, had, did he have a chance to finish school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or in the South?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did he serve overseas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was actually in the, one of the squadron--I recently found out he was one of the squadron leaders in the Quarter Masters group that fought in Northern Italy, Germany and took part in this Battle of the Bulge campaign.
Speaker 1: So he was in the Quarter Master Corp.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I found information on that. I was fortunate enough to be able to see some of the documents and go on a web and found out who they were. I was like, oh, wow, it's pretty--well, I knew he had lots of medals. I never knew what they were. I saw them growing up. These, these medals which said, you know, part of the North African campaign. But I'm assuming that that was actually a big campaign too at the end of the War. He had Purple Heart. He had all kinds of--
Speaker 1: So he was wounded then if he had a Purple Heart, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And he never spoke about the War. I talked to my uncle, my other--his brother, who also fought. And he said he was wounded, according to him, he said he was part of the, the Normandy. So my uncle was part of the Normandy invasion, and my father was in the South. He said he was down in Italy and in Germany. And he said they never spoke about, you know, the War, because of the, I guess the pain associated with it.
Speaker 1: That's interesting. Yeah, some people, I know my father spoke about it a lot, talked about it all the time, but he was in Quarter Master Corp too. And the stuff was bad stuff, but he talked, would talk--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he didn't talk about bloody things. But he talked about how they were treated, black soldiers. Did you have a sense that he, so he didn't talk about it at all?
Speaker 2: He didn't talk about it at all as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now did your--what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a welder. So he worked in the Philadelphia Shipyard, working I believe for the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So he did this basically for the balance of his career?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Did he have any stories about growing up or--
Speaker 2: Never,--
Speaker 1: --anything about work or anything?
Speaker 2: He never talked much about those things.
Speaker 1: What was he interested in?
Speaker 2: Good question. I mean I was nine when he passed away, so I don't really know a lot, you know. That, I think that's the issue for me, is that there's a missing component that I have to go and find (laughter). But, no, he never talked much about, you know, he basically was trying to take care of his family, working. And those were the main things. And, you know, I think it took its toll. Whatever happened, I do feel as an adult, me, thinking about it, I think it took its toll on him because, you know, he became a heavy drinker. And he, but I've never heard him talk about anything. I'm guessing he internalized lots of what had happened in his past.
Story_ID: 22257
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Senia Boney and Kirby Fable Jenkins] personalities, their habits, their talents, their dispositions and mentalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think both of them. I kind of think that they were, they were fearless, and I kind of see myself as fearless. I don't, I don't create boundaries. I kind of wanna go out and not only just in terms of locations. So for me to go to Africa, for me to go, those are not issues. They're places I wanna go to. I wanna go to the Antarctic. I don't have boundaries. I think their whole view of migration, going into uncertainty, going to an unknown situation but saying it's gonna be okay, I think I carry that. And I think also, they had a certain level of steadfastness, you know. You just gotta stay with it. And I think I'm, that's my approach. Now, I've worked on one problem for fifteen years. It has never bothered me that it's taking that long to fully understand an approach, that it's about hard work. It's circular, a lot of the times, the way life is, you know. You've thought about something one way, but over time, you come to view it another way. I think that there was something about my father and my mother and that whole generation that I don't really see today. And that's the sense of not knowing but being okay with it, that faith, that, you know, we're gonna be okay, you know. You gotta work hard. There's no guarantee that you're gonna be successful, but it's the process that is important. It's the process and the courage to go through it, you know. That's, that's what they had, and I think that's what I have. I think that just, yeah, so it's with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said that--
Speaker 2: So it's tenacity, it's a certain level of tenacity. I think it's the tenacity that they had to face, you know, in their lives, that, I think that was passed on.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories of obstacles they had to overcome--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Now, I can only tell you what my aunt told me about how they struggled, you know, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because it was such a segregated city. And, you know, they moved from one place of, of racism to another place of racism, thinking that it would be better. But I think they dug in. They didn't let it get them down. I always felt a sense of, even with struggle, joy, like the picnics, the beach, you know, the, the family things. Yeah, so, I know there was struggle. And I know that economically, it was difficult for them because like so many of the cities, they were great in the '50's [1950s], '60's [1960s], and over time, things like gangs and crime and those things crept in. I know certainly my father had a hard time with my oldest brother who just passed away recently, in terms of trying to keep him on the straight and narrow, you know, just, there were a lot of gangs in the neighborhood as it began to deteriorate. And, you know, he struggled with that, and so did my mother. So I know those were the things, but, you know, they always kept us pretty much focused. I never can remember a time when my mother didn't say, you're going to college, yeah. I think it was like, you know, they carried us this far, and our job was to go further.
Story_ID: 22258
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the youngest--you and your twin brother are the youngest of the siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you name your siblings from the eldest down through you and your brother?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, so Kirby, Jr., Kirby Joseph Jenkins, Jr. was the oldest. He passed away in January. The next in line is my sister, Sharon Jenkins, next is Hannah Jenkins, and she's named after my grandmother, Miranda is the following. So she's about two years older than me, and then there's me and my brother, Jeffrey. He's a, we're twins.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, let me, when did your parents get married?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I need to find out, but I think it was right after the War [World War II]. The date of about, I don't know, 1946 somehow pops into my mind. But I can, I can check on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, did they--is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know how they met. I can find that out. I have one living aunt, and she may know how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting story. I mean, just looking at the, hearing, just listening to you, I'm thinking, you know, it had something to do with the shipyard and welding and all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean I don't know.
Speaker 2: I feel like it was related to the Wartime effort somehow. And I don't think they met in North Carolina or South Carolina. I feel that it was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that they met.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like, so they get married right after the War, '46' [1946].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your brother, Kirby, is born, what, in?
Speaker 2: Fifty three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], okay. So okay, so they, alright. So, and your, I guess your father passes away around '73' [1973]?
Speaker 2: Seventy three [1973], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well, what side of Philadelphia did you live in? What neighborhood?
Speaker 2: West Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not far from Drexel University, in fact. Not far from the Philadelphia Zoo.
Speaker 1: Okay, Drexel University and the zoo, okay. Now, is there a--what are the characteristics of West Philadelphia? I mean other than, you've got Drexel University, the Philadelphia Zoo.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, there're, so generally, this area that we lived in, I'm assuming at one time, unlike it is today, it is, it was a very nice neighborhood. But when I was growing there, the poverty, the crime was, was there. Somehow, I wasn't really aware of that fact, but it's true that it was a very impoverished area.
Story_ID: 22259
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, the earliest thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: About the area.
Speaker 1: About anything, about life. What's your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories are, go back to, I don't know, probably kindergarten. And those are, you know, just me playing around, being a kid, also getting in trouble (laughter). But those are more or less the kinds of things that I remember, the beach, the park, you know, family kinds of things. They're the earliest memories I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's not one incident you think is the earliest thing I remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the earliest thing I remember (laughter) is, is probably about five years old. Okay, the thing that stands out in my mind at five years old is, you know, some kids taking my baloney sandwich (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's probably the earliest thing I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was it, I guess--now, being a twin, is this an identical twin? Is Jeffrey identical?
Speaker 2: Fraternal.
Speaker 1: Oh, fraternal, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you all look different, I guess or--
Speaker 2: We look more and more alike now. It's weird. When we were growing up, he was always much taller than me, and now we look alike.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I know those identical twins, they have, they see somebody, they see themselves outside of themselves almost, like (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a different kind of thing. But, so you lived in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], like what kind of dwelling did you live in?
Speaker 2: We lived in a three-story house. So we, yeah, we had, you know, typical house.
Speaker 1: Was it a row house type?
Speaker 2: Row house, yes. The street we lived on, we knew everyone. The, so the, so there was a sense of community. I could say that. I mean there was also a sense that, hey, bad things happen. But those bad things never really happened to me or my friends or we remember, you know, playing out in the street, listening to music, Michael Jackson and trying to imitate him and all those things. But there was a sense of community where people look out for you. You know, I clearly remember people telling me, "Hey, what are you doing over there?" And that was enough for me to just say, okay, I'm getting away from here (laughter). Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your older brothers and sisters kind of look out for you?
Speaker 2: They were doing their own thing. I was not really engaged with them. I'm more or less, was my [twin] brother and our friends just having a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I know your older siblings, immediate ones are all sisters.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I guess they had their own--
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably, my youngest sister, we were kind of close, but, you know, we were boys. So we were more interested in playing football and catching insects and things like that.
Story_ID: 22260
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: To me the sights were, you know, you had your local street and the area near you, but the basketball courts, you know, not far from you. Fairmont Park was right around the corner from where we lived. I mean the zoo is there. The Art Museum, you know, going downtown, all those things were part of, of my growing up. It was a certain level, certain amount of order, you know, the family dinners, the Thanksgivings, the Christmas, those things are very clear in my mind in terms of being part of a constant memory. The smells are food (laughter), fried chicken, turkey (laughter), macaroni and cheese, the things that send you to the kitchen (laughter), and send you out of the kitchen eventually because you're being a nuisance (laughter), yeah. And the sounds, the sounds are the music. You know, my sister and my older brother, you know, "Earth, Wind and Fire", "The Isley Brothers", all that was music that, while it wasn't really clear what that music was about, the sound was great (laughter). And I really, I really enjoyed that. It's something that was kind of cross generational. I really didn't understand the music from the '60's [1960s]. Now, that was something that I listened to, but it was like, but "Earth, Wind and Fire" kind of grabbed me and Chaka Khan and they all just, that just took over.
Speaker 1: So you were about ten, I guess, or eight, nine and ten when those artists started emerging.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's great--when I asked you about the sounds, my mind played back the sounds of Philadelphia, so, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --around the country we all knew, you know, Tom Bell--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Kenny Gamble and Huff, now, all the Philadelphia artists.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were they big stars when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: They, they, like I said, there was, I guess I just blotted it out because I was so caught up in the music that my siblings were listening to. And, you know, I guess it like, people like Michael Jackson were just the "Jackson Five". They were just so big that it kind of just, you didn't wanna listen to anything else. And the other music, it was like, hey, that's oldies, you know. It's interesting, and, you know, as a kid, I was like I, there's nothing romantic about this music for me (laughter). I just, I'm too young (laughter) to care. I wanna hear the beat. I wanna hear the dancing music.
Speaker 1: So the Philly doo woppers, "Dramatics" and "Harold Melvin", "The Spinners" and all that, that was too--
Speaker 2: It was too slow, too romantic, too, I don't know (laughter), although I did like some of the music. I, it was--
Speaker 1: I know the Spinners every now and then would have something that, I think--"Rubberband Man" and stuff like.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Rubberband Man, there were some songs that, yeah, the radio.
Speaker 1: But mainly, "Earth, Wind and Fire" and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that whole core group that was coming up at that time, and, you know, I was listening to them basically, listen to the music my sister and brother were playing. It was very, it was very, it was an attractive force to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this the kind of neighborhood where you could walk down the street and hear the music coming out of people's houses?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was coming out all the time (laughter), coming out of people's cars, coming out of people's houses, yeah, the music was coming out, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any musicians in your family or--
Speaker 2: No, actually, no musicians in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, the reason why I asked 'cause it seemed to be so many in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Great musicians, and any in the neighborhood that you knew?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I mean I just probably didn't care. I just was so, I loved the music. I think, for me, the music wasn't something that, this is something I never thought of in terms of career or interests. I mean we played instruments in school, but that genre of music was so far away from what I actually liked that it was like, how do you go from there to there (laughter) and impossible. So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you talked about, I think you mentioned that the zoo and art museum were in your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Fairmont Park.
Speaker 1: And did you take advantage of those? Did you go to the zoo?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, on my bike, with my friends, you know, going, going all way around the West and East River Drive. Those are fun days, you know, exploring on the bicycle.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have a nice like bike path?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very nice bike path, some nice hills to go flying down as fast as you could go (laughter), yeah, really run times.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you go to the zoo itself or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Like I said, the zoo was a five-minute walk from where I lived. So it wasn't, it wasn't even, it wasn't even like curiosity. It was like okay, you can go whenever you want. I was more interested in the, being on the monorail than seeing the animals 'cause it was like, hey, when I, I could actually see the animals walking past the zoo, like, okay (laughter). But that monorail, I'm like how does that work?
Story_ID: 22261
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were a kid growing up, what were you mainly interested in doing, and what did you do? What was your personality like?
Speaker 2: The thing is, I was always interested in the stuff that typical kids are interested in. I wanted to be on the basketball court. I loved Dr. "J" [Julius Erving, Philadelphia 76ers]. I love all of it, okay. And that was just part of me, but there was this curiosity for science and mainly, weather, nature. I had a really, I have a good friend. His dad would take me and my brother to, and John, my friend, his son, to the University of Penn [Pennsylvania], and we'd go to the Observatory and, you know, to gaze at the stars. That, that along with my interests of weather, you know, something that was always there. I mean like, for weather, you didn't really have to go far. You could go outside your door and you could see, wow, these are really big, violent thunderstorms or two feet of snow. I mean it was there. So it was like, the laboratory was already there for me. So that was always a curiosity, and I was, I was constantly interested in learning more and more about it. So I would go to the free library, which was kind of far away, but I would check out books about weather. And, you know, I'd look at these equations. I'm like, what are--how is this related to (laughter) understanding this phenomena? Their books were always too far above me in terms of the math, like, hum, I didn't know what Calculus was at that time. But my interests was always there. So my interest in natural, in physical sciences were always there. As far, I mean I don't know how far back that goes. But it's just always been part of me even to this day. So I feel the same way if you see me in West Africa, and I'm looking at these forecasts. I'm looking at the satellite images of this big dust storm that's projected to come two days away, and I'm excited. I'm waking up in the morning. I'm taking pictures of the sun. I'm, I was the same way before a big snowstorm, like when is it gonna happen? Okay, why didn't it happen? Okay, why did it rain instead of snow? You know, these are always things that drove me, in addition to basketball and all the other stuff that kids do.
Speaker 1: So you've always been interested in the weather.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any, your friend's father, you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did he work for the Observatory?
Speaker 2: No, he just, he would--
Speaker 1: He just liked to take the kids to the--
Speaker 2: He had colleagues at Penn [Pennsylvania State University]. I mean he didn't work down at Penn, but he had colleagues there, and I used to think he was also a science enthusiast. So I think it was just something that he did anyway. And, for me, it was like, you know, this is great stuff, like--and I think that living in the city, you often don't see enough of the sky. But I was often like interested, like there's the "Belt of Orion". Why is it here in January, but then other times of year, I can't see it that well? Why did it move? You know, those were more curiosities, not knowing that it was the Belt of Orion, just like the way the stars lined up or they lined up or why is this--which I didn't know it was Venus at the time, why is it so bright? You know, what is it, and there was not really enough. There was no one I could talk to and say, you know, is that Venus over there? But the main thing was the library and then once in a while being able to go down to the Observatory to feed your, to feed your hunger for knowledge.
Speaker 1: So the Observatory was at the Franklin Institute or--
Speaker 2: It wasn't in the Franklin. It was on the University of Penn's campus. Now, I did go to the Franklin Institute. I did go to the Natural Academy of Sciences. I loved going to those places. Those were places where I felt like, wow, this is right where I belong, yeah.
Story_ID: 22262
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about school. Now, what was your first school? Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to a Catholic school, St. Agatha.
Speaker 1: Was that in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, walking distance, fifteen, ten to fifteen minutes walking distance.
Speaker 1: So did you start kindergarten there or first grade?
Speaker 2: No, I started, with kindergarten was in the public school which was right across the street from where I lived at. But my mother [Senia Boney] put us in Catholic school, my mother and father [Kirby Fable Jenkins]. I mean they understood that the schools were not really that good in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Were they Catholic at all themselves?
Speaker 2: No. They weren't Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was just, you know, an education issue just like it is today. You want your kids to be in a good environment where, you know, there's discipline. There is, you know, structure. There's an academic integrity. People want their kids to learn. So that's where I was at.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would have been 1969, I guess?
Speaker 2: Started '69' [1969], '70' [1970]. I do recall those first days of grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, unfortunately, and this may all be linked to me being a scientist, I'm not one for a whole lot of structure. So I was always getting in trouble. You know, if the teacher said fold your hands, I always felt like, why (laughter), like this does not feel natural for me to sit with my hands folded for an hour, unless you tell me I'm meditating. And we didn't know how to do that (laughter). So I was often one who would challenge, I think maybe give the nuns some heartburn.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is an all-black school, pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was all pretty much, all black.
Speaker 1: What about the nuns? Were they--
Speaker 2: They weren't, they were all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Okay, so you, you got in trouble but not for anything really bad. I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't, I wasn't, yeah, not anything bad, just constantly challenging authority (laughter), and wondering why the rules were as they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you accept the religious part of Catholic instruction?
Speaker 2: It was interesting, but I don't--I think the ritual created a certain level of discipline, like we had to go to church every Sunday. We had to--and I was an altar boy too. So that was part of the tuition like remission (laughter). So we had to do all of that stuff. I mean it created a certain level of discipline. But, you know, in terms of the way I feel like right now about faith, I would say I'm much closer and have a much deeper understanding of faith and religion at this point--even though I'm not Catholic, I still go to Catholic church. I'll go there. I've never, I've never disputed any of the things that--I think it's a good thing. And I feel like religion has its place. I also understand its context in terms of history. And it's very person, and, for me, it's a personal choice that people make. But I would say did I feel like I was gonna get zapped by thunder or lightening if I did something wrong? Generally, no (laughter). But I would say my faith was there, even at a young age. I think a lot of that came from my mother because she was part of the AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. And why I didn't really like going to church with my mother because the services were so long. There seemed to be something that was electrifying the spirit that wasn't really there in Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you're saying that something was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Catholic church was pretty much boring. Okay, you did the ritual. There was kind of monotone. The singing was there, but it wasn't like, not like what you heard on the radio. But, at my mother's church, the AME church, people seemed to be uplifted. They would sing with passion, you know, people giving their, their, you know, raising their hand, you know, really rejoicing over the word, and the pastor clearly was different than the priest because the pastor would speak in a very loud voice, sometimes saying things many times whereas (laughter), it was just the opposite for the priest.
Speaker 1: And they still did the mass in Latin, right, when you were--
Speaker 2: No, they were doing it in English. Yeah, and I'm glad because my sisters and my brothers who also went to Catholic, they did it in Latin. And I would have had a whole lot of struggle with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, did you, at St. Agatha, was there any particular teachers or, that emerged that you think were really important in your development?
Speaker 2: How can I say this? Maybe in a negative way, yes. There were some teachers who, who fed me with knowledge, and there were others I often felt who felt like I couldn't, I wasn't, you know, the right stuff. But math and, math and science were always my favorite subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay, you liked math and science.
Speaker 2: Yeah, English, penmanship, I just remember the days when the teacher was trying to force my hand to do cursive correctly. And it just never happened, just never, and to this day, it's like, hey, (laughter), I don't know why I'm like this (laughter). But I remember being scolded, you know, kind of like, you're not disciplined, you know, it's like, I don't know why my hand can't (laughter) draw in a straight line. I'm not, I'm not sure why that is. It is what it is. It's never really been any different.
Speaker 1: May have been a sign that you were gonna be a medical doctor--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --judging by their signatures. But, okay, so are there any of the nuns that stand out as, that really were helpful to you at all, and at that level or were they all pretty much the same?
Speaker 2: I think the nuns weren't really, from a discipline point of view or just keeping me on track, I guess they did their job. I wasn't really motivated by them. I think most of my motivation in terms of science and math is just coming out naturally. It wasn't anything that anyone did that would push me in that direction.
Story_ID: 22263
Speaker 1: Now, a kid growing up in an ordinary neighborhood, interested in science, I mean were you attracted to the popular culture science stuff like on television or radio or, you know, I know, I think NOVA was on by then and--
Speaker 2: I, the strange thing is, yeah--
Speaker 1: --they had like TV shows, "National Geographics", "Explorer" was on and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: None of it. I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't particularly pay attention to those things?
Speaker 2: "Fat Albert" was my show (laughter), okay, you know. I didn't pay attention to any of it. I think I probably spent more time reading than the visual part with respect to science and math.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any, can you remember the first book about science you read that really gave you a sense of understanding of what a scientist is and what the scientific is?
Speaker 2: No, none, none in all that period. It was just sheer curiosity; me going into the library, going, you know, to science books, grabbing science books, thumbing through them, looking at pictures, trying to understand what was going on, weather, trying to understand, you know, how it worked, was, it was nothing else. It was, it was no, there was no underlying structural organization to it outside of just sheer interests. And the same is true, you know, like the weather, etc., just sheer interests. I remember, I would call, the big storm was coming up the East Coast. I would call and try to talk to a meteorologist. And I would ask him questions like, so why is this gonna happen? Why is that gonna happen, never really understanding fundamentally that basically, Newton's laws were driving pretty much everything (laughter), just kind of sheer curiosity. Nothing else.
Speaker 1: So you're sort of a weather, you were a weather autodidact, I guess in some ways in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were just drawn to it because you were, and so did you watch all the weather TV shows and--
Speaker 2: We didn't have those back then. We had the weather at (laughter), the weather guy on TV, yeah, I would watch those definitely. And, you know, we had, like a phone number to the weather service where you could call and hear the weather, you know, what the temperature was. There were situation, and I mean to this day, I kinda still use this 'cause I feel like it's really interesting. Those early questions to me is like, how can it be 32 degrees when it's raining? I don't understand that. Why isn't it snowing? Isn't it supposed to snow at the freezing mark? Yeah, but, you know, now I'm saying, okay, it's change of phase. There are situations that come up where it takes energy. And so sometimes you will get rain out of it instead of snow.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what age did you really manifest this weather curiosity?
Speaker 2: I would say probably by ten. But even before that, the interests was there. But by ten, and certainly through my high school years, it was there, you know. But I'm sure before I was fourteen, it was there 'cause I would, 'cause I was interested in it. And I would, again, go to the library. I would read. I would try to understand as much as I could without really understanding it. But the interests was always there.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular meteorological drama that took place when you were growing up near the East Coast or near Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Those big snowstorms and those big thunderstorms. Those would be the ones that would just like, see the sky completely black, lightening all over the place. And I'm like, why? You know, it was sunny earlier. So what happened? You know, I remember a tree got struck and split by lightening. And I was like, wow. What happened? I mean how does this work? You know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you hear the stories in grade school of Benjamin Franklin with the key on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard those.
Speaker 1: --kite and all that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but it was kind of abstract (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you, at what age did you sort of decide that you wanted to become a scientist?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: Or did you think it was possible?
Speaker 2: I always felt like I wanted to be a scientist. I never really felt like there was another job that I wanted to do. I might have been earlier on saying, I wanna be a meteorologist, okay. I wanna be the guy who understands and predicts weather. But as I went into high school, it was always science. It was always like, you're gonna be, you're gonna be a scientist, and not really clear about what a scientist did. But there was never another area. I never saw myself as, I don't know, someone in business. It just never came to me. It was never a thought. It was always like, take as much science as you can. Take as much math as you can.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you go to middle school or did you go all the way through--
Speaker 2: Straight to high school.
Speaker 1: Straight to high school from St. Agnes--
Speaker 2: St. Agatha to West Catholic High School for Boys.
Story_ID: 22264
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, so West Catholic High School for Boys, it's 1977.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, are you a good student by this stage of--
Speaker 2: I feel like I'm a good student, but, you know, one of the issues is the best high school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was, at that time, was Central High. We couldn't go there unless our teachers recommended us. And I didn't get recommended, but I felt my strength was no, my strength was in math and science. And that's really what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: But did the Catholic schools recommend students for Central High--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a public school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: That seems like that would be contradictory in some ways, but okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean because the school was known for math and science. It was like the best students went to Central.
Speaker 1: Alright, but you were a good math student at this point?
Speaker 2: I feel like I was a good math student and a good science student. That's why I feel like I excelled. Some of the other subjects, hum, you know, I have a much greater appreciation for English now. But it was, I really think it was the way they taught us (laughter), that just turned us off, like, you know, why do they keep teaching us the same thing over and over without any context. And not only that, the context was, we were in a neighborhood where people spoke differently than what we were being taught. It was a like a disconnect. And, and so it really didn't have that kind of, you know, solidification that it should have had. You know, it's just like, hey, people don't, people don't talk like this. You know, when they may write differently, but it's like a different context. I kind of felt like our grade school was disconnected from the, the neighborhood. I always, I really did feel like that. I felt like, you know, we did--we went some place that was foreign for six or seven hours. And then we were back, when we walked out, we were back in our neighborhoods, like home. This is it. This is where, what, this is where all the stuff is going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I suppose you probably found out over time that you almost had to be bilingual if you lived in a black neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where you're doing a, especially a professional job because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --nobody would understand you otherwise (laughter), you know, if you try to transfer one or the other.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Misunderstood. So, anyway, so in, so, for instance, in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], what would be the way you all would talk?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just like we were in the streets (laughter), like, hey, it was not anything like, like what the nuns were saying. So it was like, okay, these rules that are set in place, they may make sense in some context, but not in our context. And that was a problem. I mean we, we didn't have a sense of the greater world around us and how we would ultimately be interacting in that greater world. It was like, you're inside of a bubble. Whatever your neighborhood is, that's where you are, and so what is the motivation for you learning--I probably would have done much better off learning a foreign language. And that may have made sense than actually trying to learn English in a neighborhood where most people didn't speak standard English.
Speaker 1: They didn't give you a sense that you would have to use standard English--
Speaker 2: No. I almost feel like they didn't give us a sense that we, I don't wanna say this completely. But I felt like at times the Catholic school, both in the grade school and high school, was more like, well, you'll be, you know, a good citizen. Not that you'll ever be anything great, but you'll be a good citizen. And that's probably enough.
Speaker 1: Okay, or a non-troublemaker.
Speaker 2: Non-troublemaker.
Story_ID: 22265
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, usually freshman year, sophomore year, that's the time when gang recruitment takes place the most in the hood. Were you under pressure to join a gang or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I mean for me, I mean I think, this was a different time for me. You know, high school was something that, you know, my eyes were wide open like, wow, we're in high school. But it's also, it was also in my freshman year that, that my mother [Senia Boney] became ill. And so I don't think that I was focused on other things. I think I was focused, I really did like high school. But I think I was trying to deal with this other, the other issues, you know, just trying to understand where--so the first couple of months from well, you know, I was like, I don't have the nicest clothes. You know, these kids are dressing nice. I'm not, I'm not in that gang, that group where, you know, it's what it is. You know, this is what we can afford and this is how it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, when you--how did you deal with your father's [Kirby Fable Jenkins] passing? You said that you were very--that was before you went to high school, of course--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: --you were in grade school. But that, you know, I was just thinking. I didn't ask you really about that. We talked about it, but--
Speaker 2: I was, I don't, not quite sure. But I know that I, I'm not sure how I really reacted to it. I know I lost someone who was important to me, and I was pretty close to my father. But, you know, it was like keep moving on, keep moving on. And so, yeah, that, I mean I think when you're very young like that, nine or eight, nine, you may process things differently because you don't understand the full scope of it. All I know is that one night we were sitting, we were watching TV together. I went to bed, and then that was it. He, he had a brain hemorrhage that night, and the next time I saw him, he was cold.
Speaker 1: So this is when you're ten--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you were saying earlier that your, that he had struggled, I guess with your older brother over the years.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What was your brother doing when you started high school? Was he, was he okay or was he still in trouble?
Speaker 2: He actually, let me see, so he would have been, he was, I think he, not sure if he had gotten married at that point. But he struggled. I know that, as a, you know, he never kinda got on track. He, he did finish high school. He did finish community college, junior college, but I know he didn't finish. He went to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University]. He kind of never stayed focused. I think, yeah, he didn't stay focused.
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school, was he working or--
Speaker 2: He was working, but he was more away. My sisters were probably there and my mom. So I didn't really pay much attention to him. I assumed he was just doing whatever he was doing at that age. I think the more critical time was, was after she passed away in terms of having a support structure 'cause I think, while I wasn't really uncertain after my dad passed away, I was much more uncertain after my mom passed away, about how, you know, how things would be.
Speaker 1: Now, you were sixteen when your mother passed?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was fifteen. I was, let me see. So I was fifteen. She passed away in '79' [1979], yeah. So I would have been sixteen in May, but I was a sophomore. And, yeah, it was, it was, so it was about a six-month duration where she was hospitalized from like, I don't know, Thanksgiving, and then she passed away in March. So, yeah, that was, I think that was much more traumatic in terms of like not sure how things were gonna turn out.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your brother? How was he dealing with this?
Speaker 2: My twin?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: It's funny because I'm assuming we were dealing with the same thing. We were, we were high school kids, you know, thinking about the future, the basketball still in our lives, playing, playing around and all of that.
Speaker 1: Was he in the same school? Did he go to the same school as you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were in the same school, but it's like he started taking vocational classes. And so somehow he's making a decision that he was, he wanted to do something else outside of going to college. I don't know why he made that decision. Me, I was just more, more or less interested in like, starting to focus on, I'm going to college, and I want to be in science. And how do I get more math courses, so I can take physics as a senior because they had pushed me back to--I don't know who made the recommendation, pushed me back to lowest Algebra. And for me it was like why am I in this class, like this is just a waste of time.
Story_ID: 22266
Speaker 1: Now, this is West Philadelphia Catholic High School for Boys.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The population was racially what?
Speaker 2: It was probably 40-60, black, white. White, 40 percent, blacks, 60 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't, I have, to this day I don't understand why they put me in these very low math classes that, about the only thing they could do would be to bore me. It was no challenge whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And eventually, I had to go to summer school and take a math class so that I could ultimately get to physics in the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Were there very many black students in the higher math track there at West Catholic, you know, West Catholic School--
Speaker 2: I think there were less than the white students. In fact, you could see it. And by the time I got to the physics class, you know, there was clearly many more students more students who were white than black. And, you know, like the AP courses, you know, it was almost like it was, I wouldn't say sabotage but kind of. The math can sabotage everything, right. So if you don't, if you don't have the math, if you're not in the right math course, then you can't take those AP courses. You can't take those accelerated courses like--and for me, I kind of understood. I'm not sure that my sisters or anybody else understood it, but I was like, why am I in these classes? Like, what happened? Did--
Speaker 1: So your sisters and your, you say your brother kind of accepted that he was gonna go to this vocational track--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and didn't raise up about it. But you, now, here you are with, you know, your advocate, one advocate is gone, another one is sick, you know, and you've gotta like fight this battle yourself it seems--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about how you're gonna (unclear) (simultaneous) focus.
Speaker 2: And I, I definitely offered resistance. I told the math teachers from the beginning, like I don't belong in this class. This class is too easy for me. It is not challenging. I don't belong here. Is there a way I can test out of this? No way to test out. I just felt like, you know, that's the thing. And I kind of feel like, this is always the catch, I think this is really kind of a human situation, human condition that if you don't put people in challenging situations where, like where they feel like they can grow, you ultimately do much more damage to them because they're gonna become either indifferent or bored with whatever they're doing and they ultimately start questioning like, why am I in this anyway, like why, what, is there something, am I not supposed to be doing this, like am I, I mean do people just think like I'm not good enough or what is it? I don't know what that is.
Speaker 1: What amazes me now, I've been in similar situations. A lot of people we've interviewed have been in the situation you've described where you're a kid and you're given this different track or something. How did you have the presence of mind to fight for, 'cause some people would say well, this is easier so I'm a kid, so it's easier. It gives me more time to play around. I mean, what gave you the presence of mind to push yourself to these higher classes?
Speaker 2: I think I kind of understood that I wanted to be a scientist. There's that certain tenacity, a certain hardheadedness where there's like, no, this is not gonna happen. There's no way after pleading with these teachers that I can get to where I'm trying to get to. There's no way to do it. I mean no matter what I tell them, no matter what I do, if I score a hundred on every exam, it doesn't matter. I'm locked on the track, not even understanding the full ramifications of it except that I don't wanna be on this track. This is not where I belong.
Speaker 1: Can you, have you thought in retrospect about what kind of person would keep you on that track?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, and I've thought about a system, one where outcomes are decided early on, where people say this is the kind of student who does this. This is the kind of student who does that without recognizing the whole human spirit, the whole idea of choice and possibilities that are beyond whatever we think. And, yeah, so I understand that. And I can tell you to this day, when I take students with me to Africa, I don't just take physics majors. I take students from the School of Communication, students who don't even know what they're supposed to do. They're not clear about their path because you don't know, you really don't know how the story is gonna play out. But if you see passion in the person, if you see character and commitment, sometimes you just have to go with that and say, let me see how this works out. It's not always the "A" student that you need to be focused on. Sometimes, it's just the student that has that spark, and they need the right condition to grow in. So I mean what I see, what happened to me at that point in time, to me is symptomatic of what's happening right now across the public schools and schools in general, that teachers, the structure overall is not aware of this latent power that exists within young people, students, and that we have to figure out a way to harness that, to make it grow, to--and it's not always gonna be what we think. It's not always gonna be what we think. Sometimes we just gotta get the interest. We just gotta hold that part, and then let the thing take off. I, and that's kind of what's happened. I mean that's what happened to me. I would say that the best thing that could have happened to me in high school was my physics teacher. Now, he knew 'cause I went to him (laughter), in tenth grade, eleventh grade, hey, I wanna take physics. And he would look at me, and say you can't take physics. You don't have the math. He, he was my freshman conceptual physics teacher, conceptual physics. So he knew exactly where I was, but he's like, you can't take physics. You're not gonna be able to take physics. Your math and that kind of helped me in saying, look, I'm gonna take physics as a senior. And all the way up until the (laughter), the end of the eleventh grade, he's like you can't take physics because you still don't have this math. And really, so by the end of the eleventh grade, I was in night school, taking Algebra II, no struggle with it. It was easy. And I'm like why, what's the problem.
Story_ID: 22267
Speaker 1: Was this a night school approved by the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to get it approved by--'cause they were not gonna let me take physics. And that was just the end of it.
Speaker 1: But they wouldn't let you take Algebra II?
Speaker 2: They wouldn't take the, they wouldn't move me no matter what grades I had. They would not move me. So that's, that's how it is. But my grades--
Speaker 1: So you were able to--okay, well go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but my, the physics teacher, when I took it, you know, like I said, I'm more or less in the raw, like I understand how things work. But, you know, Physics teaches you about structure and Newton's laws. So how does this project our motion work out. Those things, I was very raw. I just, like, I, concept--(unclear), I can feel how it works. But now, you're telling me (laughter) that everything is predictable. And that to me was like a great thing, like there are laws that are driving all of this stuff. And you can quantify it. And I think that's, that made a big difference. My teacher, his name was Mr. Nemick (ph.), and he was one of those cantankerous types of teachers that you loved him because he, he always pushed you just a little bit further. Ah, Jenkins, that's not quite right (laughter). And my nature is like, why? Well, consider this. Well, what do you do if you have this situation? Hum, okay, let me go back to the drawing board (laughter). I didn't think about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, once you got there, you got a good teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're a senior and you're taking physics and had you been on track where you should have been, you would have been where at that point? You'd have been taking, what?
Speaker 2: I would have been, if I had it my way, I would have been taking Calculus and Physics in the senior year. It turns out that I couldn't even do that. I mean I was like two stages behind, so I was taking Trigonometry and pre-Calc in my senior year. But like I said, there was no mechanism to feed you beyond a certain point, to feed your hunger.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so, now, did you do other things in high school? I mean what were your other high school activities? Now, this is the major, seems like the major struggle in high school. Was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, for me, it was more or less being a student. You know, the, playing basketball, doing things like that, I really didn't join too many clubs. You know, I worked after high school. I mean when, you know, when my mother passed away, you know, we knew that we had to do more. So me, me and my brother, both of us worked. We had high school, we had jobs after high school because high school wasn't free. It was a Catholic high school.
Speaker 1: So what kind of job did you have after school?
Speaker 2: You know, some of it was, some of it was custodial, and then, but I also had jobs at this, this center, Monell Chemical Senses, says in, on 30--on University of Penn's campus. That was a nice job because, I mean it was a job that would unnerve me because, basically, feeding lab animals. But, basically, I'd work. I don't think I didn't have a job beyond tenth grade. I was just working, no matter what. So, you know, school, work.
Speaker 1: So why was it unnerving to feed the lab animals?
Speaker 2: Man.
Speaker 1: I had to ask.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: What kind of animals were you feeding?
Speaker 2: Guinea pigs, wild and domestic, when they're hungry, I can still hear a thousand cages rattling (laughter) when I walk in, in the morning (laughter). They would be, you know, so, I don't know, hungry and thirsty, they would just pull everything out. They would turn their cups over. And I was like, this is like a revolution every time I walk into this building (laughter), for food and water (laughter).
Speaker 1: It sounds like Devil's Island or something, you know, (laughter).
Speaker 2: They were, they were testing the animals. I mean it was a good job. It was good experience. I worked at like the hospitals during the, some summer programs like as orderlies and moving stuff around. But it was always work. I mean we worked. So I think that also probably kept us out of trouble because there was a sense that you had to do things. And when, and when I wasn't working, I was getting in trouble, you know, hanging out with my friends, not doing my homework. You know, my sister, she definitely had a struggle with me for a little period of time, about a year, probably after my mother passed away because I think I was just not sure about anything.
Story_ID: 22268
Speaker 1: So did your older sister, was this your oldest sister?
Speaker 2: It was my middle sister.
Speaker 1: And she's the one that took over the household after your mother passed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did a lot. And I think all my sisters did as much as they could have, but she certainly kept me on course.
Speaker 1: And she was how long, I'm sorry. How old was she?
Speaker 2: She's, my sister is five years older, five years older than me.
Speaker 1: So you're talking about a really young woman.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: She's like twenty one, twenty two, or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she, she--and I struggled with her for a minute, but she, I think that was a good struggle because I mean she really helped me to recognize, it's like, you know, there's a corner. There's hanging out with your friends, but there's homework, there's college, you know. You have to take your PSAT's, you have to take your SAT's. So I think that that was clearly something that I appreciate, you know, from her, at this point. And sad to say that her son has gone through the same thing, single parent, she's--but she just, overwhelmed her. So her son hasn't graduated from high school yet. And she, I see her struggling. I kind of look back at myself, and I told him, I said, listen, I'm sure I wouldn't be here if your mom had not helped me to stay focused on what was important. And she's doing the same thing for you, it's just that the conditions have changed. There's so many more, so much more overwhelming. And that's the difference that I felt like, you know, when I was, could have fallen off, someone kept me going, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good that she was around--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to help. Did you have to move or anything or did you--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have to move. We stayed there at the house, but, yeah, I think school at that point, after going through this period of not being sure about things, you know, my focus really did come back. And it was like, this is what I've been taught my whole life. You're going to college, you know, you're gonna do something. And it came back, came back.
Story_ID: 22269
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned basketball a few times. Did either you or your brother ever play, you know--
Speaker 2: Intramurals and stuff like that. I mean we just never, look, we loved being out on the court, but I think we were clear about the reality of like, you're not gonna play in college. You're gonna, you know, you're gonna figure it out another way.
Speaker 1: Now, those were the days when Philadelphia's NBA team, the 76'ers were, didn't they win the championship in eighty--
Speaker 2: They won it in '83' [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], right.
Speaker 2: Hey, I grew up with Doug Collins, McGinnis, Darryl Dawkins, Dr. "J" [Julius Erving], that was, motivating forces to go back out on the basketball court (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought it was '83' [1983] 'cause it was around that, I know that's the time that Larry Byrd and Dr. "J" were in the news a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah. They, the Sixers [76'ers] had a period from about '77' [1977] to about '83' [1983] where they were just championship caliber team. Now, they didn't always get there, but they had the pieces to do it.
Speaker 1: Right, I think they only won one, and then they finally--
Speaker 2: They only own one.
Speaker 1: --but they had like the top tier team in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --league for years. Yeah, that's right. So, okay, I just wondered about that, if you all ever played. Now, your brother, you say, is taller than you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the time. Now, we're the same height.
Speaker 1: Okay, really, you caught up--
Speaker 2: Caught up.
Speaker 1: --being twins even.
Speaker 2: Being twins. His jump shot was always better. I gotta say that (laughter).
Story_ID: 22270
Speaker 1: So what kind of counseling did you have about college and high school? What did they, how did they help you?
Speaker 2: To me, that was not all that good. I mean I, I pretty much can say that, like the schools that I wanted to go to, I didn't really get a whole lot of help from counseling services about that. I don't know. I can't remember anyone really sitting down talking to me about, do you want to, if you wanna be a physicist, you need to go here or why don't you apply to these places. I don't, I don't recall getting that kind of guidance.
Story_ID: 22271
Speaker 1: You eventually went to Lincoln [University], right? Now, how did you--
Speaker 2: Eventually went to Lincoln, but I started at Drexel University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. In fact, I got accepted to Drexel, and, you know, I had to go through their summer program. I mean, once again, how can you say it? It's kind of a deficiency mode where it's like, okay, you're not ready for college, so we have to take you to a summer program. So I went to Drexel, I went to Drexel from 1981 through basically, 1983, '83' [1983] or so in the Physics Department, physics and atmospheric, I think it's atmospheric sciences. And that, that was a place where, you know, everyone was good. I came in this program with about fifty other minority students. And I don't know how many made it through, but I'm sure that it was less than ten. It was a very different environment, and it was almost like the Catholic school environment. Drexel is like a bubble, right? So I lived at home, and I'm in an environment that's completely different than the rest of the environment. You know, I ride my bike down, and I'm in another bubble. And it's a college bubble though. So a college bubble is better than some of the other bubbles you can be in. But it's not really clear about the relationship of who I am in this environment. I'm a college student. That's pretty much it. And I could say that I struggled at Drexel, I definitely struggled in terms of the math, the science, but there was little, if any, encouragement in that environment. There were some professors, but not many, who would encourage you. More or less, you felt like the way I can say as, when I was a professor at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] how I know some of the colleagues looked at the students. It's like, why are you here? Are you qualified to be here? Why are you here? I think those signals reverberate within you because you're constantly questioning those basic things about yourself. It becomes like an identity struggle, like why am I here? I know I love science, but why can't I get the grade? Why can't I make the cut? And, you know, it all came to a final crash and burn when my sister became pregnant with my nephew, and it was just too overwhelming, like how can I, you know, help take care of her? She wasn't doing well. How can I maintain school? How can I do all that? So, it came to an end for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so money issues at home, you're staying at home and yet the economy there is really strained--
Speaker 2: Kind of, I mean--
Speaker 1: --so you wanted to make a contribution to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and just really like, just know, I mean just emotionally and mentally, how do you struggle through all of this stuff that's happening around you, you know? And, so, yeah, it came to an end for me. I kind of knew it would. I didn't really have the support structure at Drexel to really work through some of this stuff. I, I mean most of the time, it was like, I'm not, yeah, I talked to faculty members. And it was like, I don't know if I'm gonna give you the benefit of the doubt, like, I'm like, well, if you really understood that I stay in the library from sun up to sun down, but the situation is overwhelming me, like I don't know how to get through this. I think that was, was it. I mean I really understood. I remember one person, (laughter) I mean it was like this whole question of doubt. I remember one faculty member just asking me, like, are you, you know, you're basically wasting taxpayers' money. And I was like, um, like what (laughter), like what. I mean, I, as I said, it's a system that I've been inside where it's constantly questioning who you are, why you're here, what is your purpose, why don't you fit in or you don't have the cut--you can't make the cut because you don't have, I don't know what, something.
Speaker 1: That had to be like living in two worlds. I mean you described a bubble.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You go to the bubble, and that's one world, and then your outside world, there's economic issues, and all this stuff is going on in the neighborhood and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and here you are, you know--
Speaker 2: I'd ride, I'd leave the library at midnight on my bicycle. I'd ride past all the dudes on the corner, I mean every night. And be like, hey, what's up, (laughter) just like do the same thing the next day. Yeah, two worlds--
Speaker 1: In one world, you actually feel at home, but they're not going anywhere, and the other one where it's a doorway to what you wanna do, but they don't want you there.
Speaker 2: And all within a fifteen-minute, ten-minute bicycle ride (laughter), (unclear) two different worlds.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, '83' [1983], you stop going?
Speaker 2: So '83' [1983], '83' [1983], yes, so somewhere between '83' [1983] and early '84' [1984]. My nephew was born in, he was born in '84' [1984], so yeah, I stopped. I really didn't know what else to do at that point. My grades were suffering. I know that, but the overall situation was just overwhelming, like no, no, no way out. And I think like a lot of student feel today. It's like I don't know what to do. But, you know, it's always good if there's an adult. So I think I realized this actually. I've had students in my class, and I'll just be like something's wrong with you. What's wrong? Like, I can kind of see whatever it is I was going through back then, I'm like I see that, this person is struggling with something. I don't know what it is, but I'm gonna ask. It's not my business. If they don't wanna, but I'm gonna ask them and see if there's any way I can assist them, yeah.
Story_ID: 22272
Speaker 1: And so what happened with you at that point? Now, did you--
Speaker 2: So at that point, I was out. I mean I probably, like, student loan was like, look, you don't have enough credits. So I went to community college for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to community college, and in that year my girlfriend, which later became my wife, she got pregnant. And I was part of that (laughter) piece.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you had something to do with that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had something to do with it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: So, that was a struggle, but I, but, you know, in that struggle, and I mean it was a struggle, I really did not--I went to community college. I did not have the resources to just take the bus. But in that year, I found myself. I, this is who I am. I'm going on to Lincoln University. I'm gonna stay in science. And I also knew that I was doing it, not just for myself, but because I'm like, I've got a kid, like I can--stopping is not a possibility at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay, so after your baby was born, now, that's Nicole, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, after she was born, I mean you were, were you working then or something?
Speaker 2: I was, I wasn't working, I mean part, you know, jobs, jobs here and there, no, you know, no permanent work. And, you know, I was in Lincoln. I got accepted there. And it was like, yeah, well, I'm, I'm focused. This is gonna happen.
Speaker 1: So, now, did you move your--
Speaker 2: I commuted.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so Lincoln's close enough to Philly where you can--
Speaker 2: Fifty miles, forty five miles commute, one way; round-trip about ninety miles.
Speaker 1: Did you have a car at that point?
Speaker 2: I had a bad car (laughter). The first year I lived on campus. So it was okay. But I realized that, you know, I wasn't gonna be able to just stay on campus.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a, was there a link to Lincoln University, I mean who, how did you end up at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: I, I, that's a crazy thing. I don't really recall except Lincoln was a place that I wanted to go to because I knew they had physics. And, you know, there was--when I went to the community college, that's actually the first African American course I took. And that kind of opened my eyes up to like, hey, a lot of this stuff is connected (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you took a course in African American studies?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that and what, now, this is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it was the, it was eye opening because it's like, hey, all these years I've been thinking one thing and it's really completely something different, like we were never taught these courses. We were never taught this information in any of the history courses I have ever taken. Like, there's no context for our condition. Like, how did this all happen. You know, it's not just me only that's struggling. It's a lot of my friends. It's people. It's like what, so while I always understand that I was black, it was the context in terms of like why did this happen or how did this happen? And I think that that was, that was a major, you know, player in terms of like, this is something bigger than just like your own little thing. This is, this is huge, and it's not just at this moment. It's part of time, part of a longer period of time where people have been struggling with conditions. And now, I remember taking that course, and I remember being angry through a lot of that course. And just like, why didn't they tell us this? Why--
Speaker 1: So you never had anyone around you that generalized about our condition like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: To get back away from it and say, well, this is what--
Speaker 2: No, and which is why I feel like the academy is so important because where else can you learn this stuff? I mean like, I'm not even sure if my parents understood it. I'm not sure any of my aunts understood it. I'm not sure that they understood how big the forces were that had shaped their lives and were shaping everyone's lives on a daily basis. I mean I just don't think they understood it.
Speaker 1: Who was your teacher at community college?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't remember, but I know he was, I think he was from Ghana. But I just recall reading, just everything in the book, just trying to understand it. I mean it was as important as the astronomy course, just a sense of context and a sense of you've been thinking all this stuff, all this time, but your part is something bigger too (laughter), like it's not just you're out there by yourself. You're also part of something bigger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I do think that that was a, strangely enough, that course and that community college experience would have an impact on me. And I'm sure I did not consider another majority institute. Maybe I was thinking Penn State [Pennsylvania State University], but I was probably not thinking Penn State. I was pretty much thinking like, I need to go to an HBCU [historically black college and university]. I mean that was it. And, and when I went to Lincoln, I would say that was probably the best learning experience and confidence builder that I had up to that point. I'd never seen, I'd never seen a black physicist, a black chemist, a black mathematician. That was not part of anything. The only black professor I had at Drexel was an English teacher. That was it. And that was like, okay, so look (laughter), you have to question what is happening here. And that was, that was something. I mean that was the first time people were commenting, like, you're a smart guy. And stuff isn't difficult for you. You understand. I, no one had said that, maybe in my high school physics teacher said that, but through that other experience, people had not said that to me about anything in terms of like, you being a contributor to science or to knowledge. That was a very influential period for me. And I still call my professors, Professor Heard, Professor Roberts, Professor Jenkins. She's a, Wilma Jenkins. They were, whew, when I saw them throwing partial differential equations up on the board, I was like, where am I at (laughter)? I'm in math heaven. This is the place.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, who was, first of all before we leave the Philadelphia Community--was the name of it Philadelphia--
Speaker 2: This is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was it Philadelphia Community College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's Philadelphia Community College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22273
Speaker 1: So who were the teachers? Who was the head of the physics department or who was the teacher there that helped at Lincoln [University]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Professor, like I said, there were three who were really influential. Dr. Roberts, he's currently the chair of the physics department at Lincoln. Professor Heard, Irving Heard. We'd have more of those, like, sit down, son (laughter) kind of talks. Let me tell you (laughter). And he also had a great sense of history from an Afro-centric prospective. The folks from Moli and Egyptians and he had a sense of that. Dr. Roberts is more of a purest. He's an elementary particle so he's a theorist.
Speaker 1: Well, Herman had a historical context--
Speaker 2: Yeah, historical context and had the right demeanor to let you know that, like, it was so much deeper than whatever you were thinking.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: I mean so much deeper than whatever you would see in the book. That's just, I mean like there is book knowledge, but there is the context, like, what's the context? So that's, to me, that's always the situation. What is the context? How are you connected to this?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, we've heard about him before. We talked to one of your fellow students yesterday, Ralph Etienne Cummings, and he was also very partial to Professor Heard in his (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, seriously, you know, just like you, you appreciate it. Maybe you didn't appreciate it in your youth, not completely, but Heard was the kind of person who, Professor Heard is not the kind of person who you could okedoke. You know, you can't just give an answer and just be like, whatever. And even if you gave that answer, his look of disapproval would be like, I messed up (laughter). And sometimes, you need that, like, you don't have to say any words. You reflect on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so did you like, so were they into atmospheric science?
Speaker 2: They were physicists. Professor Heard and Dr. Roberts, Dr. Roberts was in elementary particles so he's a theoretical physicist. So they, they, you know, pure physicists. That's what they do. And you say, well, how did the atmosphere come into this, because first of all, it was always a thing that I was interested in. But, in particular, in my junior year, I mean if you ask--and I think Professor Kennedy from Lawrence Livermore did ask me, he said, what do you wanna do? I said, I just wanna get a job. You know, I got a kid. I just need to make some money, and that's it. So I gave him one of those bonehead answers, you know, like bonehead (laughter). But along the way, I was watching NOVA, and they were talking about this drought in Africa. And I swear, it caught me like that [finger snap], like that's what I wanna do. I wanted to know why (laughter). I'm going to break the code eventually (laughter). I wanted to know why there is this long-term drought in Africa. And I know I can contribute. I know I can make a difference. And, and in my, when I applied for graduate school, trust me, that was in my application that I was like, I'm gonna be a contributor to this problem because it's like I have the passion, and I have the will. I want to know, and I want to help society. And, again, if you'd asked me this question, probably before I, I don't know maybe taken those Afro-American courses, maybe none of this would have happened. But there was a deeper contextualization of who I was from that course, from being at Lincoln, it's just like, you're not just some obscure guy doing whatever. There is purpose behind you and there is context and there is connection.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was liking your language (unclear), and I'm trying to write it down (laughter). But that's, yeah, this is, okay, this is very interesting stuff. So, so at Lincoln, you got the kind of mentoring and attention that you needed to develop your talent--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in science.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay. So meanwhile, you've got like, I think you have two children by the time you graduated, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And I think Professor Heard, you know, was so instrumental in, in keeping me focused. You know, Professor Heard would always say, you're a man first. And that kind of, you know, a sense of like responsibility, accountability, like you can do many things in your life. But there's something, you're a man, you're a black man, you're a scientist, but there's something more fundamental about, you know, you gotta hold your ground. You gotta, you know, keep it steady. That kind of mentoring, that, I think a father tells a son. That's beyond whatever is on paper. That's like to the heart, to the core of who you are, like you can't escape this. There is no running away. There's freedom if you accept whatever your condition is. And be truthful and authentic and be about, you know, what you have to be as a father in this society. I really felt that that was more, like I said, I think Professor Heard gave me things that, they're priceless, just--sometimes it was spoken. Sometimes it was not spoken. But it was understood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were at Lincoln from eighty--
Speaker 2: Five [1985] through '87' [1987].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985] to '87' [1987].
Story_ID: 22274
Speaker 1: You got your BS in '87' [1987], and now, what were you, did you, were you advised there about what to do next?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), from Day One. You're going to grad school (laughter), even though I fought it my junior year with those bonehead answers about I just want a job. Those guys were like, you're going to grad school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that, you know, that made a difference.
Speaker 1: Now, I notice that after '85' [1985], your children have African names. It's Safiya, then Osei, you know, is this a part of a different kind of world view--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess to, yeah, okay. So, now, had you met Warren Washington at this juncture at all?
Speaker 2: I met Warren Washington when I was in grad school. So I applied to a number of grad schools and Michigan was the one for me.
Speaker 1: Ann Arbor, Michigan, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And when I went, when I left Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to go to Michigan, it was in a green, I don't know what kind of car that was. I had two blowouts on Route 80, but I was determined (laughter), I'm gonna get to Ann Arbor (laughter). And I had my kids in the car and my wife. And we, we drove all night.
Speaker 1: Okay, two blowouts.
Speaker 2: Two blowouts, and it was a force behind it, like listen, this part of my life has to happen (laughter). And a tire is not enough to stop me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you like Ann Arbor?
Speaker 2: Good and bad, I mean again, it's like going into these bubbles every time, right. So you go into a new bubble. But the thing about graduate school that's different is that, yeah, you gotta do classes, but there's much more room for creativeness in terms of your research. And I never felt, I think what Lincoln [University], what those professors gave me was confidence. I never really felt like I was somehow less than another. It didn't matter where you were from. It didn't matter that you were from Princeton [University] or MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] or, it was like, you're just the same. We're just here trying to get our degrees. I'm not gonna be bowing down to you as a result. So that was how it was. I had a good advisor at Michigan. His name was Professor Bill Kuhn. I felt like he always treated me fairly and not with any sense of partiality. I always felt like he knew that this was a passion that I had, never tried to discourage it, and it was, so I worked for two years. It was during Martin Luther King's [Jr.] celebration that Warren Washington came up to Michigan. And I met Warren on that day, and I was like, man, where has this guy been (laughter)? And Warren invited me out to Boulder, Colorado for the summer, me and my family. He helped us get a summer rental. And I drove my car from Michigan, and by then I had a Corona, which was, seems like half rusted out. We drove all through the night. We got there. I was like, I'm in my environment. Warren helped me in terms of, you know, providing computer time so we could test out some ideas for my thesis--dissertation. And that's it wrote, I mean 'cause that's how it worked out. I mean he was a very important source of support, you know, throughout my graduate, from my PhD proposal to, you know, again, making computer time or providing me with computer time 'cause I'll need to use super computers out there, bouncing ideas off of, you know, this is what I wanna try; how does this work? So, yeah.
Story_ID: 22275
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, now, how do you spell your advisor's name? Bill Khun. How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, K-U-H-N.
Speaker 1: K-U-H-N, alright, okay. Okay, so well, tell us about your--now, you went, like most people in the heavy sciences, the Master's degree was nothing. It's like a speed bump. You just throw that over your shoulder and keep going, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're just going straight for the PhD.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And what was your dissertation about? What's the--it's called, if I'm right, "An Investigation of Achaean Climate Using the NCA-RCCM".
Speaker 2: Right, so, let me set the stage. My, my advisor, Bill Kuhn, and his colleagues had been trying to understand why the earth was apparently warm when the sun was putting out 25, 20 to 25 percent less energy. This is, we call this a paradox. The sun burns off of nuclear processes. So it starts out in diffusion process where when it's very young, it's basically hydrogen. And over time, it starts to use heavier elements like helium. As it goes through these heavier elements, the amount of energy that's coming off the sun will increase. So over the lifetime of a star, it will get hotter and put out more energy. Well, early on, in earth's history, when we think the earth is about 4.5 billion years old, the sun was producing much less solar energy. And yet, by 3.8 billion years ago, there was water at the surface, and we see life. This, the entire planet should have been frozen over. And so the solution to this has always been, there must have been a massive carbon dioxide atmosphere. And, you know, my advisor did some simulations to look at this, and they'd figure out how much CO2 would have to be in the atmosphere, and it was a tremendous amount. The thing is, is that the models that they were using were simple, what we call one-dimensional models. When I met Warren [Washington], Warren was working on three dimensional models to look at climate today. And we were like, you know what? We should try to look at this using three dimensional models, something that hadn't been done before. And I was the guy who, you know, I wouldn't say I'm foolish enough, but I wanted to do that kind of thing. I wanted to be on the edge. I went out there to Boulder [Colorado] and learned how to use the three-dimensional models. And I applied it to the problem. So, you know, in this kind of situation, you have to reduce the amount of energy coming in from the sun by 20 percent and you have to include the oceans and you have to look at the day length. The day length was much shorter 4 billion years ago because the moon and the sun--the moon and the earth are locked together, like through conservation of angular momentum. So the earth day is slowing down over time. So it's getting longer and longer and longer. Four billion years ago, the earth day was maybe five hours long. And that's short, short sleep for most of us (laughter). But it was rotating very fast, and we were like, you think rotation is important because basically, the way that the system works is that the tropics get too much heat and the polar regions don't get enough. And the way the system tries to balance itself is to transport heat from the equator to the poles. That's what it's doing all the time. In fact, every weather system that you see, these big storms in the wintertime, spring, fall, it's basically trying to deal with this imbalance. So it wants to move energy from the equatorial regions to the polar regions, and it wants to gets some of that cold air out of the polar regions down to the equator 'cause it's always trying to find balance. Well, if the earth was spinning faster, maybe that kind of transport was different. Maybe, in fact, it was a buffer. Maybe it wasn't frozen because the heat was being transported less efficiently to the polar regions. And so now the equator had this buffer zone where it wouldn't freeze over, and so maybe life was protected down there. So we kind of looked, explored all these different perimeters. I was exploring rotation rates, CO2, the amount of land mass, you know, amount of sunlight, the amount of CO2 in these simulations. Yeah, it looks like the system has got its own buffer, but I couldn't completely say at the end of this dissertation that it would buffer it completely, that there would be still warm areas. The bottom line of the dissertation was that you still needed more CO2, maybe not a mass of CO2 atmosphere, but you needed more. And, you know, I look back at that kind of question because it's like whatever happened then is responsible for why we're here now because if this planet had been frozen, life would not have evolved. It would have been in some basically, I don't know, maybe bacterial state. And that would have been the end of it. So that was the whole purpose of the dissertation. And, again, Warren Washington, played an instrumental role in terms of, you know, giving me the latitude to test this on these climate models, on these three-dimensional climate models that were being used to understand today's climate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with that connection in Boulder, you were able to, you know, do something you couldn't have done if you hadn't met Warren Washington.
Speaker 2: That's, that's exactly--that is so true. The outcome would have been completely different. If I had missed that, that Martin Luther King symposium, I don't know what the outcome would have been (laughter). Warren was 100 percent behind me. He kept me on point. He, we talked pretty much every week or two weeks. He'd ask me, how's your writing going? What did you find out in simulations? You know, is it in line with what you think? And when I, you know, I was like, there's a bug in it somewhere 'cause this is not giving me the answer that it should be giving me. And like, hey, why don't you look in this subroutine, why don't you look in this part of the code. In fact, his whole code, I still have it (laughter) in a box in my house. It's a lot of code, I don't know, maybe 25,000 lines of code. But it was from this, this model that I used that Warren was the originator of, CCM0A'; and very, very, very instrumental, very important mentor through the whole process, all the way to the end. My, even my proposal, I could see that my, some of the committee members were not quite so sure about my dissertation, what I was proposing. Somehow Warren smoothed that whole thing over. I don't know what happened to this day. But they became believers. I don't know what (laughter) happened. I left the room uncertain. I came back in, they were like, this is a good project.
Story_ID: 22276
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay, so I just thought it being worthy to say, so a lot of time, I know, I hear young people in school, young black students, they often do not take advantage of the black cultural centers or the black studies department or the--you say, this is a Martin Luther King celebration, and they say, well, why do I need to go there? I'm already black. I'll just study harder, just, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you think they, I think perhaps a lot of opportunities and connections are missed--
Speaker 2: I agree.
Speaker 1: --opportunities and connections that other students are getting through other venues that are set up for them.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And connections they already have--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: --'cause we often come with no connections.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And they would try to avoid the connection to, I guess, to avoid the stigma of being seen as black or something, you know.
Speaker 2: I, that is definitely true. That's definitely true, and we have to get that, we have to keep that connection intact. Without it, you're like an island. You're just out there, nothing to anchor to and no foundation, no root. Big storms comes up, you're just lost out there, don't know who to call, don't have nobody to talk to, don't even understand that your experience is just not unique. It's, it's part of something bigger. So, yeah, we've gotta continue to instill that, that sense of connection. And that it's not a one-way connection. It's something much deeper in this connection, that might manifest itself at that moment; it may not. But it's something there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so I'd imagine even at Howard [University] here, some of the students don't take advantage of all the--
Speaker 2: Don't.
Speaker 1: --resources that are here for them.
Speaker 2: No, no. That's a good and a bad thing, but I think sometimes when you're at an institution like this and people think about legacy, they think about the past and not the living moment and how this stuff is connected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the transference of the moment is not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --seen as legacy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 22277
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, after you earned your PhD, now, you earned your PhD, and what's next?
Speaker 2: What's next for me is the National Center for Atmospheric Research  [NCAR] as a post-doc.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1991.
Speaker 2: Yes, and what's cool about that is that I was given an offer from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University], a faculty position straight out of Michigan [University] and yet making more money and more security. But, yet, I felt like there was a research piece. I needed to study West Africa. I needed to understand, I needed to dig in on that level. And I felt like NCAR  was the place for me to be at. It wasn't about money, even though I was poor and our family was poor, it was not the issue. The issue was what was the right thing to do. And, you know, my uncle told me before I went out there, he said, it not always--'cause I was, I felt like I'd been at Michigan, I'd been away from the family. I wanted to be near Pennsylvania, near the family. And he told me, it's like it's not always the easy thing that's, that you need to consider. You need to consider, you know, the thing that's gonna really carry you the furthest. It's not the money. It's just what do you feel is gonna take you the furthest. And you can always be around family, but you gotta think about your career. So, I was out in Boulder [Colorado] after that, and that was a tremendous experience, much more than I could ever imagine. Not only did I start going into West African climate in terms of research and really digging in and strengthen myself and try to understand the in's and out's of what was happening, it was also a time of meeting important mentors that influenced the way I thought as a scientist. And Warren, being near Warren. I would watch Warren, Warren was, I think he was head of his division, director. For me to see a black man operate in that environment with, you know, confidence, with leadership, you know, that was, was important. You know, I don't, maybe there are 850 scientists at NCAR, and I don't know, maybe a handful of black scientists. For me to see him, I mean he's known everywhere, but for me to see it every day, for me to see his level of commitment to it every day, you know, it just instilled in me even more, my commitment to the discipline and to the science. And, you know, I, but the thing was, the people I met out there, the scientists, I mean white, black (laughter), they, from my perspective, I could not have been in a more fruitful environment. I never could have imagined, you know, being--I had a great post-doc officemate, just talking all the time. I could never imagine the day the phone rung and I picked up, and I said, hello. And he, is this Greg Jenkins? I said, yeah. He said, "Oh, this is Carl Sagan." I said, who is this? He said, it's Carl Sagan. I said, really (laughter). He said, yeah, I wanted to talk to you about the paper that you wrote. I was dumbfounded, like no way (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that had to be exciting, yeah.
Speaker 2: He says, "Do you really think this mechanism could work?" And I'm saying, now, Carl Sagan's asking me about things, and I'm saying, I don't know what to say anymore because I don't know if this is a dream or this is (laughter), what it is. But he asked me some questions that were also off course. He's like, are you open as a person to new possibilities? And I was like, yeah, that's an odd question, but the answer is definitely, yes. I don't believe in closing--I believe we should be skeptical as scientists, but I do not believe that we should close off any door because you never know. It's often those small, little glitches, those small little things that mean something like, that, there's some meaningful information there. Let's not overlook it. The, the, you know, to talk to him and actually to exchange letters with him, and I must say that, I must confess that I was, I just felt like he was too high up, you know, the food chain (laughter), and I was too far down because he would send me letters asking me about things. And, and I was often too afraid to correspond to him, to call him 'cause I just felt like, hey, this guy is too high up. Now, his post-doc, Chris Schabow who I became good friends with, I felt, okay, yeah, this is okay, just shoot the breeze, talk the ideas out. But, you know, along the way, Ed Lorenz, who, you know, people talk about the butterfly effect, Jim Lovelock, the guy hypothesis, and so many other folks, Roland Madden, whose, people talk about the Madden-Julian oscillation, Jerry Mill, who is Warren's, been his collaborator for many years, I mean just the openness of that group, those group of scientists, for me to be able to go sit down with them, Charlie Anderson, who, you know, was the first African American to receive a PhD in atmospheric sciences, to be able to talk to them really is almost like, I remember these conversations and how I felt when they were talking to me, what, the impact that they had on me. It was, for me, a growth period. And the thing is about those types of scientists, they're not defensive, you know, they're not trying to cut turf. They're not like, hey, I'm worried that by talking to you, you're going to--that is something that has lost, I feel. Today, the young cats are just way too competitive to the point of this publish or perish mentality, where people don't have dialogue because they're often thinking that someone's gonna steal something from them. But through the sharing of ideas in conversation, who knows what's possible. So I spent those two years at NCAR, very great years for me. Boulder was not for me, definitely (laughter). It's a bubble within itself, a very interesting bubble, but it's not the place that I wanna be--
Story_ID: 22278
Speaker 1: Describe it. I've been there, just describe--I think all the houses are made out of the same rock, right?
Speaker 2: Man, the people are laid back. They are laid back, but there is no diversity whatsoever or very little. You know, and my kids went to the schools there. They liked it, but I'm often thinking about like what I got in those years after the community college context, like, who am I? Am I just a guy that's just working in a lab with no connections? I would go to the Denver [Colorado] to the schools to talk to the kids and things, but there's something deeper. It's something deeper about the life you live. And you can't be in a bubble to fully (laughter) let your force out. It's just not possible. I mean, of course, you can be in certain environments and still be constrained, but the bubble issue is a funny one. The people were really nice. I learned a lot, Mickey Glance, I learned so much. He's a social scientist, so much I learned from him about the Sahel, the people, how the governments work. In fact, he and, he got me--I don't know if he couldn't go to this trip in Niger, but I went in his place, and he said, why don't you go? Man, it was the greatest experience.
Speaker 1: So you went to Niger?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a post-doc, went to Niger, eyes wide open.
Speaker 1: Was this your first trip to West Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And just overwhelmed, not just overwhelmed by the fact that I'm in the Sahel, the place that I've been interested in understanding why there's drought, but the, the orange soil (laughter), the soil, the people, the, yeah, there's poverty, poverty, but there's connection. And it's like, this is where I belong, yeah, no doubt about it. This is where I belong. This is what I wanna study for the rest of my life. Yeah, so that's the kind of stuff that happened in Boulder [Colorado], and it was a very, I think one of the greatest experiences.
Speaker 1: Now, now, did you meet Dr. William King over in, he was African American Studies. He just retired this year.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: We interviewed him there in 2002. That's why I raise it now.
Speaker 2: I didn't. I was in the bubble there.
Speaker 1: Then Wesley Person over at U.S. Geological Surveys, the most elder--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Yes, I met Wesley. Warren, you know, I told Warren in the beginning, I said, I don't wanna live in Boulder. I wanna live in Denver. But his wisdom was greater than my feeling of like, I don't wanna live here. He's like, look, you need to work in their lab, you need, you're gonna be going up there. You're gonna be working nights, evenings, you know, stay close to the lab. I think that was the right, right advice because it was a very productive time for me, very good period of (unclear) growth was there. I mentored summer students each year, African American students and I worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your family like it?
Speaker 2: They didn't like being so far away, but I wouldn't say it was a negative experience. I would say it was neutral and possibly positive. It was certainly positive for me to see that landscape, to see the mountains, to go up to 13,000 feet, for me to go examine the four corners, Utah, Arizona, yeah. It's something that you never, you don't have that in the East. You don't have that kind of environment.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the Vortex and, what's that, the Red Rock Country of, I guess it's New Mexico, I guess. It's supposed to be some kind of a vortex there or something.
Speaker 2: I'm, I've gone to New Mexico. I've gone to the Mesas, the Hopi Reservation. I've gone all through these, and I love that country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sedona, I guess is where the--
Speaker 2: Sedona is beautiful. I've gone to Sedona. It's beautiful. I would not have known any of that if I'd not gone out to Boulder.
Story_ID: 22279
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there two years, and you came, so you come back to--
Speaker 2: Came back to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent the next ten years at Penn State as, first a post-doc, like a research assistant, research associate and then as a faculty member.
Speaker 1: So this is the state college, Pennsylvania, right, Penn State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Penn State, it's a, yeah, it's a state university, a big university at that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they're in a place that I doubt that anyone can name where it is (laughter), who isn't from there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: State college, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: I would say that it was a good experience overall. I mean the one problem is always diversity, right, you know. How do you get students from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and New York to come there if the environment isn't so welcoming. But I often think that those things are artificial, like, they can be changed. It's just a question of will and, and leadership. So, yeah, it was a good period of growth working with the earth system science center, studying climate change in the U.S., still working on my work for West Africa, solidifying my connections to the lab in Senegal. Those, all those things happened while I was at Penn State. My kids grew up there. And, but I would say that the sense of isolation wasn't the, a good thing for me. I kinda felt it always building, and I had really went to the dean and said, look, you gotta get more diversity here, students, faculty, staff.
Speaker 1: Now, you actually, well, while you were at Penn State '94' [1994], Warren Washington, your mentor, is elected president of the American Meteorological Society.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: First African American to hold that position.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So that kind of vindicates your mentor (laughter) in some, a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's known as a heavy hitter. Also, you, in '96' [1996], you had a chance to come to Howard [University] for a Spring-Summer semester--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to teach, and did you, what was your, 'cause you said you felt a sense of isolation at Penn State.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you feel here at Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt like, you know, there was this program that we have now, this graduate program in atmospheric sciences. They were trying to get it off the ground. And, you know, Dr. Thorpe, who's here in the physics department, was instrumental in doing that. And he was like, come down, help us to get this program off the ground, which I felt was important. And I still feel that to this day. Being down here was great, but the infrastructure part of it wasn't because my philosophy, and I'll tell any young faculty member this, you've got about five years to get your career off the ground after a PhD. You've gotta run. There's no, no if, and's or but's about it. And you have to be in an environment where people understand that, that you have to run every day. I think, you know, we have some infrastructure struggles here at Howard, especially, as it goes to supporting young, young scholars so that they can achieve their potential. So, yes, being down here was great, and it was like this is really where I belong. But from, but from a professional point of view, I could see that it was gonna be difficult. And so at the end of that spring semester, I had to make a decision. And Penn State had put an offer on the table for me, and it was--I took the offer from Penn State. Now, my friends here are like, you left us (laughter). I was like, it wasn't spiteful. It was just a professional decision (laughter). That was the, the extent of it. And, yeah, I did talk to Warren [Washington] about it. I was conflicted about the situation--
Story_ID: 22280
Speaker 1: Okay, well, in 2002, you published "The Challenges of Modeling Climate Variability and Change in West Africa" in Climate Change which is--is that a journal or--
Speaker 2: It's a journal.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, well tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, since leaving NCAR, [National Center for Atmospheric Research] and since actually starting at NCAR, I had been really trying to understand, how do we get our hands around climate change in West Africa? How do we understand climate variability? We had, this is the one location on the earth where there is some big signal in rainfall. And it's impacted tens of millions of people. How good are our tools, our climate models for this region? And after looking deeply into them, I said they're not gonna be able to give us the answers. There are a lot of problems, processes, scale, and in West Africa, infrastructure. No observations or very few. How are we gonna get a grip on this? And so that, the whole point of this paper was to kind of lay out what the issues were. And my colleagues on that paper, Adamou Garba, I had actually invited him to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University], and he had spent some time, and we were working on data and trying to understand what was going on for some particular wet years. And Simeon Fongang who is also my mentor, he, I met him in 1993 when I went to visit Senegal. And, you know, we all had a good understanding of there's a lack of observations in this area. But in terms of the climate system, it's unclear. What does this mean? Is West Africa to be drier, wetter? We expect warmer, certainly. But how are we gonna know when the bus arrives, when we don't have the observations or the measurements to really know that. So that paper was basically to lay out some of the challenges that existed. I mean in West Africa, you know, we had written an earlier paper. We actually had a workshop here, and, you know, it's like, you don't have the human capacity. You don't have the physical capacity to measure the change. You don't have the technical capacity. You know, it's like we're talking about, you know, 250 million people that are going to be impacted by climate change in one way or another and who don't have the ability to adapt to these changes when they come. So that was the main purpose of that paper to kind of lay out what the issues were to the overall community in a way where it was more about what we need to do right now.
Speaker 1: Like a needs assessment for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what it has to be, you know, for this critical because the world was stunned in the '70's [1970s] when the big draught in Sahel, all the people, so many people died and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all of the care organizations were mobilized to deliver--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --food and that sort of thing. But you're saying, we could, you know, if we understood it better, maybe we could do something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it's some processes that are driving those things. It's not--so this is where the science comes in. I'm, for me, it's like, look, let's get to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 2003 though, somebody heard you and you received a J. William Fulbright Research Award to spend eight months in Senegal--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --working at Cheikh Anta Diop University on climate change research and the AMMA [African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis] campaign?
Speaker 2: AMMA, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the AMMA campaign?
Speaker 2: So there have been very few field campaigns to understand weather and climate in West Africa. We, there was a big one in 1974 called GATE [GARP Atlantic Tropical Experiment]. The next one was AMMA, 2006. So we were priming the ground for Senegal playing a role as a measurement site there. But also we were trying to understand climate change. We wanted to run these finer resolution models, more, finer than the global climate models because the scale of rainfall in West Africa is different. It's not like the United States, okay. It's more like our summertime weather where the scale of weather is much smaller. In the wintertime we have big sprawling storms, all the Midwest is blanketed by snow. You don't get that in West Africa. The scale is much smaller, but our models, the scale, are not--our models aren't, haven't been developed for that scale. So we have to use regional or mezzo scale models. And that's where the struggle is. It's how do we get to this scale? What is the scale? A climate model has, we say, a grid resolution of two degrees. Weather happens in Africa on a point one degree scale, climber, a point one climber is very small. But it's organized. And that's what the field campaigns have told us in the past. It's very organized. It's not sporadic. It's not, you know, there's a structure to it. But you gotta get to the, you have to have the computing power to get to that scale. Me and a young man there named, he's a professor now, Professor Sela (ph.), we spent most of our time trying to look at this period of 1960 through 2000 to say can we use a regional climate model to say, to get a sense of what happened, and why drought occurred and are there fingerprints or footprints to these droughts. And we spent literally months and months downloading data from here in Washington, getting this code to run, just a tremendous amount of time to build capacity in that lab. And we did it. And that young man, Dr. Sela, has, is gone to become one of the most prolific young scientists in West Africa after doing time and spending time in Italy. I am most, you know, enthused about the fact that we built capacity there. So in that lab today, you will see students studying climate, whereas there was no capacity or very little back in 2003 on that. And that Fulbright made the difference. And during that Fulbright, you know, I knew, being in Senegal, I mean, look, I come up, I come from poverty. But seeing poverty in Senegal was different. It was, it was ubiquitous. It was everywhere. It was no, no sense of the scale, you know, going to the villages, being in the city, seeing people with a lack of resources and seeing some folks with a lot of resources. But that's a very small group of people. But I knew then that I was not going back to Penn State. I knew it. I was like, I have to make a difference. This problem, this scale of this problem is big. And I'm gonna go to Howard because I need to get students, more students to be aware of what's going on, but also, to transfer my knowledge to them, not just the one or two students that I had at Penn State or three or four, but to do this in a classroom on a daily basis.
Story_ID: 22281
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 2004, you join Howard [University]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what position did you come in as?
Speaker 2: Associate professor, and I was director of the atmospheric science program.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so what did you, did they give you enough space and enough resources to do what you--did you have to raise it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think that the, the good thing, like I said, you gotta really think these things through. But I think at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University], I developed, I had become established in terms of publications, I mean just who I was and known in the community, gotten some things off the ground, had resources. Then I won an NSF [National Science Foundation] Career Award. That really helped me in terms of just establishing myself. Those things were totally critical to coming back here because when I came back, while I may have come back in '96' [1996] as a kitten, but when I came back (laughter), I was something else, not inexperienced, a sense of direction, a sense of, you know, how the, how the rules are developed and how, what are the rules to the game. I understood that very well, and, you know, understood that I would have to bring resources to Howard. I've never expected anyone to give me anything. I've always been like, we've gotta bring more resources so that we can include more people, especially these students in being engaged in this whole process, this whole enterprise.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't know the context of this, but it has here that 2004, you're the editor of the text, the "Extreme Proterzo--
Speaker 2: Proterozoic (ph.).
Speaker 1: Proterozoic Geology, Geochemistry and Climate".
Speaker 2: Yeah, this, again, is related to the Archean, but it's also related to in later time where we keep seeing these continual low-latitude glaciations, like there are icebergs at the Equator, like how do you explain that (laughter)? This is, and it only happened basically from 2 billion years ago to about 500 million years ago, and we never see it again. So really bringing together a group of scientists and to propose, like how do you get this to happen? And somewhere in about 2000, I had a shift in thought about how you do this. And I'm not messing with it anymore, but I really believe, based on the work that I've done that, that the earth's tilt wasn't 23 degrees. It was a much higher, pretty much the earth was like go on its side like this, in terms of rotating.
Speaker 1: The poles weren't where they are today.
Speaker 2: The poles were sitting kind of pointed sideways. It's the only way you can get a solution that it can, can explain why the earth is so warm early on and also how you get these repeated glaciations 'cause it, something happened. And it's never been like this again since that early time. So we brought together scientists from all around the globe to try to look at this. And that's what the book was about.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the, was there--well, so the reason was, like you said, the earth was like--
Speaker 2: That's one of the hypothesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the theories that are out there. People are still arguing over this today like, I'm like, look, I, the solution I found is the only one that makes sense to me. I've struggled with these kinds of problems. Like I say, I can work on a problem for fifteen years. And after regurgitating, reflecting, thinking through it all, it's like, there could be other solutions, and this one seems highly implausible, but this solution works. And I'm not discarding it because the other solutions you'd have to just bang with a hammer trying to get it into the shape that you want. I don't think that's the way to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It is what it is.
Speaker 1: Alright, so this is a book the, "The Extreme Proterozoic Geology, Geochemistry and Climate" is published as a--is this an article or book?
Speaker 2: Book.
Speaker 1: Book, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a book with articles from scientists all around the globe as we try to struggle with this issue.
Speaker 1: So it's basically an anthology of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --of scientific articles.
Speaker 2: --progress has been made, but not much progress. I think we, we kind of hit the main buttons there in that book.
Story_ID: 22282
Speaker 1: Okay, I see some of the photos, I think we started this interview, you showed us some photos of some of the things that you were doing in West Africa, some of the machinery and technology that you used to study--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --study the climate change there. Is this a good time to talk about what you, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so soon after that, you know, life, you don't know if it's clean or in terms of when you break from certain areas, but I kind of made a break away from all the paleo climate work in 2004. I, and as I said, I think it's all related to my Fulbright and West Africa. I kind of don't see this as a game anymore. I mean I recognize that, you know, when you have vulnerable people, you have to work on their behalf. And you have to be the best scholar you can be to help them to understand their problems. So I kind of shifted away. If you look at everything I've done since about 2004, it's all been around Africa, I mean completely, like, I have no interest in studying other things at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay, so also, I guess you're saying that, what you're saying is that you're, this is mostly applied research rather than theoretical research?
Speaker 2: It's, some of it's theoretical, but it's mostly applied because the time and the conditions call for it. It's not, there's nothing else I can do. I mean I have to work to serve those who have needs, and there's a picture, I think I showed you the picture with the grandfather and the daughter. You know, I'm working for the granddaughter. I'm working for that granddaughter. The grandfather has already told me about the change that he experienced. Now, I've gotta look out for his granddaughter.  So that's what I do, and I work to try to understand how the system is put together. It is a very complex system, West Africa, with the desert in the North and the Monsoon, you know, it's, it becomes part of you. You know, this field campaign AMMA [African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis] and the measurements that I've been doing each year, they become part of you. It's like intuitively, you could blindfold me, and I could tell you when the Monsoon is coming in. I could tell you when a dust storm is overhead without looking in the sky. I can feel it. And in the work that I'm doing, you know, when I'm running computer simulations and running models, I intuitively know when they're wrong and kind of know where I need to go and fix things. And that, to me, is what learning is about. I'm not, I'm not any smarter. I feel like I'm being taught, like Africa is teaching me. The environment is teaching me. That's, that's where I wanna be. And, you know, that passion that I feel when I am there to like build, to help, it's all, everything is connected now. It's an integrated, I mean it's integrated within me. It's not some separate thing. I'm always thinking about it. I'm always talking to my colleagues there. And it's, and gotten bigger because while I've been focused on Senegal, now, Cape Verde and Mauritania, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Gambia, colleagues all along there, we talk about vulnerability. How do we protect people? What do we need to build to protect the populations now and in the future? How do we build the capacity? How do we get the resources? How do we bring the attention to things that really need focus? I mean that, that is integrated. So, like I said, my, I don't see myself veering off in another kind of direction because I know where, you know, I know where I'm needed.
Story_ID: 22283
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2007, you were elected the chairman of the, or chosen--I don't know how, the way they do it (laughter) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Chairman of the Department--
Speaker 1: Chairman of the Department of Astronomy and Physics at Howard, and so you've, you were, that same year, you were a guest speaker at "Climate in Society" which is a symposium, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The Warren Washington Symposium for the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder. And, now, what is AMMA [African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis]. I don't you really told us what the name (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: AMMA is the African Monsoon Multi-disciplinary Analysis Campaign. So AMMA brought together countries from Europe, for the U.S., to really study the Monsoon. And for us in the U.S., NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was a big part of it because we were trying to understand how do these disturbances, these waves become hurricanes? How do they become tropical cyclones? And that is the beginning. You have to go to the origin. You have to be like, you have to say, what are the right conditions to make this happen? And I can tell you, we left with more questions (laughter) than answers because we saw the whole mix of things. We would see a big dust storm come off, just before a cyclone formed. Now, our, all of our knowledge tells us that dust inhibits the formation of cyclones. Yet we saw observations which were suggestion just the opposite. How's all this tied in together is the question. What does it really mean for the future? You know, as the oceans begin to warm, are we gonna get more cyclones? Are there gonna be more Hurricane Katrina's? Those are the things that we don't know. But the source is back in Africa. That--
Speaker 1: So let me just ask, I guess a layman's question, I guess. So what you're saying, if I understand correctly, is that the source for a lot of the extreme weather we see in the Caribbean and the gulf and on the East Coast of the United States, hurricanes and such, coming off the water, is in West Africa.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: And it is sourced there. Now, years ago, in African History class, I heard about the gulf stream, now, this stream within the ocean that carries winds, carry waves, like a circular pattern from West Africa to the, to North America.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are these related or how are they--
Speaker 2: One is the ocean. The other is the atmosphere. They work together. The, you know, hurricanes need warm temperatures, generally, more than 80 degree Fahrenheit. But these disturbances, they begin, the origin is not clear whether they begin in Ethiopia, but certainly by the time we get to Chad, Nigeria, we see these three to five-day disturbances. Every three days we see a disturbance coming off of Africa. Now, these disturbances are really important 'cause they feed the agriculture. It rains. The people need it. But they also become hurricanes, so you can start thinking about big ones, like we can trace Hurricane Katrina all the way back to Senegal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We can trace whatever hurricane you can, big ones, back to Senegal.
Speaker 1: But they're not hurricanes in Senegal. They're--
Speaker 2: No, right. They're the seed, the seed (laughter), the seed begins there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes the hurricanes form really close to Africa, really close, like right off the coast. And so we have to tell the countries, the coastal countries that, like, you're not, you're not immune to this. In '99' [1999] Tropical Storm Cindy went up the coast of West Africa, crazy, formed right off the coast, went North, killing fishermen in Senegal, Mauritania before going back to the West and becoming a hurricane. Cape Verde, we work with them every year. We run models. They have had some close calls, and they're not, so the disturbance comes across Africa, dropping rain. It might form right there off the coast. It might form over the Central Atlantic. It might form in the Western Atlantic, but we can follow them for certain. And then the dust, the Saharan dust. The dust leaves Africa, but it, you can follow it all the way down to Barbados, to Puerto Rico, to the, to Florida. The dust, again, has bacteria on it. Dust makes a lot of people sick in West Africa. And it does get down here. So there're all these different angles to the continent that we're trying to understand, and it's connected. And it's connected to what we have here.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying too kind of leads to a sense of physical connectedness to Africa and, I guess, the world. You're saying in (unclear) the world is connected all the time.
Speaker 2: Connected, yeah.
Speaker 1: We're connected so we need to be concerned about what's going on--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: -- and 'cause I'm sure people have asked you why are you concerned about what's going on in Senegal? You should be concerned about what's going on here or, I'm sure you've heard that kind of remark?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I tell 'em--
Speaker 1: Well, what do you--
Speaker 2: I tell 'em, 'cause Katrina started just off the coast of Senegal (laughter). Yeah, we're connected.
Story_ID: 22284
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, and, now, tell us about some of the instruments and some of the conditions you're actually measuring, 'cause I know you showed us some interesting, some drones, some airplanes and other atmospheric instrumental. And what do they measure and what are they doing?
Speaker 2: So, you know, there's challenges. You can try to understand a hurricane or a tropical disturbance, but you need aircraft to do that. And the problem is you can only do that for a short period of time, one month, two months before the scientists have to go off and come back and do their next job. The real struggle is setting up a set of passive or active instruments where you can learn things from the ground over long periods of time, over long periods of time. So the field campaigns have used the drones like the Global Hawk. They're gonna be probably the best thing that we have from a non-human point of view, in terms of sitting over the top of a hurricane. There're always two questions with hurricanes. Let me just focus on those. It's genesis and it's intensification. Genesis is when, when exactly are the conditions perfect to form a tropical depression or tropical storm or hurricane? When does all that come together because sometimes there's too much wind above and it blows the thunderstorms apart. We have this dry air from the Sahara coming in, and it disrupts everything. So when do you get that or the storm develops over cold water. It's too cold for it to maintain its thunderstorms. So genesis is a question that we're still struggling with. How does it happen? What are the right conditions? And the other one is intensification. How do you go from a Category 1 to a Category 5 in 72 hours? How does that happen? What are the conditions? You need aircraft. They've gotta go inside of those storms, and they've gotta measure. Same thing for genesis. But it doesn't get to the bigger question of how do you look at this over a long period of time. You just can't keep flying the airplanes and drones. It cost a lot of money. You need to develop a network of measurements that tell you something about that. That's what we've been working on, that capacity building point, physical capacity in West Africa and Cape Verde because it is horrific, the number of observations that we have coming out of Africa, these, what we call upper-air measurements that tell us how the winds are blowing or where the dust is or how dry the air is. There're three stations typically in West Africa. In the United States, we have fifty or fifty one measurements or more of upper air every day, twice a day. In West Africa, three, twice a day, maybe, for 250 million people. People talk about data all the time, but when it comes to Africa, I don't hear people screaming. No coastal observations, not one buoy for thousands of miles along the West African coast. We don't know how the oceans are changing. We don't know when violent things are happening, like in 2003 when a ship went under, we don't even know the temperature of the water, the state of the water. You can't even go out and rescue people because you don't know the state of the sea. How can you have this kind of imbalance? I mean it just is, is not humane. I mean all these measurements in the West and Europe. Africa, depleted. I'm not sure how you do that, but we're putting our measurements in, and we're saying, look, when dust is overhead, the public officials need to know. They need to tell people, stay in today. We're in a bizarre situation right now where dust has been over the city for more than two weeks.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Dakar [Senegal]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we returned last week. Our measurements are showing this. This dust is sitting right over us. This stuff is falling in on people, and it's making them sick. They're taxing the public health system in Senegal. It's already poor, but at least we could tell people, stay in, stay in. The air quality is very bad right now. That capacity doesn't hardly exist, and the reasoning, the processes, the observations of knowing what's happening above you, is, is so important. And yet, it's out of the view of general, mainstream science.
Story_ID: 22285
Speaker 1: --the New Orleans [Louisiana] conference 2008.
Speaker 2: Well, this was an interesting conference we, you know, presented some of our data from this AMMA [African Monsoon Multidisciplinary Analysis] field campaign, but I thought that it was interesting because it was soon after the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] experience. And when the Katrina experienced happened, you know, at Howard [University], we put on a symposium because it was such, it was such a jarring experience for students here, for black America, for America as a whole, just to see what actually happened there. The, the hurricane was just one part of the story. The real story was the conditions that people were living in, the economic, the disparities, the unsafe conditions. And, you know, we had things on campus to address that. We actually taught a course in 2007 which dealt with Katrina, me and a faculty member from biology where we looked at these kinds of disparities. We went down, we went down with the students to New Orleans. We interviewed people. We interviewed residents. We interviewed people at the Army Corp. We found out what the story was, why did these levies collapse. We went to those neighborhoods, and that meeting came up in 2008. And they had a session around Katrina. And it was eye opening in the sense that sometimes the, sometimes the sense of, of what really happened escapes, escapes us all. I remember at that meeting that there was a reporter from New Orleans, and there were a lot of people there. And I asked him, I said, every time there's a hurricane, you always take us to Bourbon Street. Did you go to the ninth ward? Did you go to those areas where people are in low-lying areas? And the first thing he yelled at me was, this is not about race. And the things I shot back at him is, I didn't bring up race. I asked the question, where did you go?  We had an exchange in which I pretty much flagged him and walked away, like, you don't understand. You may be getting an award, but you just do not understand what it means to be human and be connected to people who are outside of your realm, okay. There was talk, there was talk, a reporter who said, yeah, I had, there was a family. And this guy was like, take my daughter. And, you know, just take her, just, just--and he was like, I gotta get this story out. I'll be back (laughter). He left them. And I'm like, what? Are you kidding me? You gotta get the story out, but you see people on rooftops, people are drowning, people who may not be there, and you gotta make a decision, and this decision is about humanity. And just for me to be in that meeting and to be there in New Orleans and to talk about the science that we're doing and all those things, but to recognize that something big happened. And yet, it was just a historical piece that's written about instead of recognizing that a whole Diaspora from New Orleans was created where people were just dismantled from their lives, just dismantled. I just, just--that was one of those meetings where you're just like, I don't, (laughter) I don't understand why I'm even at this meeting (laughter). I understand why I'm in my profession, but I don't understand why I'm at this meeting.
Story_ID: 22286
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have any prescriptions for, you know, to protect, in terms of, is there any observation that you've made that provide some kind of early warning for something like a Katrina?
Speaker 2: The problem is science. The problem is physical sciences and social sciences which are disconnected. Not understanding that a hazard is not the issue. There are always hazards, but the question is, it's about the people. Who's vulnerable? How did this come about? How do we alleviate it? When the next thing, next hazard comes, who's gonna be resilient? How can we ensure that people aren't just displaced and lost forever? I mean this is more than the shifting of money and funds, and we're talking about people.
Speaker 1: Well, I think I, if I understand you correctly, you're saying that we need to figure out how to protect people who are vulnerable, you know, right now. I mean that--
Speaker 2: Right now.
Speaker 1: --are in a position like the people in the Ninth Ward were in the lowest lying area--
Speaker 2: Lowest lying.
Speaker 1: --and they're always there, you know--
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: --and so if something was gonna happen, it's gonna hurt them.
Speaker 2: It's gonna hurt them, and then so you start asking yourself, how bad is it? And I look at, you know, we taught a course, and we looked at all the cities, I mean coastal cities. And the problem, sadly enough, is still the same problem of segregation. When you look at these cities like Charleston [South Carolina], Wilmington [North Carolina], Miami [Florida], Tampa Bay [Florida], Houston [Texas], hey, these are disasters waiting to happen. There are a lot of folks who do not have the resources to evacuate. They cannot evacuate. In places like Houston, you can't evacuate it. There's no way. There's too many people. There is no out. I just look at this and I keep thinking what are we doing to protect these communities that have always been vulnerable? And the question remains the same, like, well, you have to wait until the next disaster comes before people act. And then we don't know how that turns out because I often wonder what happened to all of the people there in New Orleans? Where are they? What happened to all those traumatized kids? I had students in my class who were from New Orleans. They were traumatized by the event. Who gave all these kids help? So, we don't know the answer to that. And we continue to move on with our lives as if, well, that was the past, without recognizing that it's not really the past. It's in motion. Whatever is going on right now is in motion. I just hope one of those kids will, who got impacted by Katrina, will come into the sciences, come into these areas thinking about how to protect vulnerable people in the human way and not let that situation happen again.
Story_ID: 22287
Speaker 1: In 2010, you spoke at the American Meteorological Society Symposium honoring Warren Washington. And you were among maybe, it appears to be about fifteen scholars--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that delivered addresses. What was your message?
Speaker 2: First picture, picture from New Orleans [Louisiana], Help, you know. You know, we have to do more for society. We cannot stay in the journals without thinking about the needs, the needs of society, that there are many vulnerable people here and abroad. And for me, it's West Africa, just so many vulnerable people. We have to do something. We have the technology. The question is, are we gonna let more people into the game? Are we gonna let more people into this game that's, that's been set up? Are we gonna let more voices be heard? Now, I don't know the answer to that, but I would say this. Science is still very closed. It's still very closed. So the question that [Carl] Sagan asked me which is, "Are you open?", the answer is, yes. But when I look at science overall, it's very closed. It's the club. It's, did you jump through all the hoops, and then I'll listen to you. I, that's not acceptable for me, you know. The voice of a scientist in West Africa must be heard. They are, they have local knowledge, but not only that, they understand their condition. And I know, first-hand experience, that it is very difficult for them to publish their work. But how do we know their work isn't contributing something very important to this bigger problem? And I don't know, but I do know that we have to, we have to unlock more doors so that more people can have access so that more voices can be heard.
Speaker 1: Now, one of your photos that you showed had a, you were sitting there with a gentleman, I believe it was a village elder--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who remembered the drought of the Sahel in detail, and he's one of the last people. Do you find also that there's valuable information amongst people who are not recognized scientists around the world--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: --who can--
Speaker 2: Definitely. What's great about Senegal was the village elders put out their own forecasts for the wet season. I was in, I was in a village one time where we were deploying our rain gauges, and he said, I talked to this chief, and he said, you know, the conditions are good for rain. I'm like how does he know that? He's like, well, you know, when I--he was (unclear) in his field. He's like, when the smoke goes straight up, thunderstorms are possible. If that smoke goes horizontal, no rain. I was like, man, that's what we teach our first-year students (laughter). This guy understands thermodynamic stability (laughter). He understands it. I have had some of the greatest experience with my colleagues in West Africa, and they're teaching me. I mean they're not teaching me the way the book says. We're looking at stuff in real time, big squall line coming towards Senegal. Who know what, lightening, hail, and they're telling me, we're looking at it, and we're saying, is it gonna make it here or not? This one is gonna make it. No, this one is not gonna make it. Sure, they've been trained at the academy, but they're bringing in something that is deeper than the academy. Yeah, that is what I want my students to see because that value, that understanding is, you know, it takes you to another level.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a summer research project every year in Senegal?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, in general, I've been taking students there since about 2005 where they spend weeks to several months. The big ones are the field campaigns because I want the students in the field with their colleagues. I want them to understand what it's like to execute a field campaign, you know, what it means to be timely, what it means to say, look, we can't miss this measurement. So each year I do that, and with the intent of publishing the work because there's a circle. You start somewhere, and you end somewhere. And the end part is the analysis and the write up and ultimately, a publication or to present it at a meeting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so either in a publication or in a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --scholarly meeting.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I've pushed all of my students to do that.
Story_ID: 22288
Speaker 1: Now, in 2012, you appeared in a documentary on, on Hurricane, the hurricane, the 2010 Hurricane Field Campaign.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, so is that available for us to--
Speaker 2: That, in August of this year, we will be running that documentary on WHBT here at Howard University. It will be made available. The whole intent of that is about hurricane research. You know, people know about hurricane hunters, you know, the Air Force guys who go out and fly into the center of hurricanes. But what about the research? How do scientists go about studying hurricanes? How do they come together? What are the questions they're trying to answer? How do you get to those, how do you get some answers to some of those questions? Those are the challenges. So, and the public needs to know that because I think many times, the public feel like, well, it's hit or miss. Sometimes they feel like everything is known about hurricanes or about the science, and it's not true. We have a long way to go. So the documentary examines both the ground component and the aircraft component, and they take you on a eight-hour flight into Hurricane Earl which was off the East Coast of the United States in that documentary.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long is it, about?
Speaker 2: It's about thirty minutes.
Speaker 1: Thirty minutes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we have twenty one hours of footage (laughter), but we got it down to thirty minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think you'd ever interest NOVA in going over with you on one of those projects?
Speaker 2: I would hope that we could continue to raise the level of awareness. The level of, not only serving society, but the great science, I mean it's such, it's such a laboratory to be in West Africa.
Story_ID: 22289
Speaker 1: You've done a lot of mentoring, and as you were saying earlier, you take a lot of students over with you on the projects and field studies, some of which are not science students.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some are not science students. Some of them have the motivation. They want to be there. They want to contribute. What I've, what I've found in almost all of the students, is that when they go there, they're one way, and when they come back, they've grown up. They're more mature in their approach, not only to the work that they've done, but to themselves, their life, what their accomplishments, what they want to accomplish. They seem to be a lot more focused. I can think about the number of PhDs and Master's students that have just evolved out of just being there, the number of students. I mean almost, I can't think of one student who has not graduated. I can't think of really one student who has not really thought about what's next for me. And I really feel like that, that environment is what does it. So the student who was with me this summer, he actually graduated from physics back in 2007. And he's working on his PhD at Drexel [University], my old stomping ground, but very instrumental in helping us set up these instruments. You know, I need someone who is like, he's in electrical engineering. So, hey, we've got this equipment. I need you to help me diagnose this, help me set it up. And also, we need to look at the output. I need that. Chemistry majors, history majors, communication, physics, mechanical engineering, atmospheric sciences--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --across the board.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the normal stay is, you said, six weeks or so?
Speaker 2: It's somewhere between three and six weeks. If it's a field campaign, it could be longer. The one student who's now here with Barbados, wow, this, we worked 2010 at every hour of the morning. I got Dengue fever along the way, you know, but it's the measurements that's driving us. We, we need to get, collect the data, and we need to try to put together a story. So they know, and it's like most professors, like, I'm not gonna ask you to do something that I wouldn't do. The students learn. The environment teaches them. We didn't have water for basically, almost three weeks this time, I mean because of some problem in the street where someone broke a pipe. But the loss of electricity. Last year, electricity in Senegal was very problematic. In fact, the country was undergoing a, nearly a revolution, you know, with the citizens fighting the government. They saw all that. You know, I had to keep them safe. That was my job. But they were in the midst of change. And I don't know how that influences them in the future or what they're thinking about, but it's all real. It's not any make believe, you know. I can't tell you when the power is gonna go out (laughter). It's gonna go out when it goes out. But I can tell you that, you know, when we go to the village, we, there's no power. People don't have access to water. They walk. They see that.
Speaker 1: In terms of your instrumentation and the kind of devices you have gathering data, do you employ solar energy or do you have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, and that's really been our goal, to get our instruments off the grid because the power is so unstable, you know, a spike in the data every time the power goes down, comes back up. No, we can't have that. So all the instruments currently on a roof of the lab are solar powered. And they have battery backup because we want continuous measurements. So that's where we are there. In the village that we work in--I didn't show you those pictures, but in 2009, eight [2008], myself, a professor in chemical engineering and two students, we sat there, and they had the design renewable energy source for our measurements. They looked at hybrid, they looked at solar complete. At the end, we chose solar. Those students and myself and a professor went over there in March. We built the thing from the ground up, went, got all the metal pieces from students spending their time in the mechanical engineering department. We drove that stuff down to the village, and got them powered. They did not have power before. So they had power, and this year, we went back. There was something wrong with the power grid. We took our students, three students, and we took about 12 students from the university. We went through the entire power system to make sure that something wasn't loose. The power is back up. And it's the same power for our measurements in the village. So, it's a, it's a partnership. It's a partnership that's greatly appreciated. In this same village that we looked at, you know, their well is now 60 meters, more than 180 feet deep, no water. They still haven't had water. And they, we hit water for a minute, but it was just not enough. But when you look at those, look at how the people in the village have to go five kilometers to get water, you know, it makes you really appreciate your situation, like just water for cooking, water for washing. You know, that's very labor intensive. I really feel like it gives the students another sense. It gives me a sense to not just be like whatever. My light should flip on every time I hit the switch or my water 'cause people are struggling. People are struggling. One of the, I mean the life, it's so deep. The life, the students, when, in 2009, we put the grid up, how, when we got the lights on, how the whole village just erupted. You know, the students saw that, like, wow, we made a difference.
Speaker 1: So on a number of different levels, is a rewards of going over there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and interacting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely. One of the students is down at George Washington working on her Masters. But I just think, and just the gratitude, you know, from both sides.
Speaker 1: So the students here, they can earn a, do they, can they earn a PhD in this, can they go that far in this program here at Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, in our atmospheric science program, they can get a PhD.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So they can. In the physics department, they can PhDs. So they can get that. But, you know, often we want the undergraduates, and we do, we want them to go out. And, you know, we give them the confidence, like, I was given the confidence at Lincoln, go out, flex your muscles, make a difference. So, and we bring students here, and we get 'em to that, that sacred space of the PhD.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't wanna get you in trouble, but there were some students in some of this literature. Do you wanna name some of your students that have gone on to--
Speaker 2: PhDs. Yes. Some of the students that have worked with me, Jonathan Smith, he got his PhD this summer. He's been my right-hand man, Cape Verde, you know, Senegal, you know, a really good, good guy. Aaron Pratt, you know, NOMA field campaign, 2006, PhD. Some of the other students who I mentored as undergrads, Segal Warford (ph.), she went with us to West Africa in 2006. She got her PhD several years ago. Amber Reynolds, Texas, Texas Tech [University], she got her PhD this year. I was her undergrad advisor. Tamara Battle, student currently working at NSF [National Science Foundation], you know, Jenae (ph.) Moore, helped us with the solar work, and getting her degree at George Washington, Daniel Robertson, currently working on his Master's in mechanical engineering, Gabe Perrion (ph.), working on his PhD in, at Drexel University.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a pretty nice legacy of students coming through.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So is there any interaction, I know you're partnered with Cheikh Anta Diop University in Senegal, there any interaction here at Howard between the--
Speaker 2: Well, we put--
Speaker 1: --Afro American Studies Department and the Physics Department in terms of the activities of Cheikh Anta Diop as a physicist and a historian?
Speaker 2: There isn't, but that, we lay the groundwork. Howard, we developed a memorandum of understanding between the two institutions, which is open for all departments, for research, teaching service, for exchanges, collaboration, but like so much of the administration, these things take forever to get through. Howard has apparently signed on to this thing and Cheikh Anta Diop has to sign on. It's the language often, and just, French, English, trying to make sure you get all these technical things right. But I feel like there is so much that we can do, not just from a science point of view, not just from a historical point of view or from a history point of view, from--it's just there. The, the energies are there. We've just gotta connect them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all that's required. I feel like, whatever else happens is how history develops.
Story_ID: 22290
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: So the biggest concerns I have are about our young people and them having a place, feeling like they have a place and a calling and a purpose. Too often I feel like people don't really know where they are, like, it's almost like you're looking to your right and your left, and you're trying to figure out by looking at them, where you should be. And that's not correct. We all have a role to play. And while we need to have our blinders on in terms of who we are, we should also remember that we're connected. But we can't be connected if we're not clear about who we are. So much of this right now is media drive, you know, what people think is important. But you gotta get back to what do you think is important. You know, where are you at? It's like an internal dialogue. These issues are big. I look at the number of male students in some of the physics classes. Maybe there are thirty students, five males, twenty five females. I'm saying, this is not really sustainable in terms of our own community. We have to reach every person. There's no option in this. If we don't, I don't know what will come about. The disparities, the bridge, the gap will just widen and continue to widen. And we gotta find a way to close that gap, like we're busy, all this professional stuff that we're doing. But while we're doing this, there's something else closing in on us. This is not, this is not a good situation that we're in. And I was always taught that education is the key. And, yet, for so many people that, there are these competing factors that say money and power and the next reality TV show are more important. Your cell phone is more important, all these other competing things that are pulling our young people. And we need them to develop to a point where they can contribute. If they fall out too fast, no contribution. If they fall out at fourteen, fifteen, thirteen, the connection is broken. And so we've got to preserve them by any means necessary at this point so that we have a future. This situation is going to manifest itself over time, and I think more intensely over time where our communities will not be ready or not aware of whatever the disaster is, whether it's a financial disaster or natural disaster because we do not have the infrastructure in place, human infrastructure in place to be ready, to be able to cope. So those are my biggest concerns. My greatest hope is also in the young people, like when I see them, sometimes I walk on this campus, and I feel their power. I feel great potential around me. I feel great ideas that will manifest. The question is though, how do we do it? How do we get this to happen? How do we get the pressure off of them? And college is so expensive these days. Students can't be working full time. They need to be learning full time. I don't wanna compete with their job for what's inside of their mind. I want them to grow. It's, it's very challenging right now. It is very challenging, from the home scene to the university scene. But I feel like there is no other hope, you know, except them. The material world is the greatest challenge. We extract so much, so much, and that has manifested itself when we look at climate change, how the system is warming, how we are using so much energy, so much. How are we gonna cut back at some point? I don't know (laughter), I don't know. We have to live sustainable lives. We can't live big forever. We have to live at a sustainable rate. We can't grow the economy at six percent. I know everybody wants a job, but six percent means that much more fossil fuels into the atmosphere. It means that much more resources used. We, the challenges are there. The awareness must come in line with the challenges. We cannot sustain. We cannot sustain, you know, having young men drop out at thirteen, fourteen, and never seeing that talent. We can't sustain using everything under the sun, buying everything under the sun. It's not, it's not gonna work. We have to get this message across. If we're correct on climate change, our children and our grandchildren and our great grandchildren will be challenged by the environment in ways that we cannot imagine. It's something I don't wanna see happen, but the only way we can change this is now. We don't have, we have to change, in fact, the entire economy. I mean I think that's what President [Barack] Obama's been saying. We've got to move away from a carbon-based economy. There are gonna be so many opportunities for our young people if we do this to form their own companies. But we gotta get past this mentality that everything is okay if we, if you just don't do anything. It's alright. It'll be okay. So I'm worried, and I also think the exposure. I think what you see from the media is not really what's happening around the globe. Many of these disparities are accelerating around the world. In Africa, you have so many people coming in buying up land. What about their traditional people? What about them, like, this is, this is not just about greed. So those are all the things. On a real level, it's all about being connected, that we go through this thing one time, and either we're aware of our connections to everything around us, the environment, the people and ourselves or we're not. And if we're not, it will manifest itself over time. If we're not connected to our kids, our children, it will manifest itself. So that's where I see the real issues. And some of its resource related, and some of it is really more about awareness as compared to resources.
Story_ID: 22291
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: This is always tough because, for me, I have work in front of me. And the only thing I can do is go at the work. If I don't accomplish the work, I feel like I haven't done enough. The greatest thing that I can do is reach these students. There's, just the greatest thing I can do. The greatest thing I can do is to see a student's light bulb flick on about research or about a topic. From there, new possibilities exist. So I don't know what the legacy will be. I just think that the work is in front of us and either we respond to it and go do it or we don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, once again, if you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would go back and change if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: If I could back and change anything, this is one of those questions where you can't answer because even the things that look like mistakes have meaning to them. And so, you can't go back. All you can do is be present, and move forward. I wish I could have reached more young people. I wish I could have maybe not, you know, ignored certain things. But all I have is now, and that's, that's what carries me. I wish I had more energy. I wish I could write better. I wish I could have learned more math, but everything has gotten me here, and that's all that matters. I'm very clear about that.
Story_ID: 22292
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a big project ahead of you that you would to, is there something that you could wrap up that you'd wanna do before you, you know, or do you see things in more of an ongoing--
Speaker 2: I think it's always ongoing. The key question for climate change that I'm really trying to struggle with is will it be wetter or drier? And there are competing hypothesis that I would like to test out over the next few years. I still won't know 'cause we have to see it play out (laughter). That's the only thing, but it would certainly be nice to tell policymakers, this is where our confidence is. You know, we feel pretty strongly about this, and we feel pretty strongly about that. But my, my intuition tells me, Mother Earth is not gonna tell us that, that we're going to have to be aware. It's gonna be happening in real time. You're gonna know after the fact, but you'd better prepare for all scenarios. You'd better think about protecting all of your citizens. On another angle with respect to atmospheric chemistry, we've been looking at the role of dust and how it changed ozone, a major, is the greenhouse gas, but it's also a pollutant. And we've seen some just amazing stuff from Africa that lightening, the lightening stroke itself produces so much natural ozone above 8,000, 10,000, 12,000 feet, like, like, just amazing, just, it, you cannot predict. You can only observe. Our observations that we've taken over the last two years, have just blown us away. We're trying to contextualize that in terms of the science that we know and the processes that we know. But we know that there is so much to it, that, like, I will never, I won't be here to fully appreciate all of that. But it's leaving so much room for new scholars to say, look, we're gonna go out. We're gonna need aircraft. We're gonna go explore. We're gonna try to understand this. We're gonna develop a new model. We're gonna do that, we're gonna do that. So much. There's such a, such a wealthy--Africa is wealthy not just for minerals and oil and all those other things. It's wealthy because of its people. It's wealthy because of the knowledge that it's constantly teaching you. You know, it's not, there is no end of the chapter. The book never closes.
Story_ID: 22293
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us something about your family. You have four children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay, well, tell us something about them and, now, are you still married or--
Speaker 2: Well, me and my wife, we've separated, and, but we raised our children well. They are, they're good kids. My daughters, one is, she's an architectural engineer, Nicole. She's thinking about graphic design, more along the lines of architecture. You know, I remember when she was a freshman, and they're like, when you look at a blueprint, do you see numbers or do you see, I don't know what else. She said, I see numbers. I think she's seeing the other thing now too (laughter). So my other daughter is Safiya. She's in nutrition. She's very much interested in public health and disparities. My son, Osei, the next one, he's into music, and he's been kind of not sure about education. As much as I've tried to hammer it into him, but we stay on him, and he's really great with computers. I'm hoping he's gonna tap that talent and make something out of it. And my youngest son, Okera, is like me, more of the natural sciences, the feeling of, for him, it's the life, biology. He feels that pull towards how life is connected, both interested in environment. He's in his fourth year at Eastern Maryland, and, and I have now a grandson from my oldest son, Nacer. He's, I see us going on trips to Africa and Arizona (laughter). But the family's important. For me, family's always been the, the cornerstone of who we are.
Story_ID: 22294
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything we haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: The role of the HBCU.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unless that's your last question (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, that's not it. Go ahead and talk about the role of the HBCU.
Speaker 2: We, we're currently at a time where people question why do you need Howard University, why do you need any of these HBCUs? And my answer is always the same, because some things have changed and some things haven't, that there are still a large group of people whose ancestors came here in chains and who are still looking for an equal, a level playing field where they can be respected, where they can be taken seriously, where they can achieve without questions about their ability to achieve and where they can reach the people that are from their communities without feeling like this is the cream of the crop. It's not just the cream of the crop. It's serve your community, and if this society was right (laughter), we wouldn't be dealing with the racial or class issues. We would just serve the community. That means everybody, period, as if we were human. But given that that's not the condition, this place, Howard [University], Lincoln [University] and all the other HBCUs have an extremely important role to play in making sure that they serve their communities and that they get the next generation through in terms of importance of knowledge and education and commitment, instilling confidence in those young people for their next struggle, whatever it is, for their next task. That's our job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22295
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a servant. That's it.
