Story_ID: 192964
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Adrian Jackson.  Observing is Scott Stearns, Patrinia--
Speaker 2: Johns [ph.].
Speaker 1: Johns, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And Francis Tompkins [ph.].
Speaker 1: And Francis Tompkins.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ingrid Saunders Jones, that's I-N-G-R-I-D S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S, last names J-O-N-E-S, no hyphen.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well you know I usually don't talk about my date of birth but I was born in Detroit, Michigan.  And just for The HistoryMakers, I'm going to talk about my date of birth because my birthday is coming up and I'll be sixty years old on December 27th, 2005.  That's--so I was born in 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I work at the Coca-Cola Company.  I'm senior vice president for corporate external affairs.  I'm responsible for our community, our civic and our philanthropic work.  I work at the Coca Cola Company now but I say that this is my third life in terms of work.  My first life was as an educator.  I was trained to be a teacher.  My second life was in government.  A fellowship brought me to Atlanta, Georgia where I worked in Atlanta city government and ultimately for Mayor Maynard Jackson, one of my great mentors.  And then I came to work for the Coca Cola Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December--
Speaker 1: Ninth.
Speaker 2: --Ninth, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where--
Speaker 2: I've been traveling, so right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, right.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Coca Cola Company.
Story_ID: 192965
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Well let me see.  I guess if I were to say my favorite food of all, is a wonderful hot dog along with a Coca Cola.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think spring is my favorite time of the year.  Spring is a happy time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: It may sound very strange and I like to go places, but I also like to vacation at home.  And that is to really have time off in my own space without any work obligations, to just connect with friends and with family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I live here in Atlanta proper.  I moved here in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There's a quote, I paraphrase just a bit, from John Henrik Clarke, and it goes, History is a clock that people use to tell their time of day.  It tells them who they are and what they are.  It helps them find themselves on the map of human geography.  And I use that quote in speeches because the core idea is that it is what you do today that writes the history of tomorrow.  And The HistoryMakers understands that very well.  But you have to get young people to understand that well also and it's what you do today as an individual.  It's what you do today as a company, an institution, a non-profit or a church, all of that.  You must be intentional and purposeful about writing history.
Speaker 1: Did you know Professor Clark, just as an aside?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I did not know him.  I did correspond with him before he died, but I did not know him personally.
Story_ID: 192966
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Georgia, like the state of Georgia Ann Lyles, L-Y-L-E-S Saunders, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mom was born in Augusta, Georgia on the 27th of May in 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and do you have any stories from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I do know about my mom.  I know my--I knew my grandparents very well and I knew my great grandmother very well.  As a matter of fact, my great grandmother lived until I was fifteen years old.  And so I got to see my mother, her mother and her mother's mother together and that was quite inspiring to see those three women.  My mother has two sisters and so can you imagine them, the five of them all together?
Speaker 1: Now where does your mother come from?  Is she--?
Speaker 2: She was born in Augusta, Georgia but she grew up in Tryon, North Carolina.  And that was the place where I spent most of my summers growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother grew up there.  Did--how far back did your great grandmother go in terms of her memory and--?
Speaker 2: My great grandmother went back to--and I'm going to check this out for our second session.  But my great grandmother went back to the plantation where her mother was in service as a slave.  And I'm going to get some more details on that for you.
Speaker 1: Now was that in North Carolina or was--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories that she told about those days and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're going to explore that in the second half of our--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, because I'll get more granular on that.
Story_ID: 192967
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] talk about growing up and you know what life was like for her when she was growing up in--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, they grew up in the segregated South and it was very--it was hard.  My grandparents, Blanche Lyles [ph.] and Fred Lyles, Jr. [ph.], they spent a lot of their time and resources protecting their children from the hardships of segregation.  As a matter of fact, my grandfather ran a store that served the black community and he also started a school at the Good Shepherd [Episcopal] Church, Episcopal Church in Tryon, North Carolina for black children so that they didn't have to go to the segregated public school where they weren't treated very well.  So they spent a lot of time.  Another story I would give you is that my grandfather, Fred Lyles always brought us to North Carolina in a Pullman Porter car so that we wouldn't have the, you know have to ride the segregated regular car, you know train cars to North Carolina.  And it was only so far you could go.  And I wanted to go at one time to Durham [North Carolina] to see my cousin and the car--there was not a Pullman car from Tryon to Durham.  So I would have to ride, have ridden in a regular train car and I couldn't go because they didn't allow us to participate in any segregated activities.  Like, we couldn't go to the drug store because we couldn't sit at the fountain. We didn't go to the movies because we'd have to sit in the balcony.  So our whole life was built, and my parents did the same thing, around the energy of protecting us from the rigors and indignities of segregation.
Story_ID: 192968
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother talk about going to school in Tryon [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] went to the school at the Church of the--Good Shepherd [Episcopal Church, Tryon, North Carolina] and then my grandparents [Blanche Lyles and Fred Lyles, Jr.] began sending their children to boarding school.  And one sister went to Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina].  The historically black colleges and universities then had academies.  And my mother went to Knoxville College Academy [Knoxville, Tennessee], which was tantamount to going to high school and that's where she met my father [Homer Leon Saunders].  And both of them are graduates of Knoxville College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your parents met in Knoxville College, right?
Speaker 2: Right, Knoxville Academy.
Speaker 1: Academy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then went on to Knoxville College, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother major in, in Knoxville College?
Speaker 2: You know that is--you have just stumped me.  I had known that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But she was a teacher--?
Speaker 2: She was a teacher.  My mother was a teacher.  She was in education.  But when--she got her master's at Wayne [Wayne State University] in Detroit [Michigan] in social work and I had--I got a little confused there, yeah.  But she was an educator.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought, okay.  So when did they go--did they go immediately to Detroit after they were married or--?
Speaker 2: No.  My father attempted to integrate the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] so that they could stay in Knoxville [Tennessee].  And as a matter of fact he filed a court case and I think that was about 1938.  And of course he didn't win, but under Separate but Equal, the State of Tennessee was required to pay tuition someplace else and he chose the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to do his graduate work.  And so he went and he was--he studied in the field of education.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: And that's how they got to Michigan.  They lived in Ann Arbor first, then they moved to Detroit.
Story_ID: 192969
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Homer Leon Saunders.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His--he was born in Knoxville, Tennessee on October third, 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was he raised in Knoxville?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was right--
Speaker 2: 504 Mulvaney Street [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And did he talk about growing up in Knoxville?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah he talked about growing up in Knoxville, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that you remember that's--?
Speaker 2: Well his father, who died when he was in his early twenties, was a chef and evidently a master chef in one of the hotels in Knoxville, Tennessee.  And so therefore my father knew how to cook very well and put himself through school working in hotels in service.
Story_ID: 192970
Speaker 1: When they got to New York, I mean to Detroit [Michigan], they--your father [Homer Leon Saunders] was in education too right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did they teach in the Detroit Public Schools?
Speaker 2: No they did not because the Detroit Public Schools at that time did not hire African Americans.  And so my father and my mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] kind of took different routes.  My father began working for the housing authority.  As a matter of fact he managed one of the housing projects in Detroit.  And we lived in another housing project, the Sojourner Truth Housing Project.  That's where I was born.  And at that time, many, many African Americans lived in housing projects because buying houses and housing was not readily available to black people, even in Detroit, Michigan.  A lot of people get confused about what was happening in the north.  So my father you know began by managing a housing project and his entire career was very much in the field of housing.  And when he retired he was head of Redevelopment and Urban Renewal for the City of Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seems to be a pattern you know, Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit and other cities were blacks are coming up from the south and get jobs in the factories and pushing into the city and the housing is bad and they can't really find--you know the real estate is locked down basically.  And then the housing projects become a place, a transitional place for people--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, that was the pattern in Detroit also.
Speaker 1: And so the--yeah.  I think for people who listen to this in the future they, you know when they hear projects, today it's like a dead end.  But in those days--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it was a transition.
Speaker 2: It was transitional.  It was a transitional place, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right.  So which ones did he manage?
Speaker 2: I'm going to have to look that up.  I can't--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the famous one where the Supremes, you know Diana Ross and--that was a--
Speaker 2: Herman Gardens.
Speaker 1: That was Herman Gardens.
Speaker 2: My father managed Herman Gardens.
Speaker 1: Is that the one where Diana Ross was?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know.  I'll have to check that out.
Speaker 1: There's one of them they did I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But Herman Gardens is, that's where they--
Speaker 2: A lot of very successful people.
Speaker 1: Judge--
Speaker 2: [Damon] Keith.
Speaker 1: No, Judge--the TV judge?
Speaker 2: Oh Hat--Judge, the dude.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we know--I can't think of his name right now.
Speaker 2: [Greg] Mathis.
Speaker 1: Mathis, yeah.  He grew up--
Speaker 2: Judge Mathis.
Speaker 1: --in Herman Gardens, partially in Herman Gardens, right.  It's funny I remember Herman Gardens but not remember his name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh.
Speaker 1: But yeah, Judge Mathis grew up in Herman Gardens.
Story_ID: 192971
Speaker 1: Now do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I am the lone surviving child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you, when you were growing up, you had--?
Speaker 2: I had brothers, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many did you have?
Speaker 2: I had two, but we're not going to go into that right now.  Okay?
Speaker 1: Well I just want to know where you all you know fell in--who was born first--?
Speaker 2: --I was the youngest.  I was the youngest, right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 192972
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember nursery school.  I remember nursery school.  I went to Franklin Settlement Nursery School [ph.] and I'm amazed now that I understand the, you know, the geographical proximity to where we lived and where my mom [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] worked and how we got to nursery school.  I am amazed that she was able to do that everyday, get me to nursery school.  I remember Franklin Settlement Nursery School.  I remember elementary school [Thirkell Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], yeah.  I remember stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192973
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know Detroit [Michigan] has the Detroit River and there's the, there is an island which is a park and that's Belle Isle [Park].  And the main street that divides the city is Woodward Avenue and that's where all the major businesses were.  The main department store was Hudson's Department Store.  There was another island that was an amusement park and that was called Bobalo [sic. Boblo Island Amusement Park]. And there was a boat that went to Bobalo.  But my memories are very--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bobalo?
Speaker 2: B-O-B-A-L-O, Bobalo, yeah.  And I just remember, I can remember Christmas shopping and down, up and down Woodward.  There were small stores then that were very interesting for women's clothing, Hemahokes [ph.] and Winklelman's [Department Store] and I remember being with my mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you remember the big, you mentioned Hudson's.  Was the Thanksgiving Day Parade a big deal for you and your--?
Speaker 2: To watch on television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we didn't dash down there.
Speaker 1: It was broadcast nationwide.  I just thought, you know.
Speaker 2: I know.  I know.  And we'd watch Santa come out of the little roof and know that that's where we had been but, yeah.
Story_ID: 192974
Speaker 1: Well tell us about school?  Now, what grade school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Thirkell Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan].  As a matter of fact, my sixth grade teacher is coming to my birthday party.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Thirkell?
Speaker 2: T-H-I-R-K-E-L-L.  And one of the most interesting things about my life as an educator is that when I was in graduate school I actually taught at Thirkell Elementary School.  So it was a neighborhood school and I walked to school and you could tell the kids who lived on our block because they called me Ingrid and all the rest of the kids had to call me Ms. Saunders, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  And I guess I liked the science class and that was Mr. Moore's [ph.] class.  But my favorite class was the sixth grade class and Mr. Shirley [ph.].  And there are three of us who are--who live in Atlanta [Georgia] from that class, Alice Wiggins [ph.] and Joyce Ession [ph.].  And we actually got together and took Mr. Shirley to lunch one day.  He still lives in Detroit [Michigan] but his son lives in the Atlanta environs and we knew he was in town and we took him to lunch and he was all of our favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: Well what was it about him that you know, that you liked so much?
Speaker 2: He made learning fun and if you hit a rough spot, he figured out something that you had an interest in and taught you the subject matter through that interest.  With the fellow, with the young men it may have been baseball.  With young women, it may have been dance.  But he figured out how to do that and he was just a fabulous teacher.
Speaker 1: Now what did he figure out in terms of you?  What did you--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  See, he tells me things about myself that I don't remember.  So you know, but that's the difference in being a sixth grader and looking around and being a teacher and being in charge.
Story_ID: 192975
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take the most after, your mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] or your father [Homer Leon Saunders]?
Speaker 2: I truthfully think I'm a balance between the two of them.  My mother is one of the sweetest persons that I know, you know.  And I know that everybody says that but it's true.  My father was one of the most exacting people I've ever met and I can be sweet and I am very exacting in my work.  And I was encouraged to be exacting and very demanding personally of myself in terms of success.
Story_ID: 192976
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a child growing up [in Detroit, Michigan]?  And what was your personality like and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: You know I did ballet, I rode bikes, we played in the neighborhood 'cause we could do that.  We went to the movies as long as there were, there wasn't anything that was derogatory there.  We could not go to see any Tarzan movies.  We, you know we didn't do--our stuff was totally censored, television was censored because my father [Homer Leon Saunders] and mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] didn't think that we should watch anything that either excluded black people or showed us in a bad and stereotypic light.  And so we were, you know our outside stuff was very censored.  But we just had fun.  You know that was when people played you know.  And when I got a little older we went to the roller skating rink.  And then a lot of my socialization happened through the church, through the youth fellowship program.  And the church that I went to was the--was first known as Central Congregational Church but it became the Shrine of the Black Madonna [Detroit, Michigan] and that still exists today.  And Reverend Albert B. Cleage [Jr.] was the minister.  His daughter, [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage is a famous author and playwright and we continue to be friends.  So that's kind of--high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] was great.  I was on the cheer team.  I was on the swimming team.  Lot of people didn't like school, I loved school.
Story_ID: 192977
Speaker 1: Now Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], is that your neighborhood school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my neighborhood school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you were on a, you were a cheerleader in school and--?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.   Did you have an idea when you were in high school what your career path was going to be?  What did you project as a future career?
Speaker 2: You know I can't say that I actually knew what it was going to be.  I can honestly confess that I went to college not knowing what my career path would be.  And my father [Homer Leon Saunders] always said you got to get a teacher certificate.  So I started out in social work and I think I may have switched a couple of times and ended up in education because I was encouraged to get a teacher's certificate.
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student in high school and I was a--I could be a good student in college.  I'm kind of like Andy Young [Andrew Jackson Young, Jr.].  When I liked it, I was good.  When I liked the subject, I was good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers in high school or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Fred Snowden was one of my favorite teachers.  He is now deceased.  Ms. Raven Elliott, she taught chemistry and she was the cheer team coach, another very exacting person.  And there were a couple of others.  Mr. Perry [ph.], school newspaper.  I was on the school newspaper also.
Story_ID: 192978
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders and Homer Leon Saunders] in any organizations?  You had--I think the way you described their consciousness of what they were doing, you know, made me wonder if they were involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or something like that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we all had NAACP memberships.  I don't recall them being in leadership roles, you know, being involved with.  And my father's an Al--was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and my mother is an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]
Speaker 1: Okay, I just noted (unclear).
Speaker 2: And a lot of work is done through the fraternities and sororities, you know, community work.
Speaker 1: And so they're--I mean it's a--those are active chapters--
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: --for adults who--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They're not always you know--it depends on where you are.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I know the NAACP in Detroit [Michigan] is a big deal.  That big dinner they have--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, big, they're--
Speaker 1: They have the largest in the country, I think.
Speaker 2: Right, 10,000 people, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 192979
Speaker 1: So in high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] now were you a popular person in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was fairly popular but I wasn't hip.  I was more you know in, to--modern day-language, I guess it would be geek, you know.  I just wasn't you know real hip.  But I was cool.
Speaker 1: And did you like music?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I grew up in Detroit [Michigan].  It's Motown, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the people that went on to stardom with Motown [Records Company]?
Speaker 2: No, but we used to go to the [Duffield Public] Library on West Grand Boulevard and it was like a half a, less than a half a block away from Motown's original home.  And we used to stand outside on the street to see if we could see The Temptations or The Supremes or whomever, not knowing that they always drove up to the back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So people were aware that they were there and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There was [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and Motown.  That--they were our heroes, yeah,
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: and sheroes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --All right.
Story_ID: 192980
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation, what college had you picked out and why?
Speaker 2: Well this gives me an opportunity to talk about a mentor and it was one of my favorite teachers, and her name was Ms. Eula Cutt [ph.].  And it lets you know, it kind of confirms that your mentor doesn't have to necessarily look like you do because she was a Caucasian woman.  And she was always encouraging us to read and that--I'll bring that story up a little later.  But she said to me one day my senior year and things weren't quite as rigorous about getting into college as they are--then as they are now.  She said, "Where do you want to go to school?"  And I said, "Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  I think I want to go to Michigan State."  Cause we'd been up there for a state championship game and cheered at Michigan State.  I had been to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] to, in Ann Arbor [Michigan] many times with my father [Homer Leon Saunders] for football games and I didn't, I just--that was a concrete school, you know.  It's in the city.  It's not a lot of green grass.  So I had been to Michigan State and it was the prettiest thing I had ever seen so I said I want to go to Michigan State.  And I swear to you, in two days she had an application.  I filled it out, I sent it in and within three weeks I was at Michigan State and that was it.  So there wasn't a lot of thinking, I mean deliberation that went into that.
Story_ID: 192981
Speaker 1: So now I'm going to finish the story about Mrs. [Eula] Cutt [ph.] because I got to Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] and the English class that every freshman takes is American Thought and Language.  And so the professor on our first day and I was the only black person in the class said--called out maybe the names of ten books.  Who's read this book?  I raised my hand.  Who's read this book?  I raised my--well the first time a lot of people raised their hand.  Second time, fewer people, third time--by the time they got to the tenth book which was Theodore Dreiser's 'An American Tragedy,' I was the only person that raised my hand.  So he was of course taken aback, almost visibly and said, asked me to stand up and tell the plot of the story.  And I did, I told the plot of the story.  And afterwards, he came and he asked me if I had gone to Cranbrook [Cranbrook Schools, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan] or--I mean he didn't even ask me, where did you go to school?  He said, where are you from?  And I said I'm from Detroit, Michigan.  He said, did you go to Cranbrook?
Speaker 2: Which is a private (unclear) school.
Speaker 1: A private school.  And I said no, I went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan]. He said I don't know the school.  I said it's a public school.  And he was, he couldn't believe that I had read all those books.  I want to take that story back to that one woman, Mrs. Cutt who was exacting as an English teacher who made us read over the summer and who watched over us in ways that encouraged us.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So one good teacher makes a difference?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I always knew I was going to college.  I mean there was no struggle with that.  My grandmother graduated from Paine College in 1910.
Speaker 2: Which Paine?
Speaker 1: Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you know that puts me at third generation and it was a given.  And sometimes when things are given you don't focus on them as hard.  And Mrs. Cutt helped me focus on that.
Story_ID: 192982
Speaker 1: Now you're at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  I think--well did you know [HistoryMaker] Robert Green?
Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. Green?
Speaker 1: Dr. Green?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Dr. Green.  I know him now still.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was an inspirational figure in those days and now as well.
Speaker 2: Dr. Green's a very inspirational figure and one of the first to develop a core curriculum around urban studies.
Speaker 1: Right.  I think he set up a department I think in Michigan State.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Marched with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and did--now during the Civil Rights Movement was going on while you were in high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan].  You came out in '64 [1964] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well were you paying, you know was your family paying close attention to that on television and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we were paying attention.  We were--and we paid close attention to our church [Central Congregational Church] which turned into the Shrine of the Black Madonna [Detroit, Michigan].  And Reverend [Albert B.] Cleage [Jr.] was a very, maybe more local but a very outspoken proponent for civil rights.  And then you know by--when I went to college I you know--[HistoryMaker] Ernie [Ernest] Green had been to Michigan State and he's one of the "Little Rock Nine."  And so you know he had formed an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter that was very active.  And while I was in college, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died and so there was a lot of focus on the civil rights era.  Now I'm, I--you know when you think about a story, I don't know that I can tell you a story except that we went to, we did things through the NAACP and our fraternities and sororities.
Story_ID: 192983
Speaker 1: Now just go back to the church [Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan] for a moment.  This, the--it's, it was a congregational church at first.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And do you have a sense of or you can, can you tell us like how it made a transition from being a you know, a black Congregational church to the Shrine of the Black Madonna?
Speaker 2: No, I really can't.  But I can tell you that my mother [Georgia Ann Lyles] and father [Homer Leon Saunders] were charter members of the Shrine of the Black Madonna.  But I can't tell you what, when--exactly when it happened or what the impetus was other than the general times in which we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause it's a singular kind of thing.  It doesn't--it didn't happen everywhere.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know a lot of churches remained whatever they were.  Very few of them like you know made the move the Shrine made.  A commitment, you know, to black people and in particular the way the Shrine had done.  So--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So they made, among the things they've done, they have the best black bookstore in the country probably, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely and more than one place because they've got the Shrine in Detroit [Michigan], they've got the Shrine here [Atlanta, Georgia].  They've had a Shrine in, and a cultural center in Houston [Texas] and I think it's still going, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  So I didn't want to get past that without you know focusing on it on some level.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are you still a member or--?
Speaker 2: No I'm not.  But I still know everybody and I still go to the bookstore and I still go to church there periodically and I still know [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She's here in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: She lives here in Atlanta.  We live in the same neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192984
Speaker 1: All right, now Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], how was--well you know you had like you know [HistoryMaker] Robert Green, [HistoryMaker] Ernie [Ernest] Green that started  the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: I mean what was it--did you like it for the most part?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Michigan State was, it was a good school to be with there.  Now you know when you look, when you think back to the '60s [1960s] okay, there were not many--all of the African American students could probably fit into, we always said it could fit into the [Michigan State] Union auditorium 'cause that's where we had our dances and our social activities.  So you know maybe with a campus of forty some thousand students there were three hundred African American students and some of them were not boarding.  Some of them came from Lansing [Michigan] and other places.  But it--all in all within the context of the times, it was a good school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did they have a black student organization there when you were--?
Speaker 2: No that--we really hadn't organized that.  You can think of the NAACP as the black student organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think chronologically those really didn't' come into existence till the late '60s [1960s], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Well or the early '70s [1970s] even, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask to make sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192985
Speaker 1: You started out as a sociology major, right?
Speaker 2: Well I started out as social work major and I may have switched to sociology.  But I ended up an education major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what drew you into education?
Speaker 2: My father [Homer Leon Saunders] said get yourself a teaching certificate, okay.  And I did have a very challenging moment with the academic advisor at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].  And I can remember, I can actually see myself sitting there talking to him right now.  And he looked, he was looking at a file on me and he said, "Oh you were on the swim team.  And oh you were a cheerleader."  And oh, you did this.  And he said, "Have you ever thought about going into physical education?"  And I said no.  And so I was talking to my father [Homer Leon Saunders] and mother [Georgia Ann Lyles Saunders] on the telephone shortly after that and I'll never forget what my father said to me.  He said, "Don't ever talk to him again."  And I changed my major because of that.
Speaker 1: Now that's, I must tell you that's about--we have about 1,300 interviews and at least a thousand of them have an advisor story that's similar, you know.  It seemed like they all went to school for that or something to you know do that.
Speaker 2: To channel us into physical education.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or shop, woodshop or something like that.  You don't need to pursue this because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was very interesting.  And I never talked to him again.
Speaker 1: Of course it was a white advisor, at Michigan State.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 192986
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories about Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] that you think are important to tell before--well you know, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] graduated--I mean died the year you graduated, right?
Speaker 2: Died the year before I graduated.
Speaker 1: Year before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Think it was '60--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I went to Michigan State for five years, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came out in '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: And when I got my honorary degree, I talked about it.  And that is the thing that got the biggest cheer from the graduates, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he died on cam--I mean I was on campus when he died, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you remember the day he died and what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was--everybody and yeah I absolutely remember I was in the dormitory and somebody came in and said Dr. King's been shot.  And we all just walked down to the first floor and we just started walking through the campus.  And people just pouring out of the dormitories and we ended up--the iconic tower or building is Beaumont Tower, Michigan State's campus.  And we were just you know we just all started walking and singing, walking to Beaumont Tower, you know.  And it was just very, very sad.
Story_ID: 192987
Speaker 1: You graduated in '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did you, what were your plans as you approached graduation?
Speaker 2: To be a teacher, yeah um-hm.  And you know when I finished college I swore I'd never go to school again.  I mean it was like--(makes a sighing sound).  And I taught for two years.  I actually moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and taught.  My first job was in Atlanta because my college roommate Joann McClain Phelps [ph.] lived in Atlanta.  But in my second year of teaching I knew immediately I needed to go get a master's [degree] and that's when I hunkered my brain down and decided I would do further education.  And I started my graduate work at Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] but I computed that it would take me till I was a hundred to do that part time.  So I finished my third year of teaching and then moved back home [Detroit, Michigan] and did the remainder of my graduate work in one year at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan].
Speaker 1: It's in Ypsilanti right?
Speaker 2: Ypsilanti, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said--is that when you were doing student teaching over at the--well that, no that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly when I was doing student teaching at Thirkell Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, in your own neighborhood?
Speaker 2: In my own neighborhood and a couple of the same teachers were still teaching there.
Speaker 1: How does it feel to, I mean how did it feel to be a peer of the teachers that you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You don't feel like you're a peer.  You're teaching but you don't feel like you're a peer.  You--it's still, "Mr. Moore [ph.]" and, yeah.  Yeah, but it was good.  It was a good feeling.  It spoke to as I remembered it spoke to the very good feeling of neighborhood schools, you know of community.
