Story_ID: 610528
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: I am Edith Irby Jones, E-D-I-T-H, I-R-B-Y, J-O-N-E-S [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: December the 23rd, 1927.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: My place of birth is Mayflower, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: What is your loca- occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physician, specialist, internal medicine.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: In Houston, Texas, my office address is 2601 Prospect Street, Houston, Texas 77004.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 10th, 2008.
Story_ID: 610529
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna begin by asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that I do (laughter).  I will eat most foods and no specific food choices.
Speaker 1: What about vacation destination?  Where is your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I usually vacate in the areas in which I have some reason to be there.  I combine my vacations with medical meetings, sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] meetings, other type meetings and use that as vacation as well as reason for being there.
Speaker 1: So there's no one specific place that you really like to go to?
Speaker 2: I love to go home and home for me I consider Hot Springs, Arkansas is because I grew up there, I know most of the people there and I enjoy going there just to be there.  I would say it would be one of my favorite places.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I wear a lot of red, I wear a lot of black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like colors, no specific color would I shun, but I selected the color to wear, it would probably be black or some combination of black and red.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I do.  I love the spring because I see life budding.  I love the summer because it's bright and shiny.  I love the fall because I consider that also a new beginning of things to get started, and winter, a rest period.  I like all seasons.  I just find something to do different usually for each season.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess I use so many, I think my favorite one is for most people, particular my patients, I love you.
Story_ID: 610530
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your parents, your mother and father [Robert Irby].  Let's start on your mother's side.  Tell me your mother's name, tell me where she was born and if you know, when she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother was named Mattie Buice Irby.  She died when she was fifty years old in 1950.  She was born in Mayflower, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Buice for me please?
Speaker 2: B-U-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: And what, did your mother share any stories about her growing up in Mayf- in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, I had the opportunity of knowing her father, my grandfather [Ellis Buice], and he also shared those stories.  My mother was the older of two sisters and she had five brothers.  She was the take charge kind of person and was always the one to care for the house, to care for the other siblings.  She was though mischievous.  She had a great sense of humor and she was a person-person.  She loved people and became involved in almost every level of her existence at that time.
Speaker 1: Now you talk about your grandfather, her father?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And they, did they live on a farm?  Tell me about where they lived.
Speaker 2: My mother was born on a farm in Mayflower, Arkansas, and they were farmers.  They were big time farmers.  I learned later that they were probably as big a farmers as anybody in that area.  She was one, not so much herself to work the farm because she had five brothers, but she was at home and she helped to prepare for the others to have their meals, to take care of their clothes and to be concerned about helping the family as the older sister.  Her mother died when she was still young so she had the responsibility of being the older sister to help care for the others.
Speaker 1: What was her mother and father's name?
Speaker 2: And I'm blanking on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that they were farmers.  So they were not sharecroppers.
Speaker 2: They were not sharecroppers.  They, he owned the land.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he acquired the land?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how he acquired that land, but he had rows and rows of acres of land of corn and cotton and vegetables I can remember, but I do not remember how he acquired the land.  But he did own the land.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories--did you know your grandfather personally and speak to him and interact with him?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I knew my grandfather personally.  I did not know my grandmother because she died when my mother was still young.  But my grandfather was the male support in my household after my father died, and took the responsibility of being the babysitter for me when I was the younger one, and could not go to school because of a crippling condition that I had.  He came to live with us after my father had died, and assumed the masculine role in my household.
Speaker 1: I see.  So your grandmother--your grandfather and your grandmother raised all their children in Mayflower, Arkansas.  Do you know how much education your mother and her brothers might have had?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother finished the eighth grade.  Her brothers had about the same amount of education with a younger brother finishing high school.
Speaker 1: And do you know your uncles, their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, Uncle Claude Buice, B-U-I-C-E [Claudus Buice], was the older, Uncle Cluster [Cluster Buice] was the next brother, don't remember his age.  Uncle Chester [Chester Buice] was the younger brother, and I'm blanking on who the other brother was, and she had one sister named Hattie [ph.].
Story_ID: 610531
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your mother [Mattie Buice Irby] some more, and your relationship with your mother.  Tell me what type of relationship you had with your mother.
Speaker 2: I had a very close relationship with my mother.  I had an older sister [Juanita Irby] who died when she was twelve years and at that time I was approximately six years old and I was originally very, very close to my twelve year old sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your relationship with your mother.
Speaker 2: But after my sister died, I became very, very close to my mother, taking the role of helping her to care for the house, to do all that I could do to help in the household until I became ill.  And after I became ill, my mother had a special situation with me because I could not go to school so she taught me my first schooling and taught me from my brother's [Robert Irby] books and so I spent all day in, with my mother until such time as I was in the fourth grade.  She taught me two years, in which they placed me in the fourth grade with him because that is the books from which she taught me from.
Speaker 1: If you could think about a characteristic that you might have gotten from your mother what would it be?
Speaker 2: Work.  My mother was capable of working and providing for us, of being able to face obstacles and to work out the situation so that it was favorable, to deny myself of things that others tended to think that they had to have for the good of all.  I would think that those were characteristics that I inherited from my mother.
Story_ID: 610532
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father [Robert Irby].  Tell me his name and where he was born and if you know when he was born.
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact date my father was born.  He was born in Mayflower, Arkansas.  He died when I was about five years old.  He was killed by a horse when my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] and he went riding on a Sunday.  He was kicked by a horse.  That for me was, I'd say my first witness of attempted resuscitation.  They had gone riding on a Sunday and the men brought him and put him on what we called then the front room floor and attempted to resuscitate him by breathing for him into his nostrils and mouth and by pumping on his chest.  He did not survive.  He died as a result of that.  At that time I was about six years old.
Speaker 1: Do you remember spending any time with him before that?  Can you remember back then?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I remember him vividly.  I remember spending time with him after church on Sundays in the T Model Ford [Ford Model T] in which he would go outside of the Ford, crank it up, jump back in and take us riding to a pump.  There was a pump near the place where we lived that we would bring water to drink home.  I would remember riding in the buggy with them going to church, but most of all the real vivid memory that I have of him was the last day of his life.  We had gone to church and I can remember the church as if it was yesterday, sitting on the wooden benches and collection time came.  I was extremely dressed up.  I had on a white organdy dress, a red patent leather purse, patent leather shoes and we were all sitting on the bench at collection time.  And everybody was going up to put their money on the table and he said to me, "Edith [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones] you should go up and put your money on the table."  And I says, "No, Papa, I want to keep my money."  And this is when I think I learned my first lesson in living and giving and receiving.  And he said to me, "Edith, if you put your money in, God will see that you'll receive multiple of what you put in."  So of course, I wanted to get more money than I put in so I raced up to the table, put my money on the table and stood there.  My money was, well it was pennies.  And I stood there and finally he came to get me and he says, "Why didn't you come back to your seat?"  And I said, "Papa, I was waiting for them to give me my money back.  You said I would get more money if I put in what I had."  And that was when he explained to me that that is not what you do. You put your money in, you will receive multiples, you may not receive it then and there, but you will receive multiples.  And that has been a principal by which I have lived ever since.  That has been the one thing that I have never forgotten that he taught me.
Speaker 1: What characteristic do--have you received from your father?
Speaker 2: Maybe to take charge.  If I'm not careful I'll find that I get into a situation and I feel that I need to step up and have some control.  Of being, of giving.  That is the one thing that stands out for me specifically, is to not hold on to what I have, to share with it with whoever may have it that appeared to need it more than I do.
Story_ID: 610533
Speaker 1: Now your grandfather and grandmother on your father's side, did you know them?
Speaker 2: I did not know them.  I knew and met the one who reared my grandfather--I mean who reared my father [Robert Irby].  The, I met her and that was his mother figure.  I am not sure what age he was when she began to rear him.
Speaker 1: Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: For a moment, I'm blanking.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come back to it if you remember.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Now there was a story about the slave owners that you wanted to tell me about one of your parents and the slave owners?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had the opportunity of meeting the slave owners of my father's people.  They, I had gone to American association of physicians meeting [Association of American Physicians], and I was being installed as a master's, that's a degree of achievement in medicine, and when I received the master's degree, that night a note was left for me that a Dr. Robert Irby wanted to see me, that he could not get into the Texas reception that they had for me, and I later found that Dr. Robert Irby Wise was a descendant of the slave owners of my father.  And since that time, we wrote many letters, and then I went up to see them in Williamsburg, Virginia where he is an older man, is still living and we have letters and letters that we exchanged and he was able to tell me something about the slave owners, about the slave owners having given the land to my father's people in Arkansas when they were freed as slaves and that the Irby, black Irby family and the white Irby family are still living many of them in Arkansas.  And he was able to give me more history because after he finished and retired from his practice and from his teaching, he did research on the family's heritage and he shared that with me.
Story_ID: 610534
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything in s- any specific things about your heritage as far as that family, the white Irbys?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember who he [Robert Irby Wise] said they were, particular who he is and as I reflect I can remember the white Irbys in Arkansas who were there and I did not realize at the time that there were any connections between the white Irbys and the black Irbys, but with his research and with his briefing me, I was able to make those connections.
Speaker 1: Ok, do you know what the connections, where the connection comes together?  Who married who or who had children for who?
Speaker 2: No, because what happened, the reason the Irbys--the white Irbys were in Arkansas is because they were in Virginia and there were white Irbys who primarily were farmers, who were doctors, other professions.  But there was an Irby who was a teacher, and he was teaching the white slave owners' children, the black slave children and the mulatto children in the same classroom, and that was not acceptable and was punishable by death.  So instead of him stopping doing it, he gathered all of the persons concerned and took them with him and moved to Arkansas, and in Mayflower [Arkansas] set up his own plantation, and continued to teach the children of all of the slave owners, the mulatto and the black children.
Speaker 1: Now is there some--well did the Irbys also marry into the Williams and the Washingtons?
Speaker 2: The white Irbys?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Were they cousins, some, some information about them being cousins to [President] George Washington?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  He has done research and said there is some indication that they were, but I have no documentation that it is true.  He may have documentation now because he was continuing to pursue it.
Speaker 1: I see.  And you cannot remember your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: I just now thought of my grandfather's name was Elliot.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I think it's E-L-L-I-O-T (laughter).
Story_ID: 610535
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Robert Irby] share information about his growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I was very young when he died.
Speaker 1: And how much education did he have, do you know?
Speaker 2: Limited.  I don't know whether it was sixth grade, seventh grade, eighth grade.  I know my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] had an eighth grade education.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: I know there was opposition to their having married because my mother was young, but how they actually met, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the opposition.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, the opposition was that my mother's father [Ellis Buice] did not want my mother to marry so young.  He wanted her to continue to be educated (cough) and particularly after he had married a schoolteacher that she would be educated and would become a schoolteacher, and that was that opposition.  But once married, my grandfather supported them wholeheartedly.
Speaker 1: How old was your mother when she married?
Speaker 2: Eighteen.
Story_ID: 610536
Speaker 1: Tell me, what did your father [Robert Irby] do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer, he was a sharecropper.  And I learned with his sharecropping he had borrowed forty dollars that year to make a crop, from S.C. Smith Company in Conway, Arkansas, and had made the crop and at his death, they came in and took the whole crop, all his mules, his T Model Ford [Ford Model T] and everything that my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] had, to satisfy the forty dollar loan that he had made.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your father was able to afford a car in that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, he worked and he, he was, he was a sharecropper and he did, had a whole lots of land.  I didn't know how much land, but he did lots of land, and my mother helped him to work.  So he was an entrepreneur farmer.  He had a buggy.  I remember riding in the buggy.  He had a wagon, he had a T Model Ford, he had horses and he had mules.
Story_ID: 610537
Speaker 1: When you think back to that time, what is your earliest memory?  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Probably on my father's knee at the table, food table, but the most vivid memory is the church memory that I told you about.
Speaker 1: So your mother [Mattie Buice Irby] and father [Robert Irby] get married and they settle down.  This is also in Mayf- Mayflower, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: This is in Mayflower.
Speaker 1: And you have how many siblings?
Speaker 2: At that time, I had one sister and one brother.
Speaker 1: What are their names, and tell me the--how--the birth order.
Speaker 2: Juanita [Juanita Irby], at that time, was eleven years, was twelve years old.  Robert [Robert Irby] was about ten years old.  My younger brother [Louis Irby] was not yet born.  He was born soon thereafter, so he was in the, he was in the bag at that time.
Speaker 1: And where do you come in?
Speaker 2: I'm in the middle.  I forgot about me (laughter).  I'm in the middle.
Speaker 1: You're after Robert?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I'm after Robert.
Story_ID: 610538
Speaker 1: We just went over your brothers and--your siblings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now your father [Robert Irby] had died and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And some of this I'm not going to give you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well just tell me--
Speaker 2: There, there is a period.  I'll just tell you I won't explain it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So my father died, I'm gonna give you accurate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father died and left my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] with my sister [Juanita Irby], my brother [Robert Irby] and me, okay?  My sister died from typhoid fever at twelve.  My younger brother [Louis Irby] was born after my father died, okay?
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your sister's death.  Typhoid fever--
Speaker 2: Fever.
Speaker 1: --was an epidemic in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: It was an epidemic and probably was responsible for me going into medicine.  My sister developed typhoid fever, had only one visit from the doctor, actually bled to death because that's one of the ways that typhoid fever tends to affect you is intestinal respondent, and did not have adequate, I considered even then and know now, did not have adequate healthcare.  The doctor only came once.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about where you were living because typhoid it's caused by contamination of water or food, is that not right?
Speaker 2: We were in Conway, Arkansas.  We had running water from a spigot, but we had outdoor toilets in Conway, Arkansas.  It was in the city, but that was one of the thing--there was an epidemic at that time for that whole area, and many people died as a result of the typhoid epidemic.  My sister was one, and I always felt that if she had had adequate medical attention, if the doctor had come in and out of our house as often as I had seen him go in and out of the other houses that were probably people who could afford to pay for it, that maybe he could have done something to stop her from dying.
Story_ID: 610539
Speaker 1: Tell me about the area, the neighborhood in which you grew up, that you were living in Conway [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: In Conway, there were what we call shotgun houses.  And yard where there was the big house.  The big house was the person who owned the shotgun houses, and we were renters.  We rented from them, paying very little rent I'm sure because we didn't have very much money.  But as I said, we had outdoor toilet and we did have a running faucet for water.  It was not well water.  It was a faucet with water.
Speaker 1: Tell me who else lived in your neighborhood, who else lived in the community there?
Speaker 2: The family that owned the other shotgun houses and the others who rented the shotgun houses just like we did.  It was all black and there were other children who lived in the other houses other than the house that we lived in.
Speaker 1: Were the owners black or white?
Speaker 2: They were the same owners that owned the, I think, that owned the big house, so I would think that they were, they were black.  I had no reason to think that they were white.
Story_ID: 610540
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your growing up years.  How long did you live there--now, you moved from Mayflower [Arkansas] after your father [Robert Irby] died--
Speaker 2: To Conway [Arkansas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to Conway.  What did your mother [Mattie Buice Irby] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother worked as domestic worker, worked wherever she could cleaning houses and cooking for white people so that she could have enough food and could take care of us.
Speaker 1: Now you went to what school in Conway, elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went for only a short period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So actually what year was it that you became ill?  You said you were five years old?
Speaker 2: Five or six years old.  I became ill with rheumatic fever.  That's swelling of my joints and unable to walk, could not go to school.  I had gone to school for a very brief period when this happened, and I stayed at home.  My mother's father [Ellis Buice] came to live with us and care for me while she worked.  I could remember vividly his using a chair and putting rollers that you put in a bed to roll a bed around, so that I had a wheelchair and that I could be rolled around, that he kept me during the day.  I can remember him making the tea when I was losing my first teeth.  He would use watermelon rinds to entertain me to make tea for--pretended tea for me.  That my mother taught me from the books that my brother [Robert Irby] had in school.  That same lessons she reviewed with him, she reviewed with me in preparing him for school the next day.
Story_ID: 610541
Speaker 1: So how long did you not go to school?  That's--you were homeschooled in other words, from about 1932, when did you enter into elementary school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say about, about a year to two years because soon thereafter my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] moved to Hot Springs, Arkansas, and by that time I was able to walk some, but not at a level in which I could walk unassisted, and moving to Hot Springs, Arkansas with my mother's aunt, who was her mother's younger sister, we were able to get a separate place for living in a two room house in which my mother was able to work and get enough money to have the utilities that we had, utilities being a kerosene lamp and a woodstove and to have food, and by that time I was able to walk and they started me in the class with my brother [Robert Irby] which was the fourth grade.  And because I had been taught from the same books that he had been taught from, I was able to do the fourth grade lessons, but then, and he was able to help me to maneuver steps and getting to and from school.  But then after a short period, they moved me from my brother to the fifth grade and I stayed in the fifth grade for approximately a half year and I moved to the sixth grade and I stayed in the sixth grade most of the year and then they moved to the seventh grade.  So I was skipped ahead of what my age should have been.  So by the time that I graduated from high school [Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas], I was sixteen, because I had been skipped the classes according to what they thought I could master in the curriculum.
Story_ID: 610542
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your elementary school days.  Now this is in the height of the Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 2: This was in Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: Hot Springs, Arkansas--
Speaker 2: Yes, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but it's during the Depression.  Is this not during the Depression?
Speaker 2: This was during the Depression.
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Can we stop for a minute?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Now your elementary school days--
Speaker 2: I only went to school I would say a few days in Conway [Arkansas].  When they found that I could not maneuver the walking and so forth--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it's when my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] and father--[maternal] grandfather [Ellis Buice] taught me at home.
Speaker 1: But this is during the, this is during the Depression.
Speaker 2: This is during the Depression.
Speaker 1: Depression, okay.  So tell me about that time for you.  What were you thinking about?  Did you know that you were in a depression?
Speaker 2: No, I was young, I was a child, and I had a place to sleep, I had food always and I had people who loved me and so I did not feel neglected.  I felt very hurt and saddened with my sister's [Juanita Irby] death, but I wasn't old enough at that time to do anything but be sad, and to know that she had died and I would not have her anymore.  But I could not be able to fathom through what had really happened except that it happened, and that there were many other children who also died.
Speaker 1: Was there--
Speaker 2: It was an epidemic.
Speaker 1: But was there a time that you thought about becoming a doctor at that time?  Had that went through your mind?
Speaker 2: Not, not at that time.  It was a little farther up.  I was about eight years old.  I was in Hot Springs.  And--
Speaker 1: Well tell me about Hot Springs.  First tell me about the town, what it's noted for.
Speaker 2: Oh, Hot Springs, I love it (laughter).  It's noted for its health restoration for people coming to take the baths to improve their health.  At that time it was also noted for its live life, and as I grew up, as in high school [Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas], as far as gambling, horse racing and the play, the play life of Hot Springs.  That was what it was noted for at that time.
Speaker 1: And horse racing, where was the horse racing?
Speaker 2: In Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: What was the name of--?
Speaker 2: Oaklawn Race Track [Oaklawn Park Race Track; Oaklawn Racing and Gaming, Hot Springs, Arkansas].  And we still have horse racing.  At certain time of the year, the spring of the year we still have horse racing.  We don't have the live open gambling that we had when I was in high school and even though I was not involved, the high school boys worked in hotels and gambling houses and my brother [Robert Irby] was not allowed to work in 'em by my mother, but I had classmates who did and would come back--
Speaker 1: This was illegal gambling is that right?
Speaker 2: No, it was legal gambling.
Speaker 1: It was legal?
Speaker 2: It was legal gambling.  It later closed and they still have gambling and some of it is legal and some of it is illegal.  But it has always been a town, a play town.
Story_ID: 610543
Speaker 1: So did you enjoy Hot Springs [Arkansas] better than Conway [Arkansas] or Mayflow- [Mayflower, Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I didn't know enough of Conway to say I enjoyed it or didn't enjoy.  When I went to Hot Springs, I, I enjoyed Conway.  I was taken care of, I was loved, I was fed, I was warm.  I had a shelter over, so I did not feel neglected in Conway.  I felt loved.  I knew that my mother [Mattie Buice Irby], my sister [Juanita Irby], my brother [Robert Irby], my [maternal] grandfather [Ellis Irby], I knew they loved me.  I was special with them.  I was always special.  I--my, my sister would teach me little poems and I would recite the poems at mealtime and she loved me dearly, and my grandfather loved me dearly and my brother loved me dearly and I went to church and the church people loved me dear.  So I always felt loved, so I didn't feel neglected.  I didn't, if, if I was deprived, I didn't know I was deprived.
Story_ID: 610544
Speaker 1: What about a teacher because they must have recognized your intellect?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't really have a teacher until I moved to Hot Springs [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Right.  In Hot Springs they were moving you up in grades.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I can remember my teachers particular Mrs. Miller, P.C. Miller.  She was a daughter of a physician and she was extreme--and later she became my patient when I practiced in Hot Springs, but at the time that I was growing up, she was determined that as students that we would have an exposure to everything that was important.  She was the daughter of a physician and she had fine silvers and napkins.  She would bring her silver and her glassware to school.  This was in addition to teaching us reading, writing and arithmetic.  She would teach us what table manners we should have, where the spoons should go, where the forks should go, how to take care of the napkins, and then, of course, my church [Union Baptist Church, Hot Springs, Arkansas] played a major part, but I had other teachers.  I have now a teacher that is still living that I assumed a major responsibility for.  She was my twelfth grade sponsor that is almost a hundred years old and is in a nursing home and I take care of her.
Speaker 1: What is her name?
Speaker 2: Margaret Martin, Mrs. Margaret Martin [Margaret Long Martin].
Story_ID: 610545
Speaker 1: So what school did you attend in Hot Springs [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Langston High School.  Langston at that time was a combination of grammar and high school.  Before I graduated from high school (cough) it was only a high school, but when I went in it started at the fourth, fifth and sixth grades through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in in school, in elementary school and on into high school.
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was involved in almost everything they started.  If it was program time, I was on program.  I enjoyed getting up and saying my speeches and having the applause of the people.  I also did it in my church [Union Baptist Church, Hot Springs, Arkansas].  I was on the debate team and I was able to travel through the state with other people taking me to debate other schools and other cities of Arkansas.  The church would carry me to conventions and youth meetings and I was on the Easter program, the Christmas programs usually in a speaking capacity.  However, I participated in the choir and I was an usher.  I was active.  And then as I grew up, in high school, early high school, I learned to type and to take shorthand, and I enhanced my family income by being the roving secretary.  At that time I was the fastest typist in Arkansas.  I was typing 125 net words on a mechanical typewriter.  We didn't have electrical typewriters then.  And so I took shorthand for people who came to visit in Arkansas and I typed their letters and I got paid for it.  I became the assistant secretary to John Webb [John L. Webb] who was the master of Masons in Mississippi and his home was in Hot Springs and he lectured to me and talked to me about what the principles of the world were.  He taught me how to face obstacles, how to knock down--be knocked down, get up and move on.  His wife [Carrie Branson Webb] and secretary were concerned about what I looked like when I went out, so they shopped for me and put me in clothes that were more than acceptable as a young girl and I stayed his assistant secretary until I finished high school and also the roving secretary for anybody who would come and read letters at that time.  I would take my typewriter that was portable that my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] had bought me and I would go to the hotel rooms and I would type their letters and I would get paid for it and by this time I was doing extremely well.  Of course this was war time, so they, my brother [Robert Irby] had gone to the [U.S. military] service and I was left with my mother and younger brother [Louis Irby] and was only the two.  And by this time my brother was sending money home from his service, my mother was working and I was working and were able to do the house where it was livable.  We still couldn't get running water and electricity.  We got that after I went to college [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee] because I was still working.  I had the opportunity to work as assistant to the secretary of the president and I had scholarships to go to college, so I sent my money home and my mother was able to get running water and electricity and do for my brother some of the things that she could not do for me.
Story_ID: 610546
Speaker 1: One question I wanna ask you about, you talk about your church.  What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Union Baptist Church in, in Hot Springs, Arkansas--
Speaker 1: And who was the pastor (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and it is still there.  The pastors that I remember was specifically was Reverend Hosey [ph.].  He would let me do his letters and help him with his sermons and also he would have the youth to come out to his house and he would give us dinners, Sunday dinners, and would use that as a period to orient us to what he had in his house that we maybe did not have in our house.  For instance, running water.  At that time we didn't have televisions, but radios, record players that he had that we could be exposed to there and that we learned that there was a different way that we could live.
Speaker 1: So he gave you that exposure--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because even during World--and this is World War II [WWII]--
Speaker 2: World War II.  My father [Robert Irby] was in World War I [WWI], my brother was in World War II.  My brothers [Robert Irby and Louis Irby] was in World War II.
Speaker 1: Now even though it was war time, you're saying that you were able to have enough money to now acquire some of the things that you didn't have before.
Speaker 2: Correct.  My, my, my brother was in the [U.S. military] service so he could send money home.  My mother [Mattie Buice Irby] was working and then I was working.  I was working not, not working as a full-time job, but I was working as a roving secretary and as assistant to the secretary for the master of, grand master (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, John, John Webb [John L. Webb], right.
Speaker 2: Mr. Webb.
Speaker 1: Webb.
Story_ID: 610547
Speaker 1: Of course your academics are continuing to be very good, is that right?  You were a very good student.
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I--
Speaker 1: Tell me how, who helped you decide about college?  Was that always something that was in your mind that you would go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh I knew I wanted to go to college.  I also I knew I did not want to go to the state college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  Now I know it was stupid, but then we thought that those of lesser qualities were the ones who had to take state college.  I wanted to go to a private college and that was (cough) somewhat encouraged I think by my high school sponsor [at Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas], that she wanted me to go to a private college and she specifically wanted me to go to the private college that she had gone to.
Speaker 1: And so we're talking about Margaret Martin.
Speaker 2: We're talking about Margaret Martin.  Margaret Long Martin.  That was--and she used it all.  She encouraged me to go to the private school because she thought that--she stated that I would get a better education there, particularly for the finesse, for the more than the A-B, the A's, arithmetic, reading and writing, but there would be a quality of education that I would get from a private school that I would not get from a state school.  I'm not sure that's correct, but at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you got a scholarship to go to that, to what school?
Speaker 2: To Knoxville College in Knoxville, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 610548
Speaker 1: Before we go on to college, tell me about who, who were your friends?
Speaker 2: I had friends (laughter).  In fact, we were clannish.  I had Marie Brown [ph.] who was my buddy.  I had Gloria Starlet [ph.], we were about the same size and we dressed alike as much as possible, and we were partners.  I had Elizabeth Hill [ph.].  And we were all very clannish in terms of doing things and taking charge, but we, we were not so that we were snobbish.  We, were just clannish in doing things together.  We made all the dance hops and we hung together with the boys.  We did all of that.
Speaker 1: So you went to dance hops, and whose music were you listening to at that time?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see.  I don't remember it's been so long ago.  I don't remember.  I remember the boogie woogie.  Who was playing the boogie woogie then?  (Pause) Were The Ink Spots?  I remember The Ink Spots at that time, and I just, they all run together so.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is about 1944?
Speaker 2: About 1944.
Speaker 1: Four [1944].  Okay.
Story_ID: 610549
Speaker 1: Now before we go forward, think about a sound, a smell and a sight that would take you back to your childhood.
Speaker 2: A sound.  Probably one of the, I think it would be a church (laughter).  I think it would be the church songs that I heard, 'Amazing Grace.'  For me I remember sounds, any of the piano hymns that would come, would tend to reflect and tend to unconsciously remember my childhood.
Speaker 1: A smell?
Speaker 2: I, I think it would be the magnolia.  We had a magnolia tree.  Even the rose, the smell from a rose.  We had roses.  My mother [Mattie Buice Irby] had roses in the yard and when rose season came, we had cut roses in the house and somehow or other when I get this smell, it somewhat brings to my memory those memories.
Story_ID: 610550
Speaker 1: Let's go back (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: We were talking about sight, sounds and smells.  We did decide the si- the smells and the sounds.  What about a sight?
Speaker 2: A beautiful green lawn tends to cause me to think of Hot Springs [Arkansas].  The, Hot Springs is a very pretty place.  People tend to keep their properties very pretty, including even us who were poor.  We always kept the flowers growing, the roses blooming, the grass pretty.  Our neighbors, even though poor, would still keep very pretty lawns and, for the most part, their houses were outside well cared for.  They helped each other.  My mother [Mattie Buice Irby] being a widow, the men would, if there was something that needed to be done, they would come over and help her to do it in order that things would stay intact.
Story_ID: 610551
Speaker 1: Who were the other people who were notably from Hot Springs [Arkansas]?  Did, I mean know Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is from Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Clinton is from Hot Springs.  His mother [Virginia Clinton Kelley] was my first nurse when I came out of med school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] to practice medicine in a segregated situation.  It was his mother, when they were going to assign me to the segregated part of the hospital, that his mother left the white regular hospital and came down to the, at the time, colored annex in order to protect me from anything that might happen.  I was the first black to ever practice in a white hospital in Arkansas.  And she was there to be sure that there were no errors made on my part, errors assigned to me on somebody else's part.
Speaker 1: We'll talk more about that when we get to that part of your life, but let's go on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I had no errors, let me, just in case we don't get to it, I had no conflicts.  There were no conflicts at all.
Story_ID: 610552
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your going to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  Now by this time have you decided that you would like to be a physician or did you have something else in mind?
Speaker 2: I knew then I was gonna be a physician.  When I was about eight years old I knew I was gonna be a physician.  There were two things I knew I wanted: I wanted to be a Christian and I wanted to be a physician, and I was equally as inspired to do both.  So I joined the church [Union Baptist Church, Hot Springs, Arkansas] and on my way to being a Christian, and I had the opportunity of working, by coincidence, for a physician when my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] became disabled and they allowed me to babysit when I was about eight years old.  I was eight or nine.  That they had, she was working for a young physician family who had one child about two years old and she pulled a vessel in her leg and could no longer go to work.  And in order to continue to give her this two dollars and fifty cents a week, and in order that the wife could handle the situation, they let me come and be the babysitter for about a two year old and that was what I did to keep her salary going, and it was at this time that I decided I was going, without a doubt.  He was a physician, but what really sealed it for me, his mother lived about two blocks from where he lived, and in that I was a babysitter, and it wasn't dangerous then for an eight year old to take a baby on the street walking, so I would put the baby in the carriage and I would go around to his mother's house and she would entertain me.  Of course they loved that because it meant that I was secure and the baby was secure, but there was no concern about us being secure.  And the mother said, "You ought to be a doctor, you should be a doctor," and she encouraged me and told me how great I was and how much I had to offer until I started believing it.  And then I made every effort I knew to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Had you known any black physicians?
Speaker 2: I knew one that came to see my sister [Juanita Irby] who had a son in my class when I was in Conway [Arkansas], only because he came to see my sister.  And then when I was in high school [Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas] I met the only doctor that was in Hot Springs [Arkansas], Dr. E. [ph.], but I wouldn't say I knew him.  I knew his daughter who was in high school with me, about three or four years ahead of me.
Speaker 1: So to you it was possible to be black and be a physician?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was going to be one.  To me, I didn't think about color.  All I could think about I was gone be a physician.  I never considered, in fact, I never considered the fact that I was colored.  I lived next door to two neighbors that were white.  It was my same age.  And they went to the Catholic school.  We played together and I merely thought that the reason I didn't go to the Catholic school was because my mother didn't have enough money to send me because it was private and you had to pay.  But it never dawned on me that I was black and I couldn't be a doctor.  It never dawned on me.  It never dawned on me I was black and I couldn't be anything because I had such strong reinforcement from my mother, from my teachers, from my church affiliation, because I was always told I could do it, you can do it.  I was put up to do the speeches.  I was asked to read.  I was, I was always put in charge so I didn't think anything was off limit for me.
Story_ID: 610553
Speaker 1: Off to Knoxville, Tennessee, tell me about the transition from high school into, to college.
Speaker 2: Well I graduated from high school [Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas] with honors, and had saved enough money for transportation to Chicago [Illinois].  My mother's youngest brother [Chester Buice] and his wife [Willie Bambury Buice] who had helped my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] when she most needed it, was living in Chicago.  He was, what do you, what did they call 'em then?  On the train?
Speaker 1: Porter.
Speaker 2: A porter, he was a porter on the train, and his wife at that time was living and he lived in Chicago in an apartment, but they had no children, but had taken in her niece who was about my age as someone to live with.  They had a two bedroom apartment and I wrote them, and asked them if I could come and work and make some money to go to college.  And, of course, they said yes.  And from the money that I had made in Hot Springs [Arkansas] I had my fare and I went to live with them and I got my first big job at Chicago Alden Order House [Chicago Mail Order Company] and, at that time, because I could type and type 125 words per minute, I was given a typist job and I could out type anybody who was there.  Well, I got paid according to production.  The faster you typed, the more you turned out, we were typing addresses and cards, the more you got paid.  So I was able to get enough money to save to buy me some clothes to go to college.  I was going to college.  I wanted to look pretty and to save transportation and a few dollars more.  So, I went to college, to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] on the train with a trunk full of college clothes, sixty dollars over and above my train fare, my clothes that I had bought and I was ready to go to college.  College tuition was three hundred dollars, and the letter specifically said: bring with you three hundred dollars for tuition.  I went to college.  They picked me up from the train station and carried me to the dormitory, put me in a dormitory.  Of course by this time I'm in heaven.  I'm where I had worked to be all this time.  Well, this was Sunday, the next day is Monday, enrollment time, and I went in to enroll and the clerk at the head of the counter said, "Those who have everything they need to enroll, get in this line.  Those who lack something, get in that line."  Well I knew I did not have three hundred dollars, so I got in the line (cough) that said if you lack something.  When I got to the desk, the clerk said, "Young lady what is it that you need?"  I said, "I don't have three hundred dollars."  She said, "How much do you have?"  And I said, "I have sixty dollars."  She says, "You cannot enroll with sixty dollars.  We can't accept you."  I said, "But I came to go to college and I am going to college.  I have sixty dollars."  And she says, "But I can't help you."  I said, "Who can?"  And she said, "The president [William Lloyd Imes] is the only one here can help you."
Story_ID: 610554
Speaker 1: I says, "Well let me see the president," and it was Dr. Imes [William Lloyd Imes].  I went in and I says, "Dr. Imes, I'm Edith Irby [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones], I came to go to college [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee] and I only have sixty dollars and they said I can't go to college, but I'm willing to work."  He says, "What can you do?"  I say, "I can type, I can take shorthand, I can do anything which enables me to go to college."  He said, "Well, wonderful, could you take a letter for me now."  And I says, "Yes sir."  He says, "My secretary was sick today and cannot come in and I need a letter sent out."  I took his letter in shorthand and I typed his letter and I gave it to him.  He says, "Wonderful.  You can be assistant to my secretary.  Yes, you can go to school," and he walked back out and he told the clerk something, and she gave me my enrollment papers and I was in college.  So I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you didn't really need a scholarship then, did you?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Tell me--
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Tell me why.
Speaker 1: Because I needed to send money home to my mother [Mattie Buice Irby].  I needed to help my little brother [Louis Irby] who later went to boarding school.  I needed clothes.  I needed all the things that that the scholarship, that I would not make.  But, to supplement that, I worked in the canteen and I later worked at the corner drugstore, so I was making enough money not only to have my mother get electricity in the house, but to send my brother to a boarding school.  He was much younger and she was concerned that he may not be running with the right crowd, and in that she didn't have a man in the house and my older brother [Robert Irby] was not there that a boarding school would be perfect for him, but she didn't have the money to send him to a boarding school.  So I told her, "I have money, I'll send him."  And so he started to boarding school (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 610555
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, the classes and the courses that you take.
Speaker 2: Well, there are required courses to begin with, and they're not elected.  So I took all the required courses and I made good grades, I made A's.  In fact, I had one B and I cried, and I told the professor I deserved an A, and he consoled me by saying, "But--," and they called me Irby [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones], "but Irby, the professor gets the A and you're my best student; I gave you a B."  So I made good grades.
Speaker 1: What professors were memorable?
Speaker 2: A Dr. Lott [ph.], my, a Dr. Gwen [ph.] who was my chemistry teacher.  The Mrs.--and boy I'm blanking on names.  Mrs. Clark [ph.] who taught foreign languages, and I'm trying to remember my religious teacher's name but I'm blocking on calling his name.
Speaker 1: All of your teachers were black?
Speaker 2: No, and when I first went, they were about half and half.  As I graduated, some of the same teachers that were there when I came was still there, and guess what, two of them are still there.  They were predominately white at that time, and then black teachers tended to come in.  For the most part they were primarily volunteer.  Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] is a Presbyterian school and the Presbyterians at that time supported the school and supplied the school not only with teachers, but with whatever needs there were.
Speaker 1: So was college the first time you were taught by someone other than a black teacher?  Did you have white teachers in high school [Langston High School, Hot Springs, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Not in high school.  No, no, maybe look white, but not white.
Speaker 1: So was there anything different about now being taught by a white professor?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you major in chemistry and biology and physics?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And tell me how that, I mean tell me--
Speaker 2: Why did I select those subjects?  Well number one, I did want to be a physician, but number two, because that's where the boys were.  And those were supposed to be my challengers and because I knew also that those were the courses that I was going to need if I was going to pursue being a physician.
Speaker 1: Now you continue with the debate team as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was part of the debate team and, we were good, we won most of our debates.  We traveled and other debate teams came to the campus to debate us and we felt very special.
Speaker 1: And what were your other activities?
Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader.  I was a part of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].
Story_ID: 610556
Speaker 1: I was initiated in Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.  I don't know anything they did that I didn't take some part in.
Speaker 2: Why did you pledge Delta over any other sorority?
Speaker 1: Well, we had not had sororities on the campus [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee] and this was the first introduction to sororities.  And from what they said to me, appealed to me somehow at that time more than the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] did.  They appealed more to me intellectually at that time that--career wise and doing things for the community, and I was impressed and I wanted to be a part of them.
Story_ID: 610557
Speaker 1: As you're going along in your studies, had you given thought to what medical school you would go to?
Speaker 2: (Cough) No, I would go to any medical school that would accept me.  In fact, I applied to all of the medical schools that I had money to fill applications to, and would have gone to any--of any of them that accepted me, and without even consideration of cost.  That wasn't even a factor, but I had no money and I was gonna figure that out after I got in.
Speaker 1: The way you did at Knoxville [Knoxville College, Knoxville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I hadn't even figured out to that level.
Speaker 1: So you applied to different school- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I applied to twelve medical schools.
Speaker 1: Twelve medical schools.  And so--
Speaker 2: I applied to all of the medical schools for which I had sixty dollars would go.  You had to pay application fee, five dollars application fee, ten dollars application fee.  I applied to all that I had the money to apply to--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --including University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: So how many schools were you accepted in?
Speaker 2: You know I have been asked that question and I don't really know.  Once I got my, I got several acceptances.  I don't know actually who refused me.  That's, that's the point.  I don't know.  I don't even remember all the schools I applied to.  I remember some of them, University of Chicago [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], Northwestern [Northwestern University Medical School; Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois].  In fact, I had gotten in the path to get into Northwestern for I had gone to do clinical psychology at Northwestern so that I would be on the campus and they could look at me.  So I had done everything I knew to assure myself a place in medical school.
Speaker 1: Now you said that you attended Northwestern, clinical psychology?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was, that was the, as I graduated, when I finished Knoxville College--
Speaker 1: That was in 1948?
Speaker 2: --in 1948, I went back to Chicago [Illinois] to work to make some money so that I would have some money hopefully to go to medical school and some money to do the other things I needed to do.  Chicago Alden Order House [Chicago Mail Order Company] was in the part of town that Northwestern University in Chicago is, and I found that I could work, make some money and go to Northwestern in the evenings.  And so I enrolled at Northwestern in the evenings and it took me only ten minutes by trail to go from my work post to, to Northwestern.  So I enrolled there in clinical psychology, two courses in clinical psychology and was able to do those and work too.  And I was hoping that would reinforce my ability to get into medical school.
Story_ID: 610558
Speaker 1: So what makes you decide on the University Of Arkansas Medical School?
Speaker 2: Because their tuition was five hundred dollars and everybody else's tuition was five thousand, ten thousand, fifteen thousand, but mind you I didn't have five thousand.
Speaker 1: You mean five hundred.
Speaker 2: I mean five hundred.  I didn't have five hundred.  That tuition was five hundred, but I didn't have, I didn't have five hundred.
Speaker 1: So what did you, what did you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I thought it was easier for me to get five hundred than it was going to be for me to get five thousand.  And the University of Arkansas Medical School [University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences] was in Little Rock [Arkansas], which meant that I could live with my aunt's mother [sic.] and handle special living expense, that I could be near home and could go home, Hot Springs [Arkansas], as I got an opportunity to do so since I had been away from my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] for the most part, for four years.
Speaker 1: Now it's a big deal that you get into University of Arkansas Medical School.  Tell me what happened.
Speaker 2: Not for them--I mean not for me, and they said not for them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well we know that this is something that was very special history.  So tell me why most people believed that this was very special.
Speaker 2: Because they had not accepted blacks in any southern medical school, white, before, and that they had had a black law student [Silas Hunt] and had segregated him in the class [of the University of Arkansas School of Law, Fayetteville, Arkansas], had put him, I believe at one time in the basement, at another time had put up a sheet between, I didn't know all of that though.  I didn't even have that information.  You'll remember this is in 1948 when information wasn't on any radios and TVs and so forth and since I didn't have privy to those things anyway, I didn't know all of this.
Story_ID: 610559
Speaker 1: So you're accepted into this school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas], so you're the first black to enter this medical school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now talk to me about your first day.
Speaker 2: The first day I was carried over from Hot Springs [Arkansas] to Little Rock [Arkansas] to go in by one of the cafe nightclub owners in a white convertible Cadillac.  That was the way Hot Springs was sending me over with my clothes and so forth packaged.  And we drove up.  My city had taken up the five hundred dollars that I needed for enrolling.  The mayor had started it off by giving a dollar.  My church [Union Baptist Church, Hot Springs, Arkansas] had taken up collection.  All of the churches, black particular, around town, had taken the collection.  Some of the white churches had taken collection after church, to take an after church collection to enable me to go.  So I had five hundred dollars in nickels, quarters, dimes, quarters, and at that time I wasn't smart enough to go down to the bank and get rollers to put 'em in, so I had it in a flour bag.  At that time they sold flour in cloth bags, but it was a nice, clean flour bag.  And I had all of this money in dollars, nickels, quarters, dimes, whatever, but I had five hundred dollars.  And I went over and as I walked in, all of the students in my class were standing around obviously as distraught as I was about medical school.  You'd be surprised what they tell us medical school is like.  So we were, I walked in and as I walked in the photographer said, "Would you just stand there for me and pose?"  And as I looked up he took a picture.  But then as I took the picture, I walked towards, not right in the center, and I can remember very distinctly that John Webb [ph.], a student there, walked over and said, "I'm John Webb, you must be Edith Irby [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones]."  And he came, and by this time the other three girls had come in and he brought me over and introduced me to some others because all of us there, even the men, did not know each other, were getting to know each other.  And then I met the girls and then they called for us to have, to come in to the amphitheater so they could give us what we needed to do, and as girls do, the girls were clannish and the four of us sat together and somewhat stayed together with the fellows coming over to say, "What do we need to do, what do we need to do" for all of us.  And that was how it went for a period of time.
Story_ID: 610560
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were telling me about the four girls how--
Speaker 2: You were going to ask me their names.  One of them I can't remember her name right now 'cause--two of them are still living.  One of them died so, are we on tape?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: Mary Arthur [Mary Arthur White] and Mary Thompson, but we called her Betty to keep them separated, and then we had another young lady who was in the class and I'm blanking on her name.  She later died, so she was not in the, she stayed in the class with us part of the time, but was not, did not finish with us.
Speaker 1: How many students were in your class?
Speaker 2: Ninety-one and I was the one.  Because they thought that there would be opposition, the class was meant to be ninety, so they made a class of ninety-one so no one would object.  The governor at that time [Benjamin T. Laney] said that he did not understand how they could take a black student, keeping the white male student who could be a doctor from having a place in the class.  And so instead of arguing with them, with him, or with any other political figure, they made a class of ninety-one.
Speaker 1: Now, you made friends with these, these women, women stuck together, but tell me about your experiences.  There were that certain things you were not allowed to do because of the law of the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let me, let me say this, not, not just the women, the fellows too.  These were mature fellows for the most part.  They had been to [U.S. military] service and had been with black soldiers together.  They were men who had gone to schools other than Arkansas, colleges and universities and had been with black students, so this was not a novelty to, to most of the students who were there [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And they did not consider my presence a novelty.  In fact, I was sought after.  Now I know they probably thought I wasn't gonna have partners in laboratory situation.  I'm sure it wasn't my brilliance, but for laboratory studying and so forth, that I was sought after to be a part of their groups, and that they without my requesting them asked me to work with their groups and come back to study with me so that we could study and have questions together where they had old examinations of past.  They brought those by to share those with me in order that we would learn together, so it was not an uncomfortable situation at all.  The most uncomfortable situation was being able to get the material, to be able to meet requirements.  The difference was not in color, not in male or female.  The difference was whether or not you met, you passed Jeff Banks' examination and we had one teacher there we called Spider [ph.], whether or not you were able to do the true/false and come out with a passing grade.  But it was not on the basis of you're a female or you're colored, or you're a Negro, but whether or not we were able to grasp the material that was necessary to meet the requirements.
Speaker 1: Who was the president and the dean of the school?
Speaker 2: Dr. H. Clay Chenault was the, the person then who was the dean and made all the decisions.
Story_ID: 610561
Speaker 1: So tell me about your living facilities there.
Speaker 2: When I fir- well, everybody lived there in a private home.  Some of the, they did not have dormitories [at the University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].  Some of the men had small fraternity houses where there might be four or five in one house, but for the most part we were all in private concerns.  When I initially went there I lived with my aunt's mother [sic.] in North Little Rock [Arkansas] and my, one of my classmates, female, also lived with her relatives in North Little Rock.  We would catch the same bus going to the university and at that time, the whites sat up front passed the sign saying white only, and coloreds sat in the back saying colored only.  We would catch the same bus.  She would catch it a stop before I got on and then I would get on and we would ride together.  But we knew if we would sit together, whether we sat on the colored side or whether we sat on the white side, that we would be delayed, that we wouldn't get to class on time because somebody would stop us.  So we stood and held on the post and we, from that bus stop to the school.  We stood together.  Nobody bothered us and we got off together.  Well there was no sign saying you could not stand together, but her father was the (unclear) for the state and somebody got to her father and said, "You know somebody's gonna hurt those girls."  So he bought her a car, and cars at that time was not popular at all.  I would say four or five of the fellows had cars.  But most of them caught the bus, had some other way, their wife was working and they dropped them off and brought them.  But we now had a car, so not only did we have a car for us, well we had a car for the fellows who didn't have a car who wanted to work with us.  And so that is how I got to and from the medical school, to night autopsies, to the things that we had assigned because we worked together, not, well only two of the girls worked with--Mary [Mary Arthur White] and I worked together, but the fellows who worked with us like Polinsky [ph.] and so forth, didn't have cars but they wanted to work with us.  They, they were working with us before she had the car, and we were able to get where we needed to go to do the things we needed to do.
Story_ID: 610562
Speaker 1: Well you talked about some of the things that you needed to do and you said something about night autopsies.  Tell me some of the things that you had to do as part of your curriculum [at the University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well this is a postmortem examination.  When a person dies in the hospital and for either a need to be made for diagnosis or for an inquiry as to actually how that person died, as to whether it was medical, whether it was suicide, whether it was intentional some other way, autopsies are required.  We were required as students to do a certain number of postmortem examination and we call those autopsies.
Speaker 1: And what other things that you were required to do as students?
Speaker 2: To study (laughter), study, study, study, and so we would study together.  After my first year I got an apartment.  During the first year I studied in the apartment of one of the young ladies usually with her and did not study usually because I was living in a private home.  Occasionally, one would come and study, but I didn't bring in a group to study in the private home.  After I got an apartment, then my apartment got to be the study place.  But it wasn't popular then for white men to be coming in and out of young ladies' apartments, and particularly this was a garage apartment, which meant that you could walk out of the apartment onto the street, so they would come to study with me, but then at night, say it's twelve o'clock, one o'clock, two o'clock when we finished studying, they were reluctant to go in front of my house and get in a cab.  So what we had to do was to call a cab and have them to meet them at the next corner and then from there go back to their various homes because we did not know what other people might do.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a time that, you said, there were no dormitories at all.
Speaker 2: There were some frat houses but they were only a few of the fellows could live in the frat houses and many of the fellows were married so they were in apartments, some other living arrangement.
Story_ID: 610563
Speaker 1: Now because of how the law, the law of the land at the time, on the campus [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] were you allowed to eat in the same dining room (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Use the same bathroom facilities?
Speaker 2: No.  The dean, Dr. Chenault [H. Clay Chenault] told me that was one of the things that he could not override, that we could not, that I could not go to the public dining room because they would use that and they would close the school and would eliminate my going there.  So they provided for me a lunch room in the library, one of the study rooms for the library, in which I could have lunch.  Well, this was wonderful because the students found out that I had a private room.  Now they couldn't say anything about my eating with them in private; it was only public where food was sold, food was otherwise--.  So the black help would fix that room up for lunchtime every day with a white linen tablecloth and a new bouquet of flowers, and a Coke [Coca-Cola].  A Coke at that time was a nickel and we'll put a Coke there, but then when the white students found out that I had this private place where they could eat and study and talk and ask questions and mark papers, they started coming in with me and bringing their lunch.  So they brought their lunch and I brought my lunch, and we would still each there together, but it was not against the law because we were eating in private.
Speaker 1: So the black help, they never said anything to you to encourage you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --but was that encouragement by seeing the flowers every day?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh, and I forgot to tell you I also had my private bath, private toilet, that they kept for me, and in the private toilet they would put a bouquet of flowers and they would use a scented deodorizer, so my bathroom became the bathroom for the women physicians.  But, but they couldn't keep them from using that because there was no sign on it.  It was just a bathroom, but on the other bathrooms was put women.  It didn't say white women, but put women, which made it public.
Story_ID: 610564
Speaker 1: Do you know why the school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] decided to allow you to come to that school?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I know why they said, but that doesn't make sense.  They said that the reason they allowed me to come was that I was twenty-eighth in the nation on the aptitude test.
Speaker 1: So they wanted you to be a student, a graduate of their school.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I, I--Dr. Chenault [H. Clay Chenault], who had been a general in the [U.S. military] service felt that there was no reason to exclude me, and in that he was getting to his retirement ages, age, that he felt strongly about it and made the first step.
Speaker 1: And this is before Brown vs. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --so there was no real need, they didn't have to do this, they decided that they wanted to do it.
Speaker 2: They wanted to do it.  The only public figure that objected that I know about was the governor [Benjamin T. Laney].  They tell me the governor at that time refused to do the convocation speech because they admitted me.  Who was the governor?  I don't remember his name now (laughter).  That's how insignificant all (unclear) meant to me at that time.
Speaker 1: So you always been a very bright student.  Was medical school hard for you or was it--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say I was a bright student.  I made the necessary preparation.  I think I, I spend, and even now, I think I prepare more than the average person prepares for any situation.  I wouldn't say my IQ is higher, it's that I work harder.
Speaker 1: Well tell me how was the experience in medical school?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: I mean as far as the classes, did you find any subject--
Speaker 2: You mean difficult?
Speaker 1: --difficult for you?
Speaker 2: Oh sure I did.  All of them.  I just had to buckle down and I can remember gross anatomy.  That was difficult for me to learn the relationships between the muscles and the nerves and the vessels.  It was difficult.  It was difficult for all of us, but that was what I expected and what I was willing to overcome the difficulties by spending more time, more effort in, in doing so.  If someone else can do it, I can do it too.
Story_ID: 610565
Speaker 1: So now have you decided at this time, before you graduate, what type of medicine you would pursue?
Speaker 2: At first I thought I would do pediatrics.  And actually I did a year of pediatrics at the university.  I stayed post my graduation for one year to do an intern, first year residency in pediatrics, and enjoyed it.  It was wonderful and probably would have stayed in pediatrics if it had not been for the fact that the dean of the medical school at the time that I enrolled, had now gone to Hot Springs [Arkansas], my hometown and was there with a clinic.  And my mother [Mattie Buice Irby] became ill earlier, had died.  My mother's sister became ill and I went over to see about her and again met Dr. Chenault [H. Clay Chenault] and he said, "What are you going to do?"  And I said, "I'm not sure after I finish the year residency."  He says, "Why don't you come to Hot Springs and practice?"  And that's what I did.  I went to Hot Springs and at that time he was a part of a clinic and the first day that I opened my office, I had thirty people waiting to have me to service them and I don't know whether I've had any days since then in which I didn't see that number.
Speaker 1: Well, okay, you graduate in 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen--?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then from '52 [1952] to '53 [1953] you do an internship?
Speaker 2: Intern, first year residency.  They called it, at that time they called it intern.  Now we call it first year resident.  And in the school, in the same situation that I had gone to school in, yes, at the university hospital at the medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] where I had gone to medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't, okay, the intern was at the university hospital in Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: And that is under the auspices of the medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, as you said, so this is 1952 or '53 [1953] that you opened, you practiced medicine in Hot Springs?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Is that right?  Okay, so that's 1953.  And so now you decided that pediatrics is not what you're gonna do so--
Speaker 2: It was not expedient for me to only do pediatrics at that time because all the people who had helped me in medical school, had helped me as a little girl, had, came to me as patients and some of them were sixty, seventy, eighty and they were not pediatric age.  Women who were pregnant came to me to deliver their babies because I grew up with them, various reasons that now I'm thrown into a situation where, and there was paucity of doctors to service these people, so now I am in general practice, but I had Dr. Chenault and his clinic to support me and all the things that I had not had experience with, appendectomies, breach deliveries, I always had someone there with me to demonstrate to me what to do and allowed me to get the experience of doing it.
Story_ID: 610566
Speaker 1: Do you get married during this time?
Speaker 2: Oh I've been married (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you get married (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I didn't let any moss, what is it, grow under my feet.  I married my second year in medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: And what was your husband's name?
Speaker 2: James Beauregard Jones.  I--
Speaker 1: And what did he do?
Speaker 2: At the time that I met him, he was teaching at AM&N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff] in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And that was the end of my first year in medical school.
Speaker 1: And he was a professor?
Speaker 2: He was a professor.  In fact, he was at the University of Arkansas dean of students, and professor of psychology.
Speaker 1: So how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: During the summer between my first year and second year in medical school, I went down to AM&N College to work, to let the register have the summer off to study, and I was going to play register for the summer and that was his first job after he had received his doctorate degree and he came in as a teacher there.  And out of loneliness for the two of us, we got to know each other and we got to know each other better and better until, oh what, 1950, about a year later, we married.
Speaker 1: And he moved to Hot Springs [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Almost.  He--we moved to Hot Springs.  Hot Springs is about, I guess sixty miles from Pine Bluff, and we built in Hot Springs a home and we acquired other properties in Hot Springs, so he commuted.  On weekends he was in Hot Springs and on Wednesday nights he was in Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We need to stop for a second.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: What were we talking about?
Speaker 1: That you and your husband moved to Hot Springs, well close to Hot Springs.
Speaker 2: Well we moved to Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We moved to Hot Springs and built a home in Hot Springs, acquired property in Hot Springs, had an office in Hot Springs, got very involved with all of the community activities in Hot Springs, and had two children while we lived in Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: And what are your children's names?
Speaker 2: Gary [Gary Jones], Myra [Myra Jones Romain] and I had one child since I moved here, Keith, K-E-I-T-H [Keith Jones].
Speaker 1: And your husband, so when you moved to Hot Springs, does he teach at another university?
Speaker 2: No, he's still at univers- he's still at AM&N College at that time.  He stayed there but he commuted.  He came on weekends, on Fridays and stayed until Monday morning, came back on Wednesday night and went back on Thursday mornings.  It's about seventy miles Hot Springs from--that's a long ways then, now no one thinks of it at all, and everybody commutes almost daily.
Story_ID: 610567
Speaker 1: So now you have an private practice in the community that helped you get to medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas], is that right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Well, let me say one, because whole United States helped me to get there.  I was receiving dollars and fifty cents in envelopes, saying, "I hope you much success."  I could go to the mailbox and actually take a basket and know that I was gonna have a basket full of donations.
Speaker 1: How did everybody in the United States learn about you?
Speaker 2: They put it all over the papers.  It was all over every paper, every paper all over everywhere.  It was news, it was, I don't know why so much news, but it was, I guess the biggest thing happening then.
Speaker 1: It was, you said, "Well it wasn't a big thing for us and it wasn't a big thing--," but it actually was a big thing for the whole United States.
Speaker 2: Much of you can't understand, when you're in it and you're trying to meet the requirements and do that which is necessary, it isn't a big thing (laughter).  It was--I had always had challenges and it was just a different kind of challenge.
Speaker 1: With all of this giving back, did you then think about your father [Robert Irby]--
Speaker 2: Oh, by all means.
Speaker 1: --and that time about that you gave those and that it would multiply back?
Speaker 2: Always, oh, in fact, did you know what, it's not a day now, even though then I was only about six or seven years old, it's not a day now I don't think about when someone comes to ask me for something that I never say no.  I either do it myself or I find someone else who'll do it.  I don't say no to any request.
Story_ID: 610568
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: I am Edith Irby Jones. Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Irby, I-R-B-Y, Jones, J-O-N-E-S [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones].
Speaker 1: And will you give me your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Let's see, which one can I give you (laughter).  December the 23rd, 1928.
Speaker 1: And your location of birth.
Speaker 2: In Conway, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Today's date is?  May 10th.
Speaker 2: May the 10th, 2010.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: I am in my office at 2601 Prospect Street, in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a physician, a specialist in internal medicine.
Speaker 1: This is a continuation interview that was started March 10th, 2008.
Story_ID: 610569
Speaker 1: When we ended the last part of the interview you were telling us about your husband [James Beauregard Jones]--that, that you married and that your husband and you decided to move back to Hot Springs, Arkansas to have and raise children.  So let's, let's start there.  Tell me why you and your husband decided to move where you moved from and why you decided to move back to Hot Springs.
Speaker 2: When I moved back to Hot Springs I had finished a residency in pediatrics and felt that I was ready to have some actual practice in the care of patients.  My husband was working at that time at AM&N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff] in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  It was his first job after he had graduated from the University of Washington in Seattle [Washington] and his being in a new environment and my having lived in Arkansas, having gone to school in Arkansas, we elected to move to the place where I was reared in order to practice medicine and it also served closeness to his work.  At least he could come to visit me twice a week with a drive of seventy miles.  We wouldn't think much now of driving seventy miles, but then it was some, it was a big deal, but we moved to Hot Springs because I was reared there and because I felt I owed the people a debt there.  They were not only instrumental in helping to rear me, but financially they were supportive and initially gave the amount for me to go into medical school, and gave me the necessary support all along, with other people also all over the world contributed to financially to my having attended there in University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: So once you got to Hot Springs is that when you began to rai- have a family?
Speaker 2: Well I was pregnant when I finished my residency with my first child [Gary Jones].  I finished the residency on July the 1st and the child was born on July the 25th, so that was my first child and I decided that I could have the support that I needed in practice by being in Hot Springs among the people who knew me best.
Story_ID: 610570
Speaker 1: And what was your--was it a son?
Speaker 2: It was a son.
Speaker 1: What was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Gary Ivan Jones [Gary Jones].
Speaker 1: And this--what year was this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: And then you had other children?
Speaker 2: Yes, the following three years I had Myra Vonceil Jones [Myra Jones Romain], and the following seven years, I had Keith Jones.  So I have three children.
Speaker 1: You wanna tell me a little bit about your children today?
Speaker 2: Today?  Well, Gary is an acupuncturist.  He's involved in real estate and he is my mature, demanding son seeing that I stay straight and that he has input with most of the things that I do.  Myra practiced law in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] for twenty years, retired and has come to Houston [Texas] to live and has started a wellness center [Edith Irby Jones Wellness Retreat Center, Houston, Texas].  Her wellness center is attached to my office and it's amazing how many people prefer to stay well than to have to get well.  So she has instituted correct dieting, exercise, mental satisfaction, career orientation and all the things that tend to make people whole.
Speaker 1: And Keith?
Speaker 2: And Keith.  (Laughter) And Keith is my, my youngest.  Well he was seven years after the others so--
Speaker 1: So this was 1962.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Keith is the one that was born in Houston after we moved to Houston.  He is here now and he is involved in seeing that I stay straight mainly and involved in housing and property management.
Story_ID: 610571
Speaker 1: So how long did you live in Hot Springs [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: In--I went there in 1953 and left there in 1959; six years.
Speaker 1: And where did you move to?
Speaker 2: To Houston.  I came to Houston, Texas, because my husband [James Beauregard Jones], who was employed at the college in Pine Bluff in Arkansas [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff], took a job at the university of--Texas Southern University here in Houston, and I had wanted to do a residency and it gave me an opportunity to be with him on his new job and for me to have the residency that I desired.  I took a residency with Baylor affiliated colleges, which meant previously we had seventy miles between us and he could only come home--at that time we didn't travel the way we travel now, so he could only come home maybe weekends and the middle of the week.  But coming to Houston meant that he was being occupied doing what he wanted to do at Texas Southern University and that I was in the residency program at Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas], and we were together with our children [Gary Jones, Myra Jones Romain and Keith Jones].
Story_ID: 610572
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your residency at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas].  How was it for you?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  I was their first black female.  There was another female with me, but at that time they did not think that women would be productive, I think, in medicine, and so they limited women into not only medical school, but also in the residency programs, so there were two of us women and I was the first black woman to be involved there.  It was a very pleasant learning experience and would, would, of course, do it again if I had the opportunity.
Speaker 1: Were there any black males that were in residency there?
Speaker 2: There had been one, Dr. John Madison had been the resident there and had been very successful in doing so.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  In fact, got to know him even better after my residency en- there.  While I was a resident he allowed me to come to his office and make some extra money taking his calls on weekends and so forth.  He was a very brilliant physician, active in civic activities and particular was he successful with seeing patients and putting them at ease and we would call it an excellent bedside manner.
Speaker 1: Did he give you, did he offer any advice during your residency?
Speaker 2: Not directly.  But I knew I had a sort of high record to keep because he had done such an excellent job.
Speaker 1: Now at Baylor when it came time to--did they limited--did they limit you as far as your patient roster?
Speaker 2: Not in the setting that I was in.  I initially did most of my residency at the veterans hospital [Houston Veterans Administration Hospital; Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas], which was a part of Baylor's teaching setting.  And there, of course, it was United States government and there could be no segregation in any way.  Patients were not segregated.  Staff was not segregated.  Dining halls and the other facilities was not segregated.  This was during the time though when there was segregation in public places.  The private hospitals, Methodist [Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas] and Hermann [Hermann Hospital; Memorial Hermann Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas] and the other hospitals did have segregation, but I was not exposed to their facilities.  My primary assignment was veterans hospital, which, as you know, the government demanded that there would be no segregation, even at that time.  And because I felt that I had a lack of direct black medicine address for me while I was at the hospital, the veterans hospital and because we were in the South, I asked for an experience with Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine] in Washington, D.C. and Baylor allowed me to have that experience which lasted for three months, and it was a pleasant experience because I had not been in an all-black situation previously and I wanted to hear their side of healthcare particular as it related to blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's step back a little bit and tell me about some of the administrators that were at Baylor during that time.
Speaker 2: The administrators were--
Speaker 1: I mean was there anybody in particular that you remember working with?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember them, you know when you just ask me like this, forty years behind, I can't come up with names, but I can see their faces and can remember them, but can't come up with the names at this time.
Speaker 1: Well, what about at Howard?  What was the name of the hospital at Howard?
Speaker 2: It was Freedmen's at Howard [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] that I was primarily assigned to.  And to attempt to remember the names for who was there at that time even guessing would be difficult.  That's fifty years ago (laughter).
Story_ID: 610573
Speaker 1: Now you talked about Dr. Madison [John Madison] being civic minded, you also were involved in civil rights and we're alrea- we're in 1959, but before that time, or was this after, that you became involved with the Freedom Four?
Speaker 2: It was during my schooling, my medical education that I became involved with the Freedom Four, while I was in medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It was after I had gone to school all day, studied with my classmates and slipped out at night with the other three to go from town to town from school to school and churches, to make the people aware of what their rights were.  And to encourage them to continue to push and to be sure that they did not stop until they reached their goal of having, well, not so much integration were we concerned about, but equal facilities at least.
Speaker 1: The other three were who?
Speaker 2: Dr. Bob Booker, Dr. Harold Flowers and Dr. Carter from, where was he from?
Speaker 1: Was that Floyd Davis?  Or you said Carter--
Speaker 2: Davis that, let me be sure, what was his name, Flower- Dr. Harold Flowers, Dr. Bob Book- I mean not doctor, attorney, attorney Harold Flowers, attorney Bob Booker and--
Speaker 1: Floyd Davis?
Speaker 2: --and Floyd Davis in Ar- in Texarkana, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know more than I do (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you come together with those three and then why were you called, well I mean we can figure out why you were called the Freedom Four.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: But how did that name come about?
Speaker 2: I was still, even though I was in medical school, I was still active politically with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the other groups that were trying to improve, particular the school situation in Arkansas.  And those were the people including Daisy Bates, who--and her husband L.C. Bates, who were active in having, at least if we're gonna be segregated to have equal facilities, and I had attended some of the NAACP meetings and had gotten to know them and what they were concerned about, and I just jumped on the wagon and we tended to work together.
Speaker 1: Do--did you ever meet Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, in Atlanta [Georgia], and I don't remember the exact year, but yes, I did.  I went for a concern there and to have him speak and to meet him personally to exchange ideas of where we would go from there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, we're gonna move forward, I just wanted to go back a little bit to--
Speaker 2: You know it's amazing what you think you know and don't know (laughter), don't remember.  It's been a long time.
Speaker 1: It's been a long time and you're doing fine, thank you very much for your participation in that.
Story_ID: 610574
Speaker 1: Now also because you are a native of Arkansas, in 1957 the Little Rock Nine integration [of Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], give me some feedback about how you felt when all of that was going on.
Speaker 2: Well, I was somewhat active in that from behind the curtains.  Daisy Bates had been very instrumental in seeing that my stay in medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] was successful.  She actually solicited finances for me to be able to live.  There were no scholarships and grants and loans at that time that were available and I had no family that could support me in medical school, or come up with other expenses such as even transportation, bus fare, food, place to live, and Daisy Bates who was active with her husband, L.C. Bates at that time, with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sort of took me as their charge and Daisy would go to the black professional people of the city who at that time mostly were all in one building, and she would solicit five dollars, ten dollars per week, so that I could have living money.  I never thought about finance, I didn't, I didn't have time to think that I was poor.  I just did it and somehow or other whatever I needed was all there and Daisy would go out and she would bring to me forty or fifty dollars every week.  Well that was bus fare and rent fare and all the other little things that I didn't have time to think about at that time.  She also saw that I was integrated into the social setting of Little Rock [Arkansas], so it meant that on weekends I could sort of get away from the having to be the special medical student and I was allowed to come out with the black professionals who gathered on weekends to entertain or be entertained and I was a part of that so I didn't feel lonely and left out.
Speaker 1: So when they integrated Little Rock, the Little Rock Nine, did you know any of them?
Speaker 2: I did know--I did not know any of them, but my house was a haven for Mrs. Bates.  I was living in Hot Springs [Arkansas] and because of the danger of her life, when she finished there, she would come and stay at my house at night and be taken back the next morning because of the danger on her life.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: She had continued to be very close to me after I became a student and was there, not only did she see that my physical needs were taken care of, but she also introduced me into the society and saw that I had something in which I could relax and let down from the activities in which they felt I was threatened.
Story_ID: 610575
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you one more question before we go on about medical school, and during that time many blacks were being offered scholarships to go to Ivy League schools in the North.  Was that not anything that you thought about doing?
Speaker 2: Oh I applied.  I wanted to go to medical school.  I did not necessarily want to go to the University of Arkansas [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas].  I wanted to go to any medical school, so I applied and used all of the money, all of my sixty dollars.  You had to pay five dollars or ten dollars with an application, so I used my whole sixty dollars to apply and when I applied to Northwestern [Northwestern University Medical School; Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago U [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], Hopkins [Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland].  I applied to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I used my whole money, all available to make applications to every medical school.  The University of Arkansas was only one of the medical schools that I made application to.  But, the reason I accepted the University of Arkansas as their tuition was so much less, even though I didn't have that, but it was easier for me to get three hundred dollars than it was for me to get thirty thousand dollars, ten thousand dollars, or twenty thousand dollars.  So I accepted the University of Arkansas because all I needed was three hundred dollars, and--but I didn't have three hundred dollars.  I didn't have three dollars, but having applied and with the publicity and so forth, people sent to me dollar bills, half dollars on cardboard and sent it to me.  My mayor of my city gave a first dollar in the collection.  They shook the bells like Salvation Army in small towns on the corner and fund for Edith Irby [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones] to go to medical school, so the people, and people sent me money, dollar bills.  They sometimes sent dimes on cardboard where they put paper.  It might have been fifty cents worth of dimes or dollars, so forth in mail.  Of course, I did not imagine that when I applied.  I, as I said, the tuition being so much less than elsewhere, I didn't know where I was gonna get the sixty dollars, I had no idea, but I thought I could get that better than I could get six thousand dollars.
Story_ID: 610576
Speaker 1: All right.  Let's move back to your husband [James Beauregard Jones] and you and your family moved to Houston [Texas] and you take up your residency.  So tell me what happens after you finished.  You go to Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] and then to Freedmen [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  Tell me what happens after your residency is completed?
Speaker 2: Before, let me just interject this--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --because even after I, this is still Arkansas, even after I finish the University of Arkansas, where I had a very excellent supportive group, both classmates, faculty, the City of Little Rock [Arkansas], both black and white, and after I finished in my internship or residency in Little Rock, and I went to Hot Springs [Arkansas] because the dean of the medical school was in Hot Springs practicing, and I had gone over to see about an aunt who was very ill, and he had been supportive in seeing that she got the care that I needed.  And he encouraged me to come to Hot Springs to practice.  And they had a clinic, Dr. Chenault [H. Clay Chenault], who had been the one who had said that I would be admitted to the University at Arkansas Medical School [University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] and I would be as any other student.  He was now practicing in Hot Springs and encouraged me to come to Hot Springs to practice.
Story_ID: 610577
Speaker 1: Back to you leave Hot Springs [Arkansas] to come to Houston [Texas] and you finish your residency [at Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: After I finish my residency, I had gotten to know Houston pretty well.  It was not the size it is now and we didn't have the freeways and runways the way we have now, so you got to know particular the black community you got to know.  And it was a nice pleasant place to be.  And my husband [James Beauregard Jones] was employed at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] and I decided I'm gonna practice in Houston.  I had the fortunate experience of, of knowing Mr. McKenna [ph.] and I was looking for a place to practice and he said, "Well go out and find a place and come back and tell me how I can help you."  Mr. McKenna was a businessman, finances.  He had, what do you call--?  Standard savings in which he acted almost as a bank.  He lent money because it was difficult then for blacks to get money from banks and so forth.  And I told him that I was interested in staying in Houston.  He said, "Well go out and find a place that you want to stay and practice," and so forth.  And I found this office that was just across the street from where we lived.  And I went back and I told him, "Mr. McKenna I found a place."  It was a fraternity house, but it can be made into an office and it's near where I lived.  And he said to me, "Okay, what do I need to do to help you?"  I said, "Well I don't have any money."  And he says, "How much does it cost?"  I said, "Seventeen thousand dollars."  He says, "Okay, I will pay for it, and how do you want to pay it back?"  I says, "How do you want me to pay it back?"  He says, "You think you could give a hundred dollars a month with no interest?"  So he allowed me to pay it back a hundred dollars a month with no interest.  And not only was Mr. McKenna that supportive, all the people of Houston were equally supportive.  When I opened my doors, I had more to do the first day than I was able to comfortably do.  I still have more to do every day, even now.  But was such a pleasant way to be than I can comfortably do.  But I stay, and I have a staff who are supportive, and sometimes we're nine or ten o'clock, but we see every patient that comes through the door.
Story_ID: 610578
Speaker 1: It's 1963 when you open your first practice here.
Speaker 2: In Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: In Houston.  Now you talked about this building that you found the building and McKenna [ph.] funded you the money.  Tell me more about this neighborhood, about this building and the fact that you have been here from 1963 until today.  So tell me about the neighborhood when you first moved in.
Speaker 2: Initially, it was a neighborhood of mansions, people who owned department stores, banks, otherwise and they had individual large homes.  They had started moving out to the South Houston [Texas] and a new community, primarily Jewish in origin, but with lots of money.  The house that I purchased that's now my office had been one of the owners of one of the department stores.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: No, but they had moved from the community and a fraternity group from the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] had occupied the building and the neighbors were concerned that that would not be, and that they had asked the fraternity to move, so--but the fraternity, however, had not bought the building, they were just using the building.  But then when they moved out and left the building vacant and it was a short distance from where I lived at that time and I had children that were six years old [Gary Jones] and approximately four years old [Myra Jones Romain] and I wanted to be able, I thought, between patients, to run over and see about my children and run back to the office.  Well that never happened.  Once I got to the office I didn't get out until I had finished.  But then when I went to apply for hospital privileges, this also let me be within five to ten minutes from the hospitals that I serviced so it was the ideal place for me to have a practice.
Story_ID: 610579
Speaker 1: What hospitals did you apply for privileges?
Speaker 2: I applied to Methodist Hospital [Houston Methodist Hospital], which is in the medical center [Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas], to Hermann Hospital [Memorial Hermann Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas], St. Elizabeth Hospital [Houston, Texas] and to--those were the major hospitals at that time.
Speaker 1: Hermann Hospital?
Speaker 2: Hermann Hospital, yes.  I applied to Hermann Hospital but was not immediately admitted.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went in the administrator of Hermann Hospital informed me that Hermann, the person, Mr. Hermann [George Hermann] endowed the hospital for white male physicians only and so consequently they had never had a female physician on the staff, nor had they had any blacks on the staff, so I was a double jeopardy to the original intentions of Hermann who set up the hospital and Dr. Crozier [Leigh Crozier] asked me if I would take it to court and that the board would support me to say that that was not the intentions of the endower at that time, that that was back in the times when that was acceptable and that the board would support me.  And I told him of course I could not do that.  I wanted all of my attention placed on beginning the practice, being accepted into the community and I did not want to have a court involvement.  When he later informed me that would I object if the board took it to court.  And, of course, I did not object and the board did take it to court and the court overruled the fact and so I became the first black and the first female to be admitted to a hospital, Hermann Hospital on their medical staff.
Speaker 1: Did you see other blacks then become staff members there?
Speaker 2: Not for a long time.  And I don't know how many years, but not for a long time.  I believe Dr. John Madison followed me in about two or three years.
Story_ID: 610580
Speaker 1: In this community you talked about the fact that there were many mansions and the people were wealthy that lived in the community and then it began to change.  Who were your patients when you first started and how has it changed throughout the years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a mixture of patients.  Of course, I had been at the veterans hospital [Houston Veterans Administration Hospital; Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas] and Methodist Hospital [Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas] with my residency [at Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] and I had seen patients of different colors, different nationalities and some of my patients that I had seen as a resident followed me into my private practice and continued to see me.  Some of them were white.  Some of them were black, and so I had a mixture of patients from that experience from the residency in that I did my residency with Methodist Hospital and the veterans hospital.  Particularly the veterans hospital it was decreed that there would be no segregation in any form and so I took patients as they came up on the roster whether they were black or white and some of the white patients that I had seen as patients at the hospital had elected to have me as their private physician and continued to follow me.
Speaker 1: And this area of town is called what?
Speaker 2: This is the old Third Ward area [Houston, Texas].  It was initially the elite, the particular financially, was all white and it has changed now to predominately black.  It is one of the old well built homes, multiple bedroom type large areas.
Speaker 1: And tell me why you decided to stay here.  Did you ever think about moving your practice to any other part of time as the community started to change?
Speaker 2: No.  I've always had patients usually more than I felt I was adequately able to service and it was convenient for me to get here, convenient for my patients to get here and in the last several years the city bus has routed its bus so that the bus stop is right in my door, and my patients are able to get here by bus and since I have adequate parking, the patients don't have to pay for parking and they like the fact that they can just get out and come right in and not have to worry about the things that they would in a multiple story type setting with multiple occupants in which there was some contest for parking spaces and so forth.
Story_ID: 610581
Speaker 1: Now this was 1963 when you first opened your practice, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is correct.
Speaker 1: And you also begin to, to teach as a professor at which colleges?
Speaker 2: Well, initially it was Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas] because that was the only medical school here, but since that time and since I was affiliated with Hermann Hospital [Memorial Hermann Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas], which was the teaching hospital for the University of Texas school of medicine, I also became professor for the University of Texas medical school in Houston [University of Texas Medical School at Houston; John P. and Kathrine G. McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: And that was in 1972?
Speaker 2: About 1972.
Speaker 1: And you're still teaching today.
Speaker 2: I'm still teaching today.
Story_ID: 610582
Speaker 1: Now in nineteen si- well the early '60s [1960s], civil rights is in full bloom, talk to me about the climate of Houston [Texas].  Are you still involved in civil rights in any way?  And talk to me about Kennedy and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the things that happened during that era?
Speaker 2: Initially, of course, when I came to Houston I got involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the other civil right issues and my husband [James Beauregard Jones] working at the college [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], and this was the time of sit-ins at counters and so my experience was firsthand.  My house was the reference for the students who sit-in and was arrested and my house was the place where the rich people in town brought the money to get the students out as soon as they were in.  My husband was the, well, let's say he was the mature person to be sure that no harm became of the students and that they did not spend any time in jail.  And so there was a riot, so they say, it was a riot but it was really the police who went in to the college campus and began to shoot, and one of the policemen were killed with what they call a ricochet, ricochet bullet, and that caused great difficulty and from that the race relations was somewhat escalated as being divisive.  And with my husband being the, at that time, the dean of students, they felt that he could control the students and so, that of course could not be, but my house became the fortress for those who needed to have refuge from the situation.  That also was the time when many of the white citizens recognized the problem and even though they did not sit-in at counters, they did not go to jail, they particular gave their money to see that the students did not stay in jail, to see that all the needs were taken care of and my house served as center in which the exchange of what needed to be done was done to have the progress of having students not held in jail for sit-in.  And I tell you this as a little off the record, we lived next door to a University of Houston professor, white, both wife and husband were professors there.  And my daughter [Myra Jones Romain] at that time was about five or six years old and had gone to Walgreens and wanted to get a Coke [Coca-Cola], but she wanted to sit at the counter like the others, and my husband tried to explain to her why she couldn't sit at the counter because there were some white folk didn't feel that blacks should sit at the counter.  And she said, "Daddy, then they are mean white folks. All white folk mean?"  And he said, "No they are not.  Ms. Suthers [ph.] who lived next door to us is not mean."  And she said, "Nope.  Daddy, is she white?"  So that was how it was in those days and how we had to step in to try to explain to the younger people, the--particular children, that we could change things.
Story_ID: 610583
Speaker 1: You have your practice and (pause), and it's flourishing 'cause you tell me that--
Speaker 2: Things are going well.
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens now.  This is, we're going through the '60s [1960s] into the '70s [1970s].  I know that you are teaching and tell me about your teaching experiences at, at both colleges.
Speaker 2: Well, it's been rewarding for me.  It's been stimulating and I understand that the students clamor to get into my group, to either come out to my office, have me to take the lecture part for them, particular as they go from basic to on the ward for practice, hands on.
Speaker 1: What do you teach specifically?
Speaker 2: Medicine.
Speaker 1: No, I know, but there are--
Speaker 2: I mean but there's--internal medicine should I say.  Grown up diseases that are not necessarily for surgery, diagnostic diseases, care of patients who have illnesses that medication can care for or developing the workup and the referral of patients to specialties once we have found the cause, if it cannot be handled with procedural or with medications, surgically or otherwise.
Story_ID: 610584
Speaker 1: So how is it that you become a founding member of the Association of Black Cardiologists?
Speaker 2: It just so happened that in internal medicine you got to know something about everything, enough to know that you don't know and where to send them to someone who does know, and in cardiology a lot of patients have heart disease, and particular a lot of blacks have heart disease.  So I'm interested and I go to a cardiology national meeting, an overall national meeting, and there are only about twelve blacks in a meeting of five hundred plus cardiologists.   And I'm internal medicine, not cardiology, but I need to know heart disease.  And I'm at the meeting and there were twelve of us present in I would say there was thousands of white cardiologists and we recognized the fact that, you know, we need to involve more blacks into getting involved in cardiology.  Maybe we should start our own organization.  So twelve of us who were attending that meeting that night gathered together and formed and invited other cardiologists to be a part of it, and that's how the American college--the American--
Speaker 1: Association.
Speaker 2: --association of cardiologists got started.
Speaker 1: You also--and I want, and I want to get the year, so this was 1980 that the black cardiologists were formed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 610585
Speaker 1: And then you also are elected president of the National Medical Association.  Now that had to be exciting for you.
Speaker 2: It was exciting.  But you know I had been very active with the National Medical Association.  Once I came out of medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] with all whites and I had had no experience except very little with black medicine as such, and I was practicing in Hot Springs [Arkansas] and this physician came in to take the Hot Springs bath.  They have to be evaluated and certified that they're able to take the bath.  And I found out that he was a member of an organization of all blacks, physicians in the United States.  Well I had only seen at most three or four black physicians while I was in practice, so he invited me to come to the meeting.  I went to the meeting in Detroit, Michigan and I never seen so many nice looking, well dressed, well spoken, intelligent black folk, driving Cadillacs, dressed just immaculately, gloriously that you would think that you were almost in heaven, and I got involved with the National Medical Association.  I went every year.  Earlier we could not ride the train except on the back of the train, and my husband [James Beauregard Jones] would drive.  I missed one meeting the entire time that I had been going to the National Medical Association and that was because I was too pregnant to travel by plane and, I mean, to travel, couldn't afford plane, to travel by train and my husband was afraid to take me by car.  I was so enthused that there was that many black folk speaking the King's English and living as if they were rich, driving Cadillac cars and lecturing in, on subjects in medicine that I never realized that they had the expertise.  And hadn't missed a meeting.  I missed one meeting, one meeting.  I was too pregnant to travel, and I still haven't missed a meeting.
Story_ID: 610586
Speaker 1: Well how did you get to the point that you wanted to be president [of the National Medical Association] and the fact that you were elected (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know whether I wanted to or not (laughter).  I'm not sure I wanted to (laughter).  Let's say the organization wanted me to.  I became active first in the scientific settings in which I think first they made me chairman of community health section, and then I became chairman of the internal medicine section.  And then they put me on the board, and I became just very, very active.  And then I found out I was president.  So I was extremely active, but they gave me such support until it was just wonderful experience.  And, of course, my group here both white and black, supported me.  If I needed something researched, they researched, if I, whatever I needed they were there to do it.  Dr. DeBakey [Michael E. DeBakey], one of the renowned surgeons who is now dead, found out and he of course was very popular, found out that I had been elected president.  As soon as I came back to Houston [Texas] he called me to congratulate me and says, "You know I want to be there when you are installed as president."  I don't know whether you know Dr.--know of Dr. DeBakey?
Speaker 1: Tell me who he is.
Speaker 2: Dr. DeBakey is probably the most renowned cardiologist that has ever lived.  He is now dead for a little more than a year, but he lived to be ninety plus.  He actually was founder of many of the replacements for the heart.  He taught medicine to the foreigners who came here.  He was a master of cardiology.  And, of course, he was at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], and he had allowed me when I was a resident to see his foreign patients who had no physician here to work his patients up for surgery.  That is to be sure that all was well, that their hemoglobin, their blood count was adequate, that their lungs were clear enough to go through surgery and usually we would be up at two or three o'clock at night, and he was a very aggressive person who probably had learned as I had that you couldn't waste your time sleeping.  And we would be at three o'clock and he gave me the opportunity to work his patients up for surgery and so we got to know each other very well, and when he heard that I was elected president, he called me and says, "I want to be there."  And I thought he had forgotten it, and the night of the inauguration he still was not there.  The service started 7:30, and we were all lined up in the vestibule ready to go in.  In stepped Dr. DeBakey from--coming in from Europe where he had been demonstrating his heart replacement, but he stepped in, stepped into the line of going to the stage, stayed over that night for the inauguration, got up the next morning and left at seven o'clock going back to Europe to continue his--.  At that time he was at least eighty-five years old.
Story_ID: 610587
Speaker 1: Tell me, what was your agenda or what did you hope to accomplish as president [of the National Medical Association]?
Speaker 2: Number one, I wanted, and did, start scientific sessions in all the areas of the country, so those who could not come to the national conventions could have the opportunity of having their education also enhanced by attending the scientific sessions.  To have women more involved.  There were not, in fact, I was the first president, probably the first on the board of directors to have them involved in the, the management of the organization to encourage more students, particular minority students, to go into medicine.  That was my agenda.  And so far three years, the year before, the year I was and the year post.  I spent three years stomping the country and sometimes out of the country letting them know that women can also do the job.  We might need someone to help us lift a heavy box, but once we got the box, we knew what to do with it.
Story_ID: 610588
Speaker 1: I wanna go back into the, when you started this story, you said you met a man who came to Hot Springs [Arkansas] and you did the workup on him to make sure that he could go into the springs.  Talk to me a little bit about the springs.
Speaker 2: Hot Springs.  Hot Springs has more than forty different health related springs, hot water, the mineral springs and it is a source--they say Columbus [Christopher Columbus] discovered it, but people come there to get hot baths, hot water baths that they sell medicinal, they come to drink the hot water that spring from the ground, from somewhere under the earth.  They also have the other mineral type springs where they drink the water and fill that--this and I know it does.  It's kept me.  I feel good and I, and part of that is because I think, I think I drink the hot water in Hot Springs, but that's, it's a health resort.  At one time it was famous for its horseback, its horse, horse racing and for gambling.  There's less open gambling now.  They still have the horse races one time per year, but it's a resort town.  You come to relax, to play or to make money.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So you really see the benefits of the minerals in the spring?
Speaker 2: Well, I hear what others said (laughter).  Yeah, I, it focus your thinking on health if no more.  If you come to get the bath, then you begin to focus on the other areas and what do I need to do to be more healthy, so it, it gives a mindset.  If it doesn't do it for the body, it does it for the mind and where the mind goes the body will follow.
Story_ID: 610589
Speaker 1: Your humanitarian efforts also are just so phenomenal, in 1986 the Haitian government invited you to come down there.  Talk to me about your trip there and who you took with you and why?
Speaker 2: You know that's been a little while ago so I, I'm not able to remember the details except that I was invited because they felt that they had a medical need that I could have them to get assistance from the United States and that we might also do some training for their physicians and healthcare personnel.  I asked a diverse group of physicians, attorneys, ministers, such that we could look at all situations, because I had at that time, knowing that I was to go, had done some research and reading and questioning and attempting to find out what was needed most, so I tried to get the people who could support me particular in the things that I did not have knowledge of, buildings and nutrition and all of the things that would go up making a healthy living.  A group of twelve of us, I believe, went, and stayed there for maybe two weeks.  We, we went all over Haiti to not only check to see what they were doing, but to let them know what things they could be doing, and the resources that we in the United States could give them to help them do the things better.  They had passed through a bad stage in which they felt mistreated by the United States.  We had taken all of their trees and they were having landslides and consequently it was difficult for them to have farms and they were feeling very bruised about the way that our government had interacted with their government, and, in addition to taking them resources for having them live better lives to actually try to benefit the relationship since they were so close to us in terms of distance that we would have a good relationship for each other.  I think it worked.  I think that we were, at least we were able to get in to the government and explain to them our situation.  They again--started talking and there was not the conflict that they had at that time previously and we were able to get them some material things like food and clothes and things that they very much needed at that time.
Story_ID: 610590
Speaker 1: I have kept the relationship with Haiti.  It was one of the very good relationships.  It was almost like my being married to them that I can't turn them loose and now with their crises, I have been very much involved to see that healthcare particular, would be given, that there would be enough who would go over to carry not just themselves, but medicines and the other support, bandages and other things that they need.  Fortunately, there have been many who have also, that I had no influence, to go over to render the healthcare.  We just had a meeting two nights ago in which we were overcrowded for what we thought we were gonna have a few people, but nurses and technicians and physicians have all volunteered their time as a result of our having been there knowing the situation, able to tell them what it was and to make some kind of arrangements with the Haitians that we know that are still there, to come over and to render service.
Speaker 2: Well I, I know that you went there to observe the medical and healthcare infrastructure, but now that that's--and you found that it was deplorable.
Speaker 1: It was deplorable.  But something had been done about it.  Over the years since then to the earthquake they had built hospitals, they had, had--for instance, the area in which I had the hospital [Vaudreuil, Haiti], we had not only had the hospital [Dr. Edith Irby Jones Clinic], we were delivering somewhere around thirty or forty babies a week and we were the only place in which they could be delivered other than at home within at least a hundred mile radius.  We fed the children one meal per day, a noontime meal, nutrition, we dug wells so that the children would stop drinking the same water that they were wading in and had having bodily eliminations.  Of course, this, this took a lot of people and not just from the United States, but from France, from Germany, from Canada they came in to give us a hand to see that there was improvement.  The clinic that we had with hospitalization, at first one had to come by way of horse driven carriage, but now we have what we call tap tap, which is their bus delivery, public delivery system, who brings patients there.  I don't know what, what they're doing now for care, but before the earthquake we had at least ten to twenty deliveries per day and people didn't have to be delivered in their home without the sanitation and so forth.  It's beneficial to both mother and child to see that they had a easy post-delivery course.  Haiti had grown.  It had, had--too bad the earthquake came and disrupted the growth, but they had, young people had gone to other countries and had come back with ideas and had started their own chain of stores and the last thing they asked me for at the, the medical center that I started, that they wanted some computers because they were gonna not only use 'em in the service, but they're gonna teach computer.  They teach the girls the sewing.  All of this is a result of what they call the medical center, but they say not only is the medical center there to take care of the ill, but to have those who are well not to get ill, and that was all a part of the development there.
Story_ID: 610591
Speaker 1: So how do you hope to, or what do you hope to see happen now that since the earthquake, everything is, is basically gone and they have to rebuild?
Speaker 2: But you got a whole lot of people helping them to rebuild.  We just had a meeting here in Houston [Texas] on Friday night in which more than a hundred people attended, to, willing to go over, willing to send their money over, or willing to do whatever is necessary, and they have no physical otherwise attachment, except this is a country as poor and is in need of care.  These, as I said, the nurses, the doctors, the businesspeople who are willing to give whatever they have to give to help Haiti to recover.
Speaker 1: What are some of the things you want to see new in Haiti happen?  What do you want to see happen in Haiti, as far as healthcare (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Healthcare is a major--healthcare is a major concern in Haiti.  In order, but that encompass many things.  That encompass water, they need a water system that's not contaminated.  They need food and they need to be taught how to do things with what they have.  They need people who do not talk down to them but talk with them.  They too have pride.  And we need an understanding, and I think they're getting that now, of people who are coming to help but not coming to help with me up here (gesture) and you down there, but coming to help and you give me what you have and I give you what I have and we'll make a better place.
Story_ID: 610592
Speaker 1: Are there any other humanitarian projects that you are working on or hope to work on in the near future?
Speaker 2: I don't know which ones I'm not working on (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me some of your favorites then.
Speaker 2: Well, of course, Haiti at this time is my major one in which I would say that is taking 99.9 percent of my energy efforts, finance and otherwise.  But I'm involved with poverty, poverty wherever it is, to be able to teach those who are in poverty how to get out of poverty, to supply their needs until such time as they can meet their needs, to children particular and particular black children.  Education to have them stay in school, to obtain higher degrees.  It just so happen you were telling me earlier that I seem to be doing a lot of things.  There are a lot of things that need to be done.  My undergraduate school, Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] that was responsible for me being able to master the courses adequately that I could get into medical school [University of Arkansas Medical School; University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas] and that I could maneuver thereafter is now in need of money.  They take students, they took me, they took me without any money, without any resource from where I could get money and so they allowed me to work my way through school.  They're still doing that, and I am, at this time, that is one of my major concerns.  They have asked me to spearhead a fundraising drive, but you can't fundraise unless you put something in there and say follow the leader, so I'm trying to make some money so I'll have some money to give to Knoxville College so others will give some money to Knoxville College to have young people reap the same kind of benefits that I reaped without adequate money, with only the ambition, a widowed mother [Mattie Buice Irby] who had another child at home to care for [Louis Irby] and to send to school, they took me and let me work my way through, though college.  And so my ambition is that I would at least be able to do it for many, that they might have the same opportunities that I have had and enjoy life the way that I am enjoying life.
Story_ID: 610593
Speaker 1: Dr. Jones [HistoryMaker Dr. Edith Irby Jones], if you had to send a message to the future generations, because this video's going to be available for many, many years, what message would you like to send to the future generation?  What would you like to say?
Speaker 2: The message I think I would send was don't let other people tell you it cannot be done.  If you want to do it, you can do it.  All you have to do, give all of your energies, have other people to also know that they can reach their goals.  Don't trip anybody getting to the space that you need to be.  If you would do what you need to do, there's absolutely nothing good off limit to you, you can do it.
Story_ID: 610594
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think we've talked about everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, there's a hospital named after you in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Wanna talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: I think they needed a name (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Where is it?
Speaker 2: --that wasn't difficult to--.  It is near the airport, the, what's the airport out there?  It's in the southeast area, come on, what's the--Hobby Airport [William P. Hobby Airport, Houston, Texas].  It's, it's near Hobby Airport.  It was initially one of the Memorial system hospitals [Memorial Hermann] and Riverside Hospital [Riverside General Hospital, Houston, Texas], which is predominately black, has expanded satellite hospitals, and this is a satellite hospital which they have.  But, in addition to caring for the sick, the ill, they also send them out with some type of training to do something that would keep them from being (unclear).  It is predominately for people who are mentally depressed, for people who have lost their ability to fight for the things they want, and so when they come there they get psychiatric if need, they get training for some kind of job assistant, medical, dental, opt- optician, any, they have several, in which they send them out better prepared to adjust to living than when they came in.  These are people who primarily have become depressed, feel that they cannot do it, and needs just a little bit of support and a know how and financial backing to be able to get started again.
Story_ID: 610595
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: In two words: I tried.  I know you can and we all are responsible for making a better world because we were allowed the privilege of coming and being in this world.  That, I, I don't know of any other legacy that I would have that you too can, no matter who you are, to whom you were born, where you were reared, or how much money you have.  All you need to do is want to, pursue it and accept it when you get it and share it with others.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well thank you very much for taking time to share your life story with us and with the future generations.
Speaker 2: Well thank you.  I'm all excited.  I hope I have done justice for you in trying to explain to you what I'm about, what people have done for me to have me be about and to encourage others to have the same joy that I now experience.  Thank you so much.
