Story_ID: 18263
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the Interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey is videographer.  And observing is Lydia Davis Edie, and can you help me with the other names?
Speaker 2: That's the only name.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is John H. Johnson, J-O-H-N, John, and H, of course, and Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And the "H" stands for?
Speaker 2: Harold.
Speaker 1: And can you give your date of birth?
Speaker 2: January the 19th, 1918.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November the 11th, 2004.
Speaker 1: Our location?
Speaker 2: The headquarters of Johnson Publishing Company.
Story_ID: 18264
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say it's black-eyed peas, cornbread and catfish.  And I'm not shamed to say that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is January because that's my birthday month.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Color.
Speaker 2: Color is red and blue.  I have two.
Speaker 1: That's the first time I've had someone have two.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you can take one out.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  It's no problem.  Red and blue is fine.  Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Chicago where I live is my favorite place for vacation.  I have a home in Palm Springs and people have often asked me what do I do when I'm in Palm Springs?  What's the most exciting thing I do?  And I say, "Well I make a call to Chicago."  I love Chicago.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: "Failure is a word I don't accept."
Story_ID: 18265
Speaker 1: I want to start with your growing up in Arkansas City.  And I was wondering if you could tell us what your earliest memory is?
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest memory in Arkansas City is that my mother told me to stay away from the white people because there was a lot of segregation and discrimination and mothers always urged their sons not to get in any kind of trouble.  And I guess that's one thing.  And the second thing is I went to a school which had only one room.  And they taught eight grades in, in one room.  So I guess those would be some of the things.  I had a very caring mother.  My father died when I was very young.  And I never felt the need for my father, although I cared about him because my mother made me think that whatever I needed, she could handle.
Speaker 1: Can you give your father's name and --
Speaker 2: Leroy, Leroy Johnson.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about his background?
Speaker 2: Well, he worked in the sawmill, so, you know, in Arkansas City in those days, people didn't have backgrounds.  They just--whatever they were doing at the time was their background.  So he worked in the sawmill.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother, can you give her name?
Speaker 2: Gertrude Johnson Williams.  Her maiden name was Jenkins.  And she never went beyond the third grade and she was one of the smartest women I've ever met.  She, she just had good, common sense.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk--was she was a talker much, sir?  Did she talk about her growing up at all?  Do you remember any stories?
Speaker 2: Well, she was not pleased with all the things she had to endure as she grew up.  And she really never talked about it.  You know, picking cotton and chopping cotton, and trying to go to school when she wasn't doing that.  So she, she was just determined to give me a better life than she had.  She talked about that.
Speaker 1: And what did--what would she tell you?
Speaker 2: Well, she told me that she wanted me to have a good education, which was essential to having a better life.  She knew that the schools there didn't go beyond the seventh grade.  And she was always trying to find a way to go to another city where I could go to a high school.
Story_ID: 18266
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, first?
Speaker 2: It was Arkansas City Colored School.
Speaker 1: And do you remember your teacher, anything about her?
Speaker 2: I remember a him.
Speaker 1: Oh, him, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And his name, strangely enough, was Johnson, Professor C. S. Johnson.  He was a graduate of Morehouse College.  And he, he not only taught classes, but he taught us how to shine our shoes and come with clean clothes and to respect our elders, in addition to whatever he taught in the books, from the books.
Speaker 1: And at that time, like in the time that you were there, those--in the years that you lived in Arkansas City, I know you talked, you know, you talk in your book about the flood that came through--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but are there--? Do you--?
Speaker 2: Floods came in 1927.  I remember it well.  As I say in my book, now, my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] and I--my mother was very religious.  We went to church every Sunday, all day Sunday, and sometimes during the week.  So we were returning from, from Sunday School, from school--I mean from church on this day in 1927.  And word came that the levee had broken a few miles away and that all the people should go to the levee in order to be safe.  And so we were on our way to the levee.  And we lived on the levee for six weeks.  I did get a lot of respect, as I say in the book, for the Red Cross because they did not discriminate.  They had, they had--the first time I had ever heard of a seaplane, but the seaplane brought in blankets and tent materials and food and water.  And the black and white people forgot about race and we all lived on the levee in harmony.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the street that you lived on in Arkansas City?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) There were no streets! Seriously, there were no streets. That--we knew where we lived, but there were no, there were no street names.  The only street names were in the, in the little downtown part we, we had downtown Arkansas City, which was called "the Front Street."  And there were no other streets.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the area where you lived?
Speaker 2: All I know is that we had an outhouse that I didn't like (laughter).  And we had lamps.  We had a small house.  It, it--you--you could drive through the whole town in ten minutes.  So there were no streets.
Speaker 1: And, sir, if you go back to that time, are there any like sights, smells or sounds that remind you of growing up there?  If you take yourself back?
Speaker 2: Well, I--my, my life was built around my mother who, who was--and I had a half sister, but she had grown up and left before I was born.  So, in fact, it was just the two of us [his father worked out of town much of the time].  And I, I never regretted it.  I didn't have any desire to have any sisters or brothers around.  I had friends.  And I guess it was not a happy time.  And so I have not concentrated on (chuckle) remembering what it was like, except our desire to leave.
Story_ID: 18267
Speaker 1: Do you remember when, when you knew that you were leaving?  Do you remember that and the whole anticipation of coming?  (Simultaneously) Yeah, I, I remember the day we left.  We left in July of 1933.  By then, I had a stepfather, James Williams.  And he did not want to come to Chicago.  He thought it was cold and that there were gangsters.  And we didn't know anybody, and he just wouldn't go.  And so, I remember that on the day we left, he, he still wouldn't go, but he was regretful, he cried, my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] cried, and I cried.  But we left.  And we came to Chicago of July of 1933.
Speaker 2: Do you remember coming, I mean 'cause you got off the 12th, 12th Street station?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we got off the 12th Street station, and we took a taxi to the home of the lady who had told my mother we could stay with her until she could get a job, and that was on 44th Street.
Speaker 2: And do you remember what you thought of the city at that point?  It was much different than anything you had seen, right?
Speaker 1: No, number one, I had never seen so many black people in one place.  I'd never seen that many car cause there weren't many cars in Arkansas City.  Black people didn't own any cars.  And so I, I was, you know, amazed by what I saw.  I was pleased with what I saw, but I was also amazed.
Speaker 2: And your stepsister was here at the time too, wasn't she?
Speaker 1: Yes, she was.  Beulah. Beulah, my, my--but it wasn't my stepsister.  It was my half sister.
Speaker 2: Half sister, I'm sorry, right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Half sister. Beulah Lewis.  And she, she--so we lived with this lady for a while, and then she found us a place.  And we all lived in the same building at 56-something Calumet.  And then after a while, we moved to 5412 King Drive, which then was South Parkway.  We had--it was a 4-bedroom apartment--a four-room apartment--shoot, what am I saying? Only one bedroom.  And--my mother rented out that bedroom for $5.00 a week.  The rent was $35.00 a month.  So she got $20.00 from renting out the room.  She and my stepfather slept in the dining room.  My sister slept, slept in, in an adjoining room.  I don't even know what they called it then.  And I slept on the couch.  I never had a bed of my own until I got married.
Story_ID: 18268
Speaker 1: In that time [1933], there were problems with jobs, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] lost her job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, first of all she had a job, a domestic job cause she was not edu--well educated.  And she got $3.00 a day plus carfare.  My stepfather [James Williams] later came, and he had a job sweeping streets, sweeping streets.  And they both lost their jobs.  And we went on welfare.  And when we first attempted to go on welfare, they told my mother and my stepfather that we didn't, we hadn't lived in Chicago long enough to qualify.  And my mother wrote a letter to Franklin Roosevelt, then president, telling him we'd just come from there and she had a son to raise and we, we would get work if we could, and could he please do something about our getting, qualifying for welfare. President Roosevelt was a very smart man.  He, he funneled letters back to the various states and counties and cities.  And somehow her letter got to the local people in Illinois, and they allowed us to go on welfare.  And as I say, my mother died believing that he really had answered her letter.  Well, I don't think he ever saw her letter, but the point is, she got results.  And, and, of course, she became a lifelong Democrat.
Speaker 1: 'Cause up to that point she had been a Republican (unclear)--
Speaker 2: She hadn't been anything (chuckle) cause we couldn't vote (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  Sir, now, when you, you talk about that time of being on welfare, you know, as an embarrassing time--
Speaker 2: It was an embarrassing time.  As a matter of fact--but they didn't give money then.  They gave food.  They had big trucks that would come in the community and drop off bags of rice and neck bones and whatever that they were making available.  And I would sit around with several young, young men, young boys and myself.  And the truck would stop in front of my house, and they said, "John, it's in front of your house."  I'd say, "Nah, that's not my house."  And then it would drop in one of the houses of another boy.  And he said, "That's not my house either."  We never would admit that we were on welfare, and we were getting food.  And I think that was a good thing cause we were determined to get off.
Story_ID: 18269
Speaker 1: Well, talk about the school you went to.  You went to--when you came here [Chicago, Illinois], you had gone to 8th grade (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'd gone [only] to the, to the 8th grade because there no, there was no high school there.  And when I came here [in 1933], of course, I, I enrolled at Wendell Phillips High School.  And it was--I had to walk there every day.  It was 39th Street, and we lived at 54th Street.  But there were no street cars or buses.  You either walked, you had own, your own car, or you had ten cents for a jitney.  And so I walked to school every day.
Speaker 1: And were you--this is a young boy.  What were you like at that point?  I mean, can you sort of describe--I mean were you--you were--were you quiet; were you--
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was friendly.  I made friends easily.  And I meet a lot of friends.  I, I don't think I was quiet.  As a matter of fact, I quickly became president of my class, editor, school paper, president, student council, mostly because I worked it, because when I first came here, kids poked fun at the fact that I had a strong Southern accent.  I was bow-legged.  I would say bow-legs were not sexy in those days.  When, when Michael Jordan came along, bow-legs were sexy, but they were not in my day.  And so I had to find some way--they said I was too short to play basketball.  I was thin to play football.  So I decided to do what I could do when I signed up for the high school paper, and I quickly became editor-in-chief.
Speaker 1: But what, what did you have dreams of doing at that time?  Did you have a sense of, you know, of things outside or the world outside your--why had you decided journalism, I guess is what I'm asking?
Speaker 2: I decided journalism because the high school paper was a way for me to get recognition.  And once I got into it, I, I fell in love with it.  Also, when I was in Arkansas City the Pullman Porters used to bring down copies of the Chicago Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier and so I was fascinated by seeing black people in print for the first time.  And I, I--it, it sort of stirred my desire to want to be in that field.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the paper was called 'The Phillipsite', right?
Speaker 2: The Phillipsite, it was called 'The Phillipsite' because what happened is that, it, it was--we all went to Phillips High School, and the paper was the Phillipsite.  And then one of the bad boys said he was tired of going to school, and he was going to burn it down.  So he burned it down one weekend.  And everybody thought they wouldn't have to go to school anymore, and then we were all transferred to the new school, which was DuSable [opened in 1935].  And they called it New Phillips for a while.  And so I--so from then on, I was determined to get some kind of recognition, which I could not get by playing basketball and football.  So I, I think I studied harder than they did.  I spent a lot of time.  I, I read this book on, "How to Win Friends and Influence People", by Dale Carnegie.  I practiced talking in front of the mirror to gain confidence and, and so by the time they were organizing the class, I was the only one who had enough feeling, enough ability or whatever you call it--desire for recognition to make a speech.  So I made a speech, and they elected me head of the class.  And then I was head of all the classes.  That was the junior class and the senior class and the student council.
Story_ID: 18270
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the class you were in [at DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and people who were also at the school at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the class, my class was the class of 1936.  But we also had some, well--people who became well known in the future.  Nat 'King' Cole [Nathaniel Adams Coles] was, was at the school at that time.  And Redd Foxx [John Elroy Sanford] was at the school.  Dorothy Donegan was there.  And they all went on to become very well known.  And as a matter of fact, Nat King Cole didn't know he could sing in those days.  He had a band.  He would play on, on Friday, every Friday night with a band, Nat King Cole and his Band.  And he, he wasn't singing.  He never knew how to sing.  I learned later, from him--cause we got to be good friends later, that he and his, he had--he moved to California, in Los Angeles, and he was, he had a trio, the Nat King Cole Trio.  And they would play at a bar, and one night this singer, whose not a member of their group, didn't show up.  And the people who were there were threatening not to stay and wanted their money back unless they had a singer.  So as he told it, the guy, the owner came around and said "One of you guys, you guys has to sing tonight or you can't get paid cause they're gonna--I'll have to give back all the money."  And he said, "What about you, Nat?"  And so Nat Cole sang, "Straighten Up and Fly Right", and, of course, the rest is history.
Speaker 1: So at the time, you're saying, at the time that he was in high school, he was just playing in this group?
Speaker 2: No, he, he led a band.
Speaker 1: He had a band, okay.
Speaker 2: He was always leading something.  He led a band, and then when he went out there, he led a trio.  But he didn't sing.
Speaker 1: Now, were there lots of groups in the school at that time, you know, performing and doing things?
Speaker 2: Well, there was, there was--yes, because they had a Captain [Walter] Dyett, who was a band leader.  And he had some area called the [DuSable High School] Hi-Jinks.  And anybody with talent was encouraged to participate.  I didn't have any musical talent, so I didn't, I didn't participate.
Story_ID: 18271
Speaker 1: You know the other question I have for you, because there's Wendell Phillips [High School] and there was DuSable High Schools?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're saying that Wendell Phillips burned down.  And then--
Speaker 2: All the students were transferred to--
Speaker 1: To DuSable.
Speaker 2: No, to a new school they called New Phillips for a while.  And then it was later changed, the name to [Jean Baptiste Point] DuSable.  And then Phillips was Phillips again.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, because there's always been this, you know, between the two schools at some point, you know, whether you went to DuSable or you went to Wendell Phillips.
Speaker 2: I went to both.
Speaker 1: Right.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: See, I went to Phillips, and then, as I said before, Phillips burned down [in 1935].  And DuSable was, was being built.  And we were all--all the people from Phillips, were transferred to DuSable.  And so we--but of our records and everything said "New Phillips" for a while.  But it, it--they, in the end, they were two separate schools.  DuSable is DuSable, and Phillips was Phillips.[it was later re-built and opened under its old name]
Story_ID: 18272
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about Annabelle Carey Prescott and her, you know, influence on you?
Speaker 2: Well, she was the Assistant Principal [of Wendell Phillips High School, Chicago].  We, we admired her.  But she didn't really have any influence on me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The lady who had influence on me was Mary Herrick, a white, white lady.  Ms. Herrick taught civics.  And she also taught us to, to be proud of our heritage.  She would sneak books about black history in to us.  She lived in Hyde Park, and she invited us to her home; first time I'd ever been to a white person's home.  She was the first white person I ever met that I didn't believe had any prejudice.  She, she really--if, if students didn't have, if some student didn't have any money and their shoes were bad, she'd try to give the money.  She was just a great lady.  All the people who've ever gone to DuSable [High School], if you ask them, who, what teacher do they remember, they all remember Mary Herrick.  That includes Harold Washington, and all the people who went to DuSable remembered Mary Herrick cause she, she cared about the students.  And we, we knew she cared about us.  And she helped us to understand the world.  The first time I ever went downtown, she took a group of us downtown.  She took us to the Art Institute.  She was just a great lady.
Speaker 1: Did you ever learn, sir, how she had come to, you know, teach there?  Did that ever--
Speaker 2: No, it never came up.
Speaker 1: It never came up, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: By the time I would have wanted to know, she was dead.  She passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what other things were, you know, influencing you then like, you know, you said at the beginning, you know, people made fun of you--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did--
Speaker 1: --and that very shortly after that, you know, you became, you know, junior class president and senior class president--
Speaker 2: Yeah, president of the student council and editor-in-chief of the, of the newspaper.
Speaker 1: But that means that you became popular.
Speaker 2: I did become popular.  If I hadn't become popular, I would have written something nasty about them (laughter).  So--well, I, I tried hard.  And, and, without bragging, I was better than they were because I was, I was trying harder.  You know, I was reading books and, and being able to speak without fear.  And so I, I think I earned their respect.
Speaker 1: Well, what was influencing you at that time?  I mean who besides Mary Herrick were you sort of looking up to, you know, observing, maybe in the community around you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there was anybody in the community really.
Speaker 1: Or who else, you know, that you read about or heard about?  Was there?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, I wanted to be a lawyer.  So I read a lot about Clarence Darrow (chuckle).  And there was a local guy named Euclid Taylor.  I read a lot about him.  And I guess I, of course, later, by the time I finished high school, I was working part time at an insurance company.  And I admired all those people.  But, and I, I--what happened is that I was a, I was an honor student.  And so, and so the Urban League gave a luncheon [in 1936] for all--at least one black from each high school who was an honor student.  And at this dinner, at this luncheon , they had a man named Harry H. Pace, who was president of the Supreme [Liberty] Life Insurance Company, which was the largest black business in the North at that time.  And Mr. Pace gave an inspiring speech, and when it was over, I rushed up to him and said, "Gee, we, we've all been inspired by what you, what you said today, Mr. Pace."  He said, "Yeah, I've heard a little bit about you.  I understand you'll be going to college soon, and what are you gonna do?"  I said, "Well, I, I don't know what I'm gonna do because I have a scholarship to the University of Chicago, but it's only a tuition scholarship.  And I just can't see letting my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] scrub floors in order for me to go to college."  He said, "Well, have you ever thought about going to school part time and working part time?"  I said, "No, I haven't thought about it cause I didn't know where I could work."  He said, "Well, maybe I can find a job for you."  He said--this was in June.  He said, "I'm going away for the summer, but if you come to see me on the first working day in September, I'll find a job for you.  And you can work at the company, Supreme Insurance Company and, and go to school at the same time."  And, and that's what I did.  I, I went to school from 8:00 to 12:00, and then I took the streetcar down to Supreme Life at 35th and King Drive.  And I worked until 5:00.  He really didn't have a job for me.  He just, he, he somehow felt that I had some talent.  He had been known for trying to recognize people with talent and to give them--an opportunity to do better.  So, so on the first day in September, I reported for duty.
Story_ID: 18273
Speaker 1: I just want to ask one thing about the school paper.  What articles were you writing?  What types of things were, you know, was the 'Phillipsite' writing?
Speaker 2: Well, the 'Phillipsite', you know, we didn't know anything about civil rights.  Or we didn't even think we had any rights at all.  And so we were just writing about each other, you know, writing about the football game, the basketball team.  We had the [DuSable High School] Hi-Jinx where the kids with talent, musical, we wrote about that.  And that was about it.  I mean there was no--nobody thought we were ever have a better life than we were having cause it was no reason to believe that.
Story_ID: 18274
Speaker 1: So, I want to, go back because that period with Harold Pace was an important one.
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: Harold Pace.  The period with him was an--
Speaker 2: Oh, you--Harry H. Pace.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, he, he was the beginning of my life.  It's a funny thing.  I just, I was just--there's a--the fraternity that we're in, and that put out a book, and I noticed they had Harry Pace.  He was born in 1894, and he died in 1943.  He died the year after I started Negro Digest.  I guess, if he had lived, I might not have pursued Negro Digest because I had a great opportunity at the insurance company.  And I had no way of knowing that the magazine was gonna be a success.  So, but he died--I started in November of '42. [1942] He died in July of '43.  Many of the top executives were a little bit envious of the attention that Mr. Pace gave me.  I had the feeling they weren't gonna advance me after he died.  So I put in my resignation, and devoted myself full time to Negro Digest.
Speaker 1: Now, I want,  want to, I want to just talk about him for a minute.  Can you talk--'cause he seems to be sort of a--I mean your description of him was sort of enigmatic, you know, creature in many way.  He was--can you describe him, his background and what--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he, he was a well-educated man.  He had taught Greek and something else at some school.  He graduated from Atlanta University.  He--he could have passed for white if he wanted to, but he was very devoted to the black experience and to advancing black causes.  He, at one time, he lived in Memphis, and he and W.E.B. DuBois put out a newspaper, a weekly newspaper, way back, many, many years ago.  And he later--he also lived in New York for a while, and he and W. C. Handy had a, Pace-Handy Music Company.  And Paul Robeson worked for him when he was not going to law school at Columbia.  So he, he had a--and when he was--and at one time, he was head of an insurance company in Atlanta and Walter White, who later became head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] , worked for him as an, as an Assistant.  And he--as a matter of fact, he recommended Walter White.  James Weldon Johnson, who was head of the NAACP in those days was looking for a black man who could pass for white who could go down South and investigate lynchings.  And Walter White looked white, so Mr. Pace recommended him.  And he was employed, and he wrote a book about lynchings.  So he, he was just a, a man of tremendous talent and concern for black progress.  And he also, during the time that he was head of the record company, he, he discovered Ethel Waters.  So he, he was just a guy who, who was interested in developing talent.
Story_ID: 18275
Speaker 1: And Supreme Life Insurance Company, can you also talk about its background, and, you know, and, and where it stood (unclear)--Supreme Life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Supreme Life.  What do you want to know?
Speaker 1: I just wanted to know about its background and what, you know, if you could just talk about the background and of the company and--
Speaker 2: Yes, well, what happened is that there was a--Mr. Pace went to New Jersey and started an insurance company in New Jersey [Northeastern Life Insurance Company].  His friend, Truman Gibson, Sr., started a company [Supreme Life and Casualty Company of Ohio] in Columbus, Ohio.  And a man named [Frank L.] Gillespie had started the Liberty Life Insurance Company in Chicago.  And then the--in 1929, they had the big crash, and these three companies were on the verge of going out of business.  And they somehow decided that if they could merge and be one company, they could make it.  And, and so they--it really was the first merger.  You know, we, we came into a period when there were a lot of mergers, but this was really the first merger in, in the country.  And these two companies merged, the, the Northeastern Life, Mr. Pace was had, and the Columbus Life, Mr. Gibson had, and the Liberty Life which was headed by Dr. Midian O. Bousfield.  And so they came together and called it the Supreme Liberty Life.
Speaker 1: And you talk about, a little bit about just black insurance companies and the importance, you know, of that, cause, do you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, it, it was--we were limited in what kind of businesses we could go into.  We, unfortunately, we had to go into the businesses that white people didn't want to--didn't want.  They didn't want to be in hair care, which means Madame [C. J.] Walker was able to be successful.  They didn't want to be in the funeral business and there're a lot of funeral homes everywhere where people are doing well.  And they didn't want to be in insurance, you know.  It's amazing that the major insurance companies would not write insurance on blacks.  And so they went into what they could, they could go into.  The, the--some of the best black or greatest black businessmen, or most successful ones, were in the insurance business.  You, you had the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company.  We had the Golden State [Mutual Life Insurance Co] in California.  So it, it was--we did what they would let us do.  So that's how Supreme Life came to be.
Speaker 1: You're saying the merger had happened what, in the early--
Speaker 2: Well, no, if I think about it a little bit, I can tell you.  It was, it was 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it happened in the De-, the year of the crash?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, Can you describe those, you know, people like Truman [K.] Gibson [Sr.]?  And then how did Earl Dickerson come, you know, how did he come into the fold [at Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company] then?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, Earl, Earl [Burrus] Dickerson was a, a young man who was a lawyer, who graduated from the University of Chicago Law School.  And he and Mr. Gillespie was trying to get together capital to start the Liberty Life Insurance Company.  Earl Dickerson was his lawyer, even though he hadn't graduated from law school.  And so that's how he became the General Counsel [of the insurance company]  And, of course, Mr. Gibson was head of his company in Columbus.  And then Mr. Pace was head of the company in, in New Jersey.  And Mr. Gibson became Chairman.  Mr. Pace became president, and Earl Dickerson became the General Counsel.  And he was a very smart man.  I, I have lived a long time.  I've been many parts of the world.  I have never met a man who was as smart as Earl Dickerson.  He was creative.  It was his idea to put these companies together.  And then I recall, when they got into trouble, and they said that they didn't have sufficient capital in their surplus, he came up with the idea that they could get the--'cause in those days, well, in these days too, if you took out an insurance policy, it had a certain cash value.  So he thought of the idea of getting the, the policyholders to loan the company its cash value.  And it just meant transferring the money from one place to another.  As a lawyer, you would know that (chuckle).  It's, it didn't go anywhere, it just--and so the net result is, it saved the company.  And so he, he was just a very, very smart man.
Story_ID: 18276
Speaker 1: I spent a lot of time with him [Earl B. Dickerson] because he, when he decided to run for Alderman of the Second Ward [Chicago] he asked Mr. [Harry H.] Pace, could he borrow me to write stories and, and to just generally be an Assistant.  And Mr. Pace said, okay, cause his office was right upstairs [at Supreme Liberty Life Insurance in Chicago].  And so, I, I worked with him in, in politics.  It, it taught me never to go into politics (laughter) because he was the most qualified, but in those days there was no television, you had to depend on the precinct captains.  And if you didn't have any precinct captains, you had no one to go out and, and, and, and--campaign for--on your behalf.  So what happened, Dickerson was always very independent.  I remember him saying that when he left Mississippi, he said, he was never gonna take orders from a white man again.  And he didn't.  And he, and, of course, he, he--what happened is, he wouldn't take directions from City Hall.  And they withdrew his precinct captains, and in the end, he had to go back to practicing law and being the general counsel in the insurance company. But he was a very brilliant man.  I, I, I learned a lot from, from working with him.  And so that--that's how he got connected with it.
Speaker 2: So how--what were some of the things you learned from him, cause you were driving him around too during that time, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Well, he, he had a group of people who were members of his staff.  I was a member of the staff.  And Judge Odas Nicholson who's now a judge, I think.  I haven't kept up with her enough, but she, she was a member of the staff.  And he had Judge William Sylvester White, who has since died, and was a member of the staff.  And there was a man named Joe Jefferson who was head of, head of a labor organization and was a member of the staff.  And we were all vying to be chief of staff (laughter).  So, so I told Mr. Dickerson, I said, "Well, you know, I'd be very happy to drive you around."  So I would drive him around.  And I was, I would drop him at home and leave.  So whoever talked to him last was chief of staff the next day.  And so I made a point of being the last one to see him every day.  So when I came to the office the next morning, I, I knew what he wanted 'cause he had told me.  So that's how I became chief of the staff.  And that's why I drove him around because I got to, to know him, know him better.
Story_ID: 18277
Speaker 1: Of course, Mr. [Harry H.] Pace, I drove Mr. Pace around too because he didn't want to--we'd go, he'd go to the bank everyday, and he didn't want to leave his car out for fear somebody might break in or something.  So I'd drive him and stay in the car.  And I learned a lot from talking to him each day.
Speaker 2: So what did you learn from Mr. Pace?  What was the difference of the two people in terms of what you learned?
Speaker 1: Well, Mr. [Earl B.] Dickerson taught me not to go into politics (laughter).  Mr. [Harry H.] Pace taught me how to be a, a good manager in business 'cause I remember one day, they  [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance] had an insurance man in, in Memphis who had admitted taking money and not returning it to the home office.  And he was a manager of the Memphis district, and threatened any of them to come down, and threatened to kill any of them who'd come down and try to make--take it, you know, and take the money from him.  So, and they were saying they were gonna do all kinds of things to him, put him in jail and what not.  And then, then finally I saw the man come to Chicago, this same man.  And they went into an office with the, with the, it was, the chief people, who was Mr. Pace, Mr. Dickerson, J.G. Ish, Jr., who was in part, the agency director, handled the agents.  They, they--and [Truman K] Gibson [Sr.], they were all grim.  And they went in the room, stayed a couple of hours and they came out, and they were laughing and hugging this guy and going on.  I said, "Gee, Mr. Pace, what happened?"  He said, "Well, number one, he's the best manager we have.  He brought the money with him.  He promised he'd never do it again.  And so we took him back."  He said, you know, "You got to learn to forgive and forget, if it's to your advantage."  So I learned that much.  So, and the man worked there until his retirement.  So he taught me not to hold grudges.  If, if what you want is given to you, you don't stay mad.
Speaker 2: You know what's interesting about the Supreme Life Insurance story is that these were all very accomplished, bright men, that you were able to, you know, experience as--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, they were all very smart men.  Mr., Mr. Dickerson, of course, was a graduate of the University of Illinois and the University of Chicago Law School.  Mr. Gibson had finished Atlanta Life, and then he went, later went to Harvard and got what would be an MBA now.  And Mr. Ish was a graduate of Yale, and I'm trying to think, who else.  They were all very well educated.  And Mr.--there was one other man we have mentioned, W. Ellis Stewart, who was the, what they called the Agency Director, who handled the insurance part of it, he had finished--he was the first black person to graduate in insurance from the University of Illinois.  So they were all just smart men.  And it, it was a, it was a learning experience.
Speaker 2: Well, there couldn't have been that many, any better learning experience in that way cause you had all that concentrated talent right there.
Speaker 1: And, and you were able to watch them make decision, and how they handled employees and it, it was a good thing.
Speaker 2: Now, did you see much conflict between them because they all, I mean, you know, you had Pace, he has his personality, and then, you know, Dickerson got involved politically and then Truman Gibson was off, at that point, oh, he hadn't done any boxing at the time--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, but, no, no, that's the son now.  That's the son.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's the--oh this was father.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Father. This was the father.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, this is the father.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) T.K. Gibson, Senior.
Speaker 2: Senior, okay.
Speaker 1: And Truman was always Truman Gibson, Jr.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  So this was this father, okay.
Speaker 1: Truman still--Truman's a lawyer still practicing now, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: He had two sons.  One died.  He had Harry Gibson, who got a law degree from the University of Illinois and Truman who got a degree from, from University of Chicago.  But--no, but, you know, I, I--that's another thing I learned about.  Oh, no, they, they would fuss and fight all the time, but they always made up because it was to their advantage to make up.  You know, you'd hear screaming and hollering going in, in the room (laughter), and they'd come out smiling and shaking hands.  So that, that was something to know, too--that if you, if you, if you disagree, and you can find common ground, then you don't stay mad.
Story_ID: 18278
Speaker 1: And during that time, you also, with the, Dickerson, you got to observe Dawson in a way--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Can you talk about him too, sir, 'cause he--
Speaker 2: Well, what, what happened is when, when [Earl B.] Dickerson--the mayor [of Chicago], the mayor at that time--I've forgotten what his name was, you had to submit any alderman--Dickerson was the aderman of the Second Ward, you had--if you wanted to make a speech on the [city] council floor, you had to pass it by the mayor or his secretary before you could make the speech.  And they kept, Dickerson kept saying, they should close down the policy wheels.  And they claimed they didn't know where the policy wheels were.  So Dickerson got a list of all the policy wheels and (laughter) published it in the Chicago Defender.  And so, naturally, they were a little unhappy about that, and they with--that's when they withdrew all of his precinct captains and turned them over to [William L.] Dawson.  Now, Dawson was really a Republican, but he was very strong with this mayor because--
Speaker 1: Kelly--was it Kelly?
Speaker 2: Kelly.  Kelly. Yeah, Edward Kelly.  Edward Kelly had been something with the Park District.  And I think when the Mayor was killed, Cermack, I think was his name, was killed, and Dawson was, was, cast a vote that allowed him [Kelly] to become mayor.  He was a member of the city council, and he cast the vote that allowed him to become Mayor.  So he always felt an obligation to Dawson.  So he turned all the precinct captains over to Dawson.  And for a brief moment, it appeared that Dawson and Dickerson were gonna get along (laughter).  We didn't, we didn't talk for a while, but that didn't last long--because Dawson was gonna run for Congress.  Dickerson wanted to run for Congress, and, of course, the mayor was gonna support Dawson.  And so it didn't last long.  I met with him for a while, but I did learn this about Dawson.  He was well-organized, a very smart man.  And he spent a lot of time with the constituents.  Dickerson, they, they called him the, what'd they call him, "the Silk Stocking" 'cause he was elegant, you know, well educated, didn't really, really like poor people, uneducated people.  He was not comfortable with uneducated--I don't mean he disliked them, but he was not comfortable with them.  And he didn't want to spend all the time that was necessary to cultivate these people.  Dawson had a, had a bad name, but he, he would come down on Saturday and prop his leg up, and anybody could, any of his constituents who walked off the street could see him.  You know, you could, you could, you'd be, you'd, you'd be trying for months trying to see Dickerson.  And in the end, he let you see John Johnson or Odus Nicholson.  So he, he just--he didn't care about people.  He cared about the welfare of people, but he didn't care about the individual people.  And that was the difference.  But I remember Dawson.  He, he was very smart.  He was very clever.  I remember he was very well liked by--oh, who was the president then?  I'm trying to think who was the president?
Speaker 1: Oh, was it Eisenhower?  Not Eisenhower--
Speaker 2: Out of Missouri.  What's his name?
Speaker 1: Not Eisenhower--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Truman.
Speaker 2: [President Harry S.] Truman, Truman.  You know, Truman was about to run for election, re-election.  And the word got out that, you know, he'd been in too long.  He was getting too old, and he was tired.  And he'd just been there too long, and so Dawson came up with a saying.  They were asking Dawson about it.  He said, well, he'd made a speech one day, I remember, I was at (unclear).  He said, "How long is too long, when a thing is good?  And the sisters said, "Never! Never!  If it's good, it's never too long". (Laughter).  They picked that up and they quit messing with Truman after that (laughter).  He said, it's never too--Dawson said, it's never too long if a thing is good.  How long is too long if a thing is good?  So he, he was a very smart guy.
Story_ID: 18279
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing, back to Pace, what--? Can you tell me, this whole thing fascinated me about him, when he moved to the suburbs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and why that was controversial.  And it wasn't--I was just trying to understand the times.  He moved--was he passing or wasn't he passing?
Speaker 2: No, he was passing at that time.
Speaker 1: At that time, and do you know why?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you why.  I know why.  He had two children.  Mr., Mr.--number one, if you saw, if Mr. [Harry H.] Pace walked in this room right now, you'd never think he was black.  He looked completely white.  And up until this incident, he identified completely with black people.  But what happened he had a daughter named Josephine [Pace] and a son named Harry [Pace], Jr., and they went to the University of Wisconsin where they were passing for white because they were white really.  And the boy fell in love with a white girl and the girl fell in love with a white boy.  And they wanted to marry, get married.  And the question came up of they had--they wanted to meet--the people wanted to meet the parents.  So Mr. Pace, who was a lawyer, opened up a law office downtown, and moved to the suburbs so that when the people came that, that Christmas, they saw him as a successful white lawyer with an office downtown in an exclusive section.  And his, his home was in some suburb, I can't even recall--
Speaker 1: Park Ridge.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it Forest Park or Park Ridge?  Okay, go on, that's okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think now.  I can't recall.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I thought it was Forest Park.
Speaker 2: But it was an exclusive, white--it was north, now, I don't know--it wasn't, it wasn't south.  It was north.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when they came, they saw him as a successful lawyer downtown cause he had an office downtown.  And they visited him, and he had a(unclear).  And, of course, if that hadn't happened, maybe I never would have had 'Negro Digest' because what happened is that he did not want to take anything, any black newspapers or magazines home with him.  So he gave me the job of reading newspapers and magazines and giving him a digest every Monday morning of what had happened over the weekend.  So when the people came in from time to time, he could discuss it with them intelligently.  So, and so, so that's--and so as a result of being, of having access to all these publications, I would often mention to friends in meetings and say, "Have you know of so and so, and--?" "No, no, how can I get that?  How can I get that?"  Well, I knew about Negro- (sic) Readers Digest.  So I thought, if all these people really want to know this information, maybe I could start a Negro Digest.  And that's how I really got the idea once I was working for him.  I--and then one day, they [employees at Harry Pace's company, Supreme Liberty Life Insurance] were trying to start a union, and they had knowledge that he had moved to the suburbs.  And they decided they were gonna follow him home (laughter) and, and march around his house.  And I had a girlfriend with the company who told me that.  So--she said, "Don't tell anybody.  I don't tell anybody." But, naturally, I told Mr. Pace.  I said, "Mr. Pace, there's some people--" --I never discussed what he was doing or anything-- "--who are planning to follow you home tonight.  You, you might want to take a different route."  He said, "Oh, thank you, Johnson, that's, that's, thanks." So we--he, he, instead of driving home, he drove to the elevated train, and took the train home.  And so they never really found out where he lived.  And that never came off.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And we never, we never discussed it.
Speaker 1: You never discussed it?
Speaker 2: Not with him, no.  He was passing.  I knew he was passing.  He knew I knew he was passing, but we never talked about it.  I mean he was good to me, so I was gonna be good to him.
Speaker 1: And that wasn't a discussion even amongst his partners, the people like Earl--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, no, no.  That was never discussed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If, if you knew him, you knew not to discuss that. Because he was in charge.  He could have found a way to get rid of them.  So nobody, nobody challenged it.  They all knew it.  As a matter of fact, his--one of the people who was on the board was a guy named Bibb, whose sister was married to Mr. Pace.  So everybody knew it, but it was not something they were going to discuss.
Speaker 1: And this--you're saying it was really because of his kids.
Speaker 2: I know it--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --in many ways--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I know it was because of his kids.
Speaker 1: ((Simultaneously) --because of his kids--Okay.
Speaker 2: I know it was because of his kids--'cause he--up until then, he was, everything black.  You know, he lived on the South Side.  He lived at--I'm trying to think where it--I, I used to drive him to his home.  He lived on East-- 60th Street.  So he, he was just all black until then.  So I know it was the kids.  It's a funny thing.  I, I never heard of those kids again.  You know, they, they sold their stock in the company and disappeared.  So they're somewhere living white, but he would have been--the boy would have been--and the girl, they both would have been better off being black.
Speaker 1: Well, that's often the case.  You know, there've been stories about that, that people actually did better, light-skinned blacks did better as black, right, than--
Speaker 2: --blacks, than when they were trying to be white.
Story_ID: 18280
Speaker 1: So let's start talk about the start of 'Negro Digest' and how, you know, how you went about doing that.  You said, you got the idea by basically doing those clippings [to keep his boss, Harry H. Pace, up to date with news in the black press].
Speaker 2: Yeah, people kept asking me, "How can I get it?"  So I thought maybe it would be a good idea.
Speaker 1: Because you would--it's really because you were around telling people what, what the things you learned?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: You became an information source.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's correct.  And so, so when I finally decided to, to, to try and put it out, nobody else thought it was a good idea but me (chuckle).  And I didn't have any money.  So the question was, what was the best way to get started?  And so I thought maybe--see you have to understand that there had never been a successful commercial black magazine before.  The only black magazines that were still going was  'The Crisis' with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and a magazine called 'Opportunity' of the Urban League.  They were the only two magazines that blacks had.  So I went to the bank thinking I could borrow--I wasn't trying to get much money because I had figured out I could--I needed $500.00 for, for postage.  And I, I discussed my idea with Mr. Pace, and he said I could use some names at the [Supreme Liberty Life] insurance company cause one of my many duties was to run what they called the Speedomat machine, which was really an addressing machine.  And, and they had, in the insurance business, you have people, you have what they industrial insurance where you collect every week, and then you have ordinary insurance where you pay every 6 months and once a year.  And I told him about it.  And he said, "Well, you know we've, we've got some good names," but he said, "don't, don't try to do, deal with the industrial 'cause those people don't have any money.  Let's send, you can send letters to the Ordinary policyholders.  And you can use the names.  As a matter of fact," he said, "you, you're working in that section anyway.  We'll supply you with the paper.  You just got to get the money for the, for the stamps.  So, and the other thing I learned from Mr. Pace was, I, I said, "Well, you know, I, I was thinking maybe I could--nobody knows me.  I could set up an editorial board, and would you be on the board?"  He said, "No, I wouldn't be on the board cause it's not a good idea."  I said, "Well, I'm thinking about Mrs. Bethune, Mrs. Mary McCleod Bethune and Walter White."  He said, "No.  Walter, Mrs. Bethune and I have lived a long time.  We've all made a great many enemies.  You can't live that long without making enemies.  And if you put, put it out with our names on it, there'll be people who won't think about what's in it.  They'll just say, I don't like Pace.  I don't like so and so.  I don't like so and so.  And they won't read it.  On the other hand, if you put out a good magazine, then you don't need anybody's name on it."  And so that taught me.  And he said, "And don't have any partners." (laughter).  And to this day, after 60 years, I have no partners.  We, we--it's a private corporation.  I, I've had people invest and all, but we, we've--I always remembered what Mr. Pace said, don't have partners, 'cause you have too many arguments.  You can't make your own decisions.
Story_ID: 18281
Speaker 1: Now, when, what did he [Johnson's boss and mentor, Harry H. Pace, head of the Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, based in Chicago] think of the idea of Negro Digest?  Did he--I mean I know he was supportive of it.
Speaker 2: He thought it was a good idea.  Well, he, he was the kind of guy, if he thought it was bad, he would have told me it was bad.  "You know, Mr. Johnson, I think that's a good idea.  I'm glad you thought of it."  He said, he said, you had an opportunity to find out that people really would like a publication that would allow them to know a lot of things in one, one sitting.  No, he, he was in favor of it.
Speaker 1: Now, you priced, that's what I was interested in, about how you went about pricing, you know, the subscription amount, and, you know, and then the return you got was pretty amazing.  But I want to go back.  What were you learning about the community, you know, by looking through all the clippings? [Johnson had been asked to read black newspapers and provide Mr. Pace with a summary.] What struck you--
Speaker 2: Well, I was learning about their successes.  You know, of course, you have to understand, now, the white newspapers didn't, didn't run anything about births--they didn't run anything about deaths--we're talking about black people now--unless they got in trouble.  And you would assume that we didn't get married cause there was nothing about weddings.  There was nothing really about black people that you could be proud of.  And so there was a need for, for that information.  And, and to put it all in one place.  It was a good thing.  Mr. Pace recognized it right away.  And, plus, he was a frustrated journalist himself.  I think he, he always wanted to be in journalism.
Story_ID: 18282
Speaker 1: Oh, I, I don't think I mentioned to you that he [Johnson's boss and mentor, Harry H. Pace, head of the Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, based in Chicago] really didn't have a job for me [when Johnson started work there in 1936 while attending college.] so he just had me sitting outside of his office running errands.  And then he said, "You know, we've been thinking about reviving the 'Supreme Life Guardian.'"  That was a newspaper for agents.  He said, "I plan to be the editor, and you can be my assistant."  So, and that's why I really dropped out of the University of Chicago because I had gone three years, and he said, "You know, this, this thing is really going well.  And I'd like you to take it over.  It's really a full-time job.  I don't want to interfere with your education or anything like that, but if, if you feel you can't do it., then I'll have to hire somebody else to come in and be in charge because it's a full-time job."  I said, "No, I, I was going to school to get a job.  And I got a job now."  So, so I took it.
Speaker 2: Well, what did you mother think of that move?  Was she--
Speaker 1: My mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams]--first of all, I believed in my mother and she believed in me.  All she asked--well, I'll come to that because I'll tell you how she happened to let me borrow $500.00 on her furniture.  But she believed in me.  And she had confidence in me.  And it turns out that I, I've never regretted it.  As a matter of fact, I--years later when, when Hannah [Holborn] Gray--Dr. Hannah Gray, the first female, was president of the university, she had heard about me and she invited me to come to campus and address some of the students, which I did.  And she gave me--she gave a dinner at her home, for my wife [Eunice Walker Johnson] and me, and she kept introducing me, "Mr. Johnson, John Johnson, who's an alumnus of the university."  And I said, "Dr. Gray, I did not graduate."  She said, "I know that.  You were here three years, right?"  I said, "Right."  She said, "Three years was enough for you.  We have some people who have been here five years and it's still not enough."  So, it's a funny thing.  And, and then, years later, about five years ago, I got an Honorary Degree from Harvard.  And she was then teaching at Harvard.  And she came up and she said, "I told you three years was enough for you." (laughter)  And it was for me.  I, I've never regretted it.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And I don't,--you know, what I learned from my mother and what I learned at Supreme Life, it's just good common sense.  And one thing my mother taught me, she said, "Son, always treat other people the way you want to be treated."  And, and there's no better advice you can have than that.
Story_ID: 18283
Speaker 1: So you--here you are, you--Pace [Johnson's boss and mentor, Harry H. Pace, head of the Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company] allows you to use this machine--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but you, and all you have to do is, he says, pay postage.
Speaker 2: Pay my postage.
Speaker 1: And they're gonna provide the paper.  But still you need money to pay the postage, right?  And you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, that's when I went to the bank to try to borrow 500 dollars and the guy saiy, "Well, Johnson, we, we don't loan any money to colored people."  So, but I, I, I learned enough not to antagonize somebody that I may need.  So I say, "Well, who in this town would loan money to colored people?"  He said, "There's only one place."  He said, "It's the Citizens Loan Corporation at 63rd and Cottage Grove."  So I said, "Do you know anybody out there?"  He say, "Yeah, I know so and so and so and so."  I said, "May I say you sent me?"  He said, "Yeah, you can say that."  He's feeling bad now from what, the way he treated me in the beginning and I didn't get mad or anything.  So I went out there and told the man who had sent me and all.  He said, "Yeah, we, we can loan you $500.  What kind of collateral do you have?"  Now, I didn't study collateral at the University of Chicago.  Hell, I didn't know what collateral was.  I said, "What is that?" (laughter)  He said, "You know, if you've got some furniture you've paid for or a car you've paid or a home you've paid for."  I said, "Well, I think I have some furniture I've paid for."  He said, "Well, if it's new and in good standing, and we, we can tell that from the time--from when you bought it."  I said "Okay."  So I went and told my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] about it.  And she said--and I told her I wanted her to sign so I could mortgage her furniture.  She said, "Son--" For the first time in her life, she hesitated.  The first time she ever didn't tell me right off, yeah.  She said, "I don't know, Son," said, "You know, I worked hard for this furniture.  And I, I just don't know."  She said, "Well, I'll have to consult the Lord."  I said, "Okay."  So, she--I called, I called her the next day or day, and I said, "Mother, did you hear from Lord yet?" (Laughter)  "No, I haven't heard from him yet." So--so I said, "Maybe I'd better come by and pray with you." (laughter).  So for two days, we prayed and cried together.  And then she said, "Okay, I've come this way--far with you, and you've done so--you've not disappoint me so far.  So I'm going all the way.  Give me the stuff.  I'll sign it." (chuckle)  And she signed it.  I got the  500 dollars.  So then the question is, what are you gonna say to people that will make them send you--I was only trying to get 2 dollars.  Send me 2 dollars. 'Cause all the other magazines had failed.  What would make them do it?  Well, I was trying to think, number one, black people wanted respect in those days.  See no, nobody was--called us "Mister."  You know, it was just "Boy" or "Uncle" or something.  And not only that, but we, we just didn't have anything that--I was gonna say, but I'm trying to remember it was.  Women couldn't try on hats in stores, couldn't try on shoes.  So we, we just needed somebody--we needed respect.  So I thought, why don't I try to write something that might--bring that out in people.  So I finally came up with the fact that, when I wrote the letter, I remember it as if it was yesterday, and it's been 60 years ago.  I said, "A good friend of yours told me about you.  They told me that you were well thought of in your community, that you liked to keep abreast of current events, and as a result of that recommendation, I am pleased to offer you a charter subscription to a new magazine coming out called 'Negro Digest.'  And if you send the money--and it's only  2 dollars.  And you--but you'll have to send it before a certain date."  If you're trying to get people to do things, you got to have a date.  Otherwise, they'll just throw it away somewhere.  So anyway, I got back--I think we mailed out about 20,000 letters.  And I got back 3,000 answers at 2 dollars each.  And with that  6,000 dollars, I got started.
Speaker 1: But, you know, that--were amazed at the response?  Or were you--I mean what were your (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know--see, I had no, (chuckle) no way of figuring out what would come back.  Now, I've learned later that that was a high percentage.  But, but I didn't know it, I didn't know the difference then.  I was very glad I got it.  But I didn't have any way of measuring who might answer.
Speaker 1: Did you, though, in your mind, have a sense of what you wanted to come back, you know, what was necessary?  What were you--you must have had some llike--
Speaker 2: Not really because I thought if that didn't work, I was gonna try something else (chuckle).  No, I was gonna try something else.  So I, I, I--I just believed that maybe they would answer.  You know, I, I find in life, you have to believe in things, you have to trust in things.  And I had come that far, so I thought I could make it.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother think of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was delighted.  She was delighted.  She said, "Oh, son, I'm so happy for you." She was more delighted when I built this building [headquarters of Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and put her--established an office for her in the building (laughter).  And she could come down here and call up all her friends who said the boy would never amount to anything.  She called up saying--so and so and so and so (laughter).  She said, "Remember that boy that you said would never amount to anything?"  She said, "Well, I just want you to know that I just drove down here in a chauffeur-driven Cadillac that he gave me, and I'm sitting in his--my office in his building." (chuckle)  They said, "Oh, Gertrude, quit bragging.  We know the boy made it." (laughter).  She said, "I just thought you ought to know."
Speaker 1: Did you ever tell her those two days of praying worked?
Speaker 2: No, we, we didn't talk about it after that.  No, she, she knew, she knew what she'd done.  And I thanked all--you know, over and over again.  And, and when I bought my first house, I--she had a--it was a three, three-flat building.  And I was on one floor and she was on one floor, and we rented out the other floor.  And then later on, I, I bought another building.  And then I bought her a building of her own.  So had a good--she lived to see 30 years of my success.
Speaker 1: Which is pretty amazing too when you think--.
Speaker 2: It's amazing, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you started early though, Mr. Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean you were 24.
Speaker 2: I was 24, yes, I was 24 years old.
Speaker 1: I mean you were a kid.
Speaker 2: Well, I was kid with a grown-up brain (laughter).
Story_ID: 18284
Speaker 1: I think, you know, if you--what's this thing?  I know Jesse Jackson [Sr.] said when he was running for president, people were saying, why are you running for president?  He said, they didn't know what I was running from.  He said, I was running from poverty, from, from outhouses, (laughter), from all kinds of things that I wanted to get away from.  So I was always running away from something, running from all those trucks that used to come around and try to deliver food when I was on welfare.  No, I think if you've known poverty, you don't want to go back to it, if you've known it the way I knew it.
Speaker 2: So you made that $6,000 [to start 'Negro Digest'], and then--but it's the whole thing.  You had to figure out how to put together an operation at that point, right, because--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, you learn as you go.  The first thing you have to have is confidence.  If you have confidence, you can make it.  You learn as you go, you know.  I, what,--all these things I hadn't done.  Like I, I'd never been in the cosmetic business.  I'd never been in the publishing business, but I learned.  I had to learn.  I'd never tried to sell anybody anything.  I'd never tried to sell anybody to send me some money from the bank.  If you give enough thought to it, you can, you can come up with it.
Story_ID: 18285
Speaker 1: I got married in '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In June of '41.
Speaker 2: So can you talk about--did, talk about--give your wife's name and talk about how you met her?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my wife's name is Eunice Walker Johnson.  And I met her at a dance at Bacon's Casino [49th and Wabash] in Chicago in 1940.  And she had come to the dance with somebody else, and I'd come to the dance with somebody else.  We took a liking to each other.  And I said "Well, can I take you home?"  She said, "No, you can't take me home.  I have go to home with the guy who brought me.  But here's my number.  If you call me tomorrow, you can take me out." (laughter)  So I called her and took her out.  And we got married about a year later.
Speaker 2: Now, she was from an established family, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, her father was a well-to-do doctor in Selma, Alabama.  And he, he had sent all of his kids to, to good schools.  She went to Talladega.  She had a sister who went to Spelman and she had two brothers who went to Morehouse .  And he's, he was, he was a very popular doctor in that town.  He said he delivered many children; said, people paid him off with money, goats, chickens (laughter).  And once they paid him off with a cow.  I said, "What did you do with the cow?"  He said, "I took him to the slaughter (laughter), and we ate steaks for weeks (laughter)."
Speaker 2: What did--attracted you to your wife, sir?
Speaker 1: Well, we, we seemed to have things in common.  Most of the girls I'd met before were, were just attractive.  But when I tried to talk to them about what I wanted to be, they were not interested.  And when I talked to her about what I wanted to be, she was interested.
Speaker 2: So did she know, was she on board with you starting 'Negro Digest', at the time you did it 'cause you're, that's, you know, a year into the marriage.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was on board.  Yeah, she was on board.  She, she was helping us fill, fill envelopes.  And I, I had an office upstairs in Mr. [Earl B.] Dickerson's office.  He had a law office upstairs that he never used.  So he told me, said, "You can use that as an address."  And so she would sit up there and, and answer the phones and--so she was there from the beginning.
Story_ID: 18286
Speaker 1: What would you say were the critical things in the building of Negro Digest?  Can you talk to, you know, just a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, just, just for the magazine to come out, was, in itself--see, there were no other magazines.  No place that people could find out anything.  And it, it was there.  You know, I had a lot of problems dealing with it.  You know, one of the problems was that at the end of the first year, I got a letter from War Production board saying cease and desist publishing because I didn't have a paper quota.  You had to have a--you were supposed to have a paper quota.  And the paper quotas were established in 1941.  Well, I didn't come out until '42 [1942], which means I had no paper quota.  So, so I had a date to go and, and make a plea to stay [in business].  And I went to see a, the lawyer for the Graphic Arts Association.  I didn't have a lawyer.  And I wanted--and he was supposed to look out for people who were in the publishing business.  So I wanted him to go with me.  He said, "No, I won't go with you.  The law says you, you can't do it, he said, so if, if I were you, I would just go down there and be--" He said, "Forgive me for saying it now, but I'm Jewish and I can say it.  If I were you, I'd just be a poor colored boy who didn't understand these laws, because if you had understood them, you would not have started the magazine.  And just throw yourself on the mercy of the court."  He said, "There's also one little clue here which says they could do it if they wanted to cause they said, if, if denial creates undue hardship, then you have a chance."  So I said, "Okay."  So I went down to Washington (D.C.) that day, and I think there was maybe 25 people who made pleas that day.  They came in with lawyers and CPA's and all kinds of sophisticated research.  And they were all turned down.  The only person who got anything that day was the "poor colored boy" (laughter), who didn't have a lawyer or any kind of sophisticated research or anything.  But I, I appealed to them, and there was one guy, I could, I'd sort of zeroed on him cause he had started his own business, he had known the hardship of getting started.  And he kept asking me good questions.  And when it was in, they voted me to have the paper quota.  And so I headed back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say the paper quota, basically, at that time, there weren't--there was limited paper.
Speaker 2: Yeah, limited paper.  See, the war, the war was going on then.  As a matter of fact, that was a part of my plea, that I had, had--I was, I had a lot of subscriptions for black soldiers overseas.  They were encouraged and uplifted.  And if they--if, if they stopped the magazine, they would taking something away from the black soldiers.  So, you know, and I, I find that if you really believe in something, and you're sincere, it can touch people.  You're a lawyer, you know, lawyers can touch people (laughter).  So I touched them that day, and they gave me the quota.  And they turned down everybody else, all these white people with sophisticated information and lawyers and all kinds of stuff, CPA's.
Speaker 1: Now, you were all of what--what age then?  Are you 25, 26, something like--
Speaker 2: I was--let me see, 24.  I was 24--I would have been 25 then, 25 then, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, but had you--I mean you hadn't done anything like that before.  You had spoken, right?
Speaker 2: No, but you, but you--if you, if you're talking from the heart, people will feel it from the heart, you know.  It's, you know, it was life or death for me.
Story_ID: 18287
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing that was important in, in 'Negro Digest' was the relationship with--was it Charles Levy? You know, that--
Speaker 2: With Charles Levy--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --distributors, yeah.  I, I--so what happened is that when--I, I got these letters back--so I knew what I could with the subscription copies but I had printed 2,000 more than I needed for the subscribers.  And so it was a question of trying to get on the newsstands.  And there was no black distributors, no black magazines.  And so I went over to see Mr. Charles--it was Charles Levy [Circulating] Company, but-- I think the uncle or somebody was running the company because young Charles Levy who inherited the company was overseas fighting.  And so, so I went to see him and--Joseph Levy what he were--And I, I--he, he said, "Johnson, we don't distribute no black publications."  I said, "Is it because you don't think they'll sell or is it because you prejudiced?"  He said, I'm Jewish.  I'm not prejudiced.  I don't believe in all that prejudice stuff.  It's because we don't think it'll sell." So I said, "In other words, if you were convinced it would sell, maybe you would distribute it?"  He said, "Of course, I would." I said, "Okay."  So, and I have the job of trying to convince him.  So I got some friends of mine at the insurance company [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company]--'cause I was still at the insurance company, to go around on the South Side--the South Side was small then.  You know, we weren't living all over the city.  It was just a small group, you know, like 47th Street, 53rd Street--and to ask for the new magazine, 'Negro Digest.'  And so I got about, I think about 10 or 15 friends.  So anyway, when they--so they started asking for it, and then naturally, they called Levy, and said, "What's this about this new Negro Digest?  People, several of my customers have been by."  He said, "Yeah, I, I've heard something about.  Maybe I'll know more tomorrow."  He called me, he said, "Johnson maybe I'll take a few of those books." (chuckle).  So I went over and gave him the books, and he distributed them.  And then he began to tell me how I could sell them.  He says, you know, "I'll put a sign on my truck."  And he said, "The Chicago Tribune has a section for black people--you oughta get a story in there, and, of course, you ought to send stories to the [Chicago] Defender."  He said, "We might have something here." And we did.
Speaker 1: And that proved very critical to your success, that--the distribution cause you needed distribution.
Speaker 2: Oh, I needed the distribution, and, of course, it--you know, I had the problem--it wasn't just here now.  It was all over the United States.  So, and most people, they just had never, they had never had any occasion to distribute any black publications and they didn't believe in it.
Speaker 1: But you used a combination of black and white distributors, right?  You had Charles Levy here but--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You have to understand.  Charles Levy and people like him controlled the newsstands.  They controlled the newsstands.  But what I did is that I--I--and, and I couldn't get them in a lot of white newsstands.  So I went to various cities and found school teachers, people who worked in the post office, who had time on their hands, to be distributors.  But they were like sub-distributors.  They couldn't distribute in the mainstream, you know.  They could, they could go to, to local news--local, well, liquor stores, bars, places like that.  But I still needed some mainstream people, which I eventually got.
Speaker 1: And during--Okay, so, with that, how long did it take you to--you were actually making money pretty quickly there, right, I mean almost immediately?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, almost immediately.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And then your sub-distributorships, you created a new system.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, what happened, as I said before, I was--dealt with it a little bit by saying, you know, I went to various cities where I couldn't get white distributors.  And I found blacks who had jobs, which gave them some, mostly it was people who worked at the post office at night or school teachers who had time after school to, to work for me.  So I would open bank accounts in my name.  They could--not my name, I mean Johnson Publishing, they could deposit money there, but they couldn't withdraw.  And the understanding was that they would sell the magazines, keep their commission, and put my money in the bank, which they could not withdraw.  And then I would call them every day to make sure they put the  money in the bank.  And for the most part, they did.  So, I, I set up my own system.  I had to.  Then I had something called "Paid in Advance", where we would get--see people would, would write in to be distributors.  And you really couldn't trust them cause I tried a little bit, and you'd, they'd, they'd order a few and pay for that and order a few more and pay for that.  And then they wouldn't pay.  So I, I--what I would do is I'd say well, we'll send you 5 copies to get started, and then you pay cash in advance for the rest of it.  So we, we--it was a system we called CIA, "cash in advance".
Story_ID: 18288
Speaker 1: The sales [of 'Negro Digest'] went up every, every week.  And I finally got to 50,000 around the country.  I couldn't seem to get over 50,000, so I was trying to think of what could I come up with that would make more people subscribe.  And so in, in those days, I think I'm, I think I'm thinking about nineteen forty--I don't know, anyway,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously, murmured) it's (unclear) forty--
Speaker 1: about, about--it was about a year after I got started.
Speaker 2: Forty-two. [1942]
Speaker 1: Black people were still--the war [World War Two] was still going on.  White people were telling us to not push for equality during the war, to not push for good schools during the war.  Just be quiet until the war is over.  And so I thought, I finally came back, what if I could come up with something that would say--ask these same white people if they were black, would they want their children to wait for a good education?  So I came up with some--'Negro', 'black' was not in use then.  It was Negro.  So I just--a series of articles called, "If I Were A Negro".  And I was trying to think, now what prominent white person can I get to, to do that?  And Eleanor Roosevelt was known to be fair-minded.  And so I sat down and wrote her a letter.  You see, you don't have to know people.  People think, (unclear) "Do you know--?" I didn't know anybody.  So I just sat down and wrote her a letter and asked her would she do it?  And she wrote back and said, she is too busy to do it right now.  But she didn't say she wouldn't do it.  So I wrote her--I, I waited 2 or 3 weeks and wrote again.  And she said she was still too busy.  And then I saw in the newspapers that she was in Chicago speaking at the Hilton, which was then called another name--Stevens, called Stevens.  And so I sent her a telegram.  And in those days, telegrams were delivered the same day.  And she later, in our old building, had lunch with us.  And she told me that on that day, she had just finished dictating her column called, "My Day".  And the secretary said, "Mrs. Roosevelt, what about that guy, Johnson?  We have some time on our hands.  You might want to do it, if it's something you want to do." So she sat down and she did it, and which she said, if, "If I were a Negro, I would have great bitterness".  And all the Northern papers picked that up.  But she said, "But I would also have great patience" and all the Southern newspapers picked that up.  So overnight, my circulation went way up, 50,000 up, 50,000 more, just from that one story alone.  And, of course, we got a lot of prominent white people to write.  And I paid them $15.00 each (laughter).  They all sent them back except Marshall Field.  He kept his 15 dollars (laughter), and he was richest of all, but he kept--I said, "Well, I guess that's how he got rich."  He kept his 15 dollars.  So that's how that, that's how that happened.
Story_ID: 18289
Speaker 1: Who was the team that you were working with at the time?  And where were you getting your, you know, articles from, and, you know, and then how were the decisions made about what, you know, the future (unclear) campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we got them from newspapers and magazines.  And we had a staff of people, but I was in charge then, and I'm in charge now (laughter).  And if you want to get in charge--if you have a law office, you'd better be in charge (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, but I'm asking a question about, how would you decided--I mean you were paying, basically, other--you were paying a fee to reprint?  Or how was, how did that work?
Speaker 2: Well, most of, most of the people let us do it for nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was free.  It was free.  Nobody really charged us.
Speaker 1: And they were just happy to get the--
Speaker 2: They wanted exposure, they wanted exposure so that was, that was never a problem.  That was never a problem.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell me what was happening with other black newspapers and other blacks in publishing and how they perceived you?  And I want to start (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, they, they did not perceive me well (laughter).  They, they were afraid of the competition.  The Chicago 'Defender' was always friendly.  John Sengstacke and I were always friendly.  But they didn't worry so much about 'Negro Digest.'  They worried about 'Jet,' which was coming out weekly the same as they were.  As a matter of fact, they--and here you need to know that, that all the people who--with the exception of the 'Defender', just about every other black newspaper was owned by light-skinned family members, whether you were talking Dujoie in New Orleans or the people in--
Speaker 1: The Murphys in Baltimore--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Murphys in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: As a matter of [Carl] Murphy was saying, "Who is that guy, Johnson?  We, we don't know his family.  Where did he come from?"  (Laughter)  In other words, "Where did this black guy come from?  This is a high-yellow thing."  (Laughter)  But anyway, yeah, they, as a matter of fact, the Murphys would, would take their newsboys on mystery trips on the days that Jet came out so that they couldn't distribute Jet.  (Laughter)  But in the end, we, we overcame it.  And there was the guy from Philadelphia, the Philadelphia Tribune--. But they finally named me publisher of the century and invited me--number one, they wouldn't let me join their association [the National Negro Publishers' Association, later the National Newspaper Publishers Association].  I joined once, and they kicked me out later.  In the meantime, it was the best thing that ever happened to me because then I joined the Magazine Publishers Association where I could learn something.  I couldn't learn anything from them cause I knew more than they did.  So anyway, I remember that just, just before I was to get the award [the Russwurm Award, in 1966] the guy [E. Washington Rhodes] who was head of the, the Philadelphia Tribune said, "Johnson, you know we don't like you, don't you?"  I said, "Yeah, I know that." (laughter)  He said, "Well, but you've earned this, and we want you to have it.  But we didn't like you before, and we don't like you now."  I said, "Fine, no problem.  I've been doing pretty, pretty good without (laughter) you all liking me.  (Laughter)  So, I'll keep on doing what I'm doing, and you can keep on doing what you're doing."  So, no, they, they were very antagonistic, but it didn't hurt us.  It didn't hurt us.
Speaker 1: So why do you think Sengstacke was different, you know, in his approach?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  Sengstacke was just a decent human being.  That's, that's the only way I can describe him.  He was a decent human being.  We, we got along well together.  I, (chuckle) I remember one thing.  I had a guy, D. Parke Gibson, who was the circulation manager.  And Sengstacke was pushing for circulation, and he was aware of what Jet was doing.  And I guess he thought he could learn what we were doing by employing this guy.  So after about two months, he called me up.  He said, "John, first of all I want to apologize for offering that guy a job.  And secondly, I want to know how, how did you handle him, 'cause he was no good with me."  I said, "John, all I can tell you is that I told him what to do every day he came to work.  And if I were you, I wouldn't ever steal anybody from me unless you steal me."  (laughter).  If you don't steal me, don't try to steal anybody else in circulation cause that's how I got started.  I knew the circulation.  I knew advertising.  I knew everything.  I had to know everything really.  But anyway, I don't know.  We, we were just friendly.  As a matter of fact, about two weeks before he died, he called me to say that he had just gotten out of the hospital and that he missed talking to me, and he liked to--for us to get together and have lunch.  He said--I said, fine.  And then after two weeks passed, and I didn't hear from him, and I called him, they said, oh, he passed away.  So, but, but we, we were friends.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I don't think you can identify people, but you're friendly with the people who are friendly with you.  Like, for example, in the magazine business the only person I was ever really friendly with was Earl Graves.  And I'm still friendly with Earl Graves.  But so, I, I don't know.  We just respected and liked each other.
Story_ID: 18290
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Johnson, let's talk about--well, people--I want to just go into some of the people like Ben Burns and is it Jay Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ben Burns worked for me.  Jay Jackson.  There were quite a few people.  I can't recall all the names, but, but we had quite a few people.
Speaker 1: And from the beginning, you had blacks and whites?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always had blacks and whites.  Well, in the beginning--
Speaker 1: And then they--and I'm just--
Speaker 2: Well, let me just say this to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir.
Speaker 2: In the beginning, the whites were the most qualified and the blacks learned from the whites.  For example, with, with advertising, when I started Ebony with advertising, I never will forget.  I didn't know anything about adver--about setting up an advertising thing.  So I, a friend of mine told me about a Jewish guy named Irwin [J.] Stein--(addressing interview observer) Were you here, Della, when Irwin Stein was here?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Un-un.
Speaker 2: No.  (Laughter).  Okay, I won't ask you anymore (laughter).  Anyway, Irving Stein, but I had an understanding with him that we wanted him to train a black person for his job.  And he said,"Fine.  I, I think that's the way it should be."  And so it was always with the understanding that whenever we had white people, black people were gonna get their jobs.  But I went for the most qualified people.  And sometimes the most qualified people were white.
Story_ID: 18291
Speaker 1: And you had an understanding it also seemed like, you know, with your stories about, you know, purchasing property and, you know, and being sort of turned, turned down originally.  And then being able to go and get, you know, a white lawyer to go, you know, and purchase, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, white people used us so we used them.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened is I wanted to--it was not just this building, but what I originally wanted to buy 1820 South Michigan.  It was the old Hursen Funeral Home.  They were moving out of the area because it was turning black.  But when I called up, he said, "Yes, it's for sale."  And then when I told him my name, my company was Johnson Publishing--Negro Digest Publishing Company-- he suddenly remembered that there was a previous commitment and a prior negotiation, so I, I, you know, I didn't call NAACP, Jesse Jackson wasn't here (laughter).  Plus, I didn't want to march around,  I wanted the property.  So the simplest thing to do was to call the white lawyer that we knew [Louis Wilson] and ask him would he buy it in trust.  So he told them that he was representing the Hearst Publishing Company out of New York and that they were thinking about opening an office in Chicago.  And they, they--and so he said, "Is it, is it still for sale?"  "Of course, it's for sale."  "And how much?"  He said, "$52,000."  That's the amount--I'd offered him more, but he still wouldn't take mine.  So he said--well, he said, "Well, you know, there's one problem.  They, they've got a colored boy whose gonna live on the place.  You do have places for people--?" I'd already told him that you could live on the place. "Yeah," he said.  "And, and for some reason, they want the boy to see the place 'cause they're busy.  They're not able to come out there, and he's got to live on the place.  And so is all right if I bring him along?"  They say, "Sure, bring the boy along."  So for the first time since I left Arkansas, I dressed in work clothes (laughter).  And I went down, and I saw the place.  And they kept saying, "Say, yeah, you'll know about this, this thing.  You'll know about that thing.  And if you're gonna stay on the place, you've got to know how to turn this on and that on."  I said, "Of course."  And so the deal went through.  And then years later, about a year later rather, I, I discovered some, some photographs and other things that had been there in the Hursen family.  And so I called up Mr. Hursen, and I said, "You know, I eventually bought your, your place.  And I discovered some photographs that I think you might want to have."  And I said, "So if you want to stop by, I can make them available to you."  So he stopped by, and he almost cried.  He said, "You know, I'm, I'm so embarrassed."  He said, "I've been looking for these things for years.  And I just want to thank you for being decent enough--'cause I was not decent with you.  And I apologize."  He said, "But I, I didn't know many black people.  And I'd heard that they just turned everything they owned into kitchenettes, and I didn't want this to be into kitchenettes because it had been in our family for years."  But he said, "You know, you've done much better than we ever dreamed we could do.  So I just want to thank you again for this and apologize for that, and--."  So that how that went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so then--then the city claimed they were gonna--they were planning to run the, some, some new thing through 18th Street.  And then they changed their minds.  And in the meantime, I was trying to, to look for a place.  And my wife [Eunice Walker Johnson] found this vacant lot where this place is now [820 South Michigan Avenue].  And here again [in 1959], they didn't want to sell to black people.  So I got the same white lawyer to go and buy it in trust again.  And so that's how we got it.
Speaker 1: Now, let's--track--you started out in Earl [B.] Dickerson's, you know, law office.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And then you moved to?
Speaker 2: 5619 South State Street.
Speaker 1: And that was a storefront?
Speaker 2: It was a storefront.  And I quickly outgrew the storefront.  So then I rented--I bought that place.  Then [1949] I rented a place near where Della used to live, 51--
Speaker 1: (Off-camera voice:) 5124--
Speaker 2: 5124 Calumet.  I rented it from the, The Good Shepard Church, who owned it.  And they had Horace Clayton--[Horace R.] Cayton and St. Clair Drake were working out of that building.  And so I, I decorated the place.  And when it came--at the end of the next year I was thinking that I would get credit for having decorated the place.  But instead, they upped the rent based on what, the improvements I made.  And so out of anger and disappointment, we began looking for a better place.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's when you found the place at 1825 South Michigan.  And you just sold--I think [daughter] Linda [Johnson Rice] was telling you had just sold that place not that long ago.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we sold--no, it was quite a, quite a long time, now.  I'd say two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Two or three years ago, we sold it.
Story_ID: 18292
Speaker 1: Just so we understand, so 'Negro Digest' is doing well, and then you're not happ--you're always looking for opportunities at that point?
Speaker 2: Always trying to do better, always trying to do better, always trying to do better.  Well, when I thought about 'Negro Digest' and I felt I needed to start a magazine like 'Ebony', I assumed, cause we were selling to a lot of soldiers, I figured we would--'Negro Digest' was a serious magazine.  I thought when, when the war [World War Two] was over and the soldiers came home, they wanted some kind of entertainment, you know.  They wanted to see cheesecake.  They wanted to see something that was uplifting.  So that's how we got the idea for starting 'Ebony.'  And my wife [Eunice Walker Johnson] thought of the name.  And the reason we named it 'Ebony' because when we--'Negro Digest', we never could get, what--what shall (unclear)--protection on the name cause the, the department in Washington says, and if, if the name is descriptive of the goods, you can't get protection. And so I had to think of something that meant black, but didn't say it.  And so we thought of 'Ebony.'  'Ebony' meant black, but it didn't say black.  And that's why we did 'Jet' [magazine], so we could get, get protection on both of, both names.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, at that point, become aware that that was important, you know, getting protection on the name?
Speaker 2: Because they had denied it before (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: See, I learned from experience.  No, I, I tried to get it on, on 'Negro Digest,' and they wouldn't give it to me.  So I thought if I start another magazine, I'm not going through that again.
Speaker 1: And so you were patterning it [Ebony] after 'Life' Magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: You wanted a black 'Life.'
Speaker 2: But, and the reason here again, I was checking newsstands all the time to see what was selling.  See, you know, my, my heart and soul was always in this business now.  So I, I was never satisfied.  I always wanted to do better.  So I found that the biggest selling magazine on the newsstands in the black community was 'Life.'  So I thought if black people were paying that much to--for white pictures, they would pay more for black pictures.  So that's how we happened to do that.
Speaker 1: So what--so--tell, talk about the decision about when to launch it because you're still in the war, right?  It's at the tail end--
Speaker 2: Well, I could not--yeah, but you have to understand this now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, I had a paper quota, but I couldn't get any paper quota for a new magazine because here again, it was all based on what happened in 1941.  So anyway, I was always wanting to do it, but I knew I couldn't do it until the war was over.  So the minute the war over, paper was available, so that's when, that's how we started.  See, the, the war was first over in Japan (sic, Europe).  And then it had to be over in, in Europe. (sic, Japan)  And so when the war was over, I was poised, and I had a printer and had ideas, a name for the magazine.  So the minute the war over, paper was available.
Speaker 1: So how did you decided, like that first cover of the magazine, it has the kids on the front, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it--
Speaker 1: How did you decide--
Speaker 2: If, if I were doing it over again, I wouldn't do that picture [a photograph of seven boys, six white and one black, accompanying a story about black kids from New York who were taken to spend the summer with white families in Vermont] (laughter).  But what happened was that it was unusual for white families to invite blacks to live in their homes.  And, and in those days, blacks were anxious to be integrated.  So that's why I did it.  But if I were doing again, I wouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Now, why would--why do you say that?  What would you have done?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I shouldn't say that.  I said, I guess I would still have to do it during that period, but since then, we've had Martin Luther King and we've had all kinds of advances, and, and I wouldn't--I would have been reluctant to do it.
Story_ID: 18293
Speaker 1: 'Ebony' resonated immediately with everyone, just the way 'Negro Digest' did, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was--I had a hard time with 'Ebony' because it was selling more and more copies, and the more copies it sold, the more I went in the hole because we didn't have any advertising.  And so we had to--the problem then is I had to sell advertising.  And I tried all kinds of people.  And they told me, "Well, white people could, white salesmen could sell it."  And white salesmen didn't sell it.  Then they told me, "Jewish people could sell it, white Jewish people could sell it."  And that didn't work.  So I finally said, you know,"This is my baby.  I'm gonna have to sell it myself."  And I sold it, then and now (chuckle).
Speaker 1: You know what's amazing about that story, this is a time where there're not, you know, black advertising agencies.  And there's no really perception of a black market, right, at that time--outside, in the larger--
Speaker 2: But, well, but I convinced them there was.
Speaker 1: Right.  So can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, what happened is that I had to think in terms of who could benefit--how the companies that blacks were using the most products from.  That's--my first ad was Zenith [Radio Company].  And I thought of Zenith because my mother owned a Zenith radio, and all the people we knew owned  Zenith radios.  So then I wrote a letter to Commander Eugene [F.] McDonald [Jr.] to see if I could come in and talk to him about advertising to black consumers.  And he wrote back and said he didn't handle advertising.  So I said, well, he must handle policy.  So I wrote back and said, What about talking to me about your policy toward advertising to the black community.  And he was a feisty guy, but he was a nice guy.  So he wrote back, he said, I can't help but believe--he said, I'll see you.  But I can't help but believe that you still want to talk to me about advertising.  And if you talk to me about advertising, I will ask you to leave my office.  So then I have an appointment to talk about, as an appointment to see him, and I can't talk about what I want to talk about.  So the most obvious thing to do is to try to find out what can you talk to him about, until you can get a chance to say what you want to say.  So I, I knew he--I looked him up in "Who's Who".  I knew he had been to, to the North Pole.  I knew that he knew--although he didn't go with him, I knew he knew the guy--[Robert] Peary, who, who had been there.  And then there was black guy who went there, Matthew Henson.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I, I had a New York office.  And my New York office looked up Matthew, Matthew Henson, who was living in retirement in New York.  We found out that he had written a book about the, written a book about his experiences.  And he had mentioned Commander, Commander McDonald.  So I also could move pretty fast then.  So I did, quickly did a story on Matthew Henson [for Ebony, July 1947].  So when I went to see him, I had something to talk about, without talking about advertising.  So--but he wanted to talk to me--I found that people--get nervous, too, he wanted to figure out, what am I gonna talk to this guy about?  So he had some snowshoes in his office--in August.  So when I walked in, he said, "Young man, you see those snowshoes there?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "They were given to me by Matthew Henson.  He's, he, he, he's black, but he's better than any two white men I know.  What do you think about that?"  I said, "I think that's great, Commander".  He said, "You know, I understand that Matt wrote some kind of book.  Have you heard about it?"  I said, "Oh, I just happened to have an autographed copy to you, Commander."  And he said,  "Yeah, yeah, that's nice."  He said, "Well, if you had any kind of magazine about black people, it seems to me, you would have done a story on Matt."  I said, "It just happens that we have, Commander. (laughter)  So he took the magazine, he thumbed through.  He said, Well, yeah, I don't see any reason why we shouldn't advertise in this magazine."  I said, "I don't see any reason why you shouldn't either, Commander."  So he buzzed a guy and then a guy name, [William] Mackey [advertising director], who came in--he was on crutches.  And he bowed at the waist.  He said, "Yes, Commander."  The commander was head of everything at Zenith.  He said, "Mackey, why aren't we advertising in Ebony (chuckle)?"  He said, "We're considering, Commander."  He didn't tell the Commander how many months he had been considering (laughter).  He said, "Well, I think we should be in it."  He said, "Of course, Commander."  So then the Commander said, "What are you trying to do with this magazine?"  I said, "Well, I'm trying to emphasize the positive aspects of race relations, to highlight black achievement and--" He said, "Well, those are good purposes."  He said, "Well, are you, are you doing well?"  I said, "No, I'm not doing well.  I can't sell any advertising."  He said, "Well, you know, you, you've--I'm impressed with the way you've talked to me and the way you've produced the things that were of interest to me.  He said, I'm gonna call a few of my friends.  And I, you, you--and I'm gonna ask them to see you.  And when you, when you see them, you make a good story just like you're making to me." So he called the president of Armour Foods, Swift Foods, the Olson Watch Company, about 5 or 6 people. Quaker Oats.  And they all agreed to see me, and I sold them all.  And that's how it got started.
Story_ID: 18294
Speaker 1: I mean what is incredible about that story is how prepared you were going in, you know, that you had done all these, you know, things that you had gone and done, the article that you had, and gotten an autographed copy, that you had done your research.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what selling is about.  Selling is convincing the person that you're trying to sell that it's to their advantage to, to buy it.  And I do that now.  I, I call myself, "One-Trip Johnson".  I don't make but one trip to sell somebody.  But then I spend weeks, sometimes months, preparing for it.  A good example is when I started with the [Ebony Fashion Fair] cosmetics.  We were trying to sell a, a store in Bermuda.  And I spent time--the man, I--one of my vice presidents who'd been trying to sell--Trimingham's, that's the name of the store.  It's the biggest store in, in Bermuda.  So, but all the people in Bermuda, all the government people in Bermuda were black.  But he didn't want a black line.  So I had gotten some letters from people from Bermuda who had bought the cosmetics in New York.  And so they kept writing asking, "When are you gonna come to Bermuda?"  So I had letters from about ten people.  So when I went in to see this guy, I took all this time getting them together.  So, but when I went in to see him, he--Mr. [DeForest] Trimingham, he, he just kept saying, "No, no, no."  I used all the ability I had to sell.  And he kept saying, "No, no, no."  So then I--I always have a fall-back position, that if all, if all the initial things fail, then I got to have something to fall back on.  So I had made a point of going--look, I had these letters in my briefcase.  But we had also gone next door to a co-, a department store called Smith's.  And Smith's had agreed to take us.  So I told Mr. Trimingham, I said, "Mr. Trimingham, I, I only have two hours on this island.  I've got to make a plane back to New York and back to Chicago.  And, and I can't leave this island unless I sell somebody to take this cosmetic line.  I should be with you, and you should be with me.  But if you won't be with me, I've taken the liberty of going next door to Smith's, your competitor, and he will take us."  I said, "But before we get to that point, I wonder if any of these people who've been writing to us about the need for the cosmetics, if any, if you know any of these people.  Are they customers of yours?"  He said, "Yeah, I know this one, I know that one.  I know the other one, and on and on."  So I said, "Well, Mr. Triningham, if you force me to go to Smith's, these people desperately need my product 'cause it's for black women, and what you have is for white women, do you--they'll have to go to Smith's.  And while they're there, they might see some other things they like, and you might never see them again.  So I'm gonna ask you one more time.  Do you want your customers to go to Smith's?"  He said, "Hell, no, I don't want my customers in Smiths.  Let's go downstairs and find some space."  So we went downstairs, and we found some space.  So I think it's just a matter of figuring out what will move people.  And that's, I spend my whole life on that.  Like I--we're in Neiman Marcus in, in Dallas [Texas], which is--we needed Neiman Marcus in order to sell Southern places because Neiman Marcus is well respected.  So Mr. [Stanley] Marcus had written a book called  'Minding the Store.'  So I read about him being in Chicago.  And I crashed the luncheon, and it just happened that I, once I got in, I knew the lady who was, who was giving it from the [Chicago] Daily News.  And I told her, "I'm anxious to get Mr. Marcus to sign my, sign my copy of his book."  She said, "Of course, Stanley will sign it, you know, I'll sit you next to him."  So she sat me next to him.  And I told him--he said, "I understand that you, she told me that you're the publisher of Ebony."  He said, "Well, you need to know that I, I speak to black people in, in Dallas from time to time.  And I've, I've quoted Ebony on several times, on several occasions."  Well, I'm not gonna try to sell him on, on the cosmetics on that day.  It's not a good thing.  I said, "You know, I'm thinking about--my wife and I are thinking about going to Dallas in the next week or so.  If we came down there, could we take, get a tour of Neiman Marcus?  I've heard so much about it".  He said, "Of course, I'll give you a tour myself."  So, so we, we went down there.  And in the meantime, I went early--the appointment was something like 10:00 o'clock.  And I went at 9:00 so I can look around.  And so when he finally came down, I said, you know, Mr. Marcus, I've, I've enjoyed looking around the store so far.  But I notice you don't have any black customers."  He said, "Oh, yeah, I, I'd like to get some."
Speaker 1: (END OF TAPE. Story continued on following tape )
Story_ID: 18295
Speaker 1: (Story continued from previous tape) My wife and I were visiting Neiman Marcus' store [in 1974].  He [owner Stanley Marcus] came down to greet us, and I said, Mr. Marcus, I, I'm admiring all the things I see.  But I notice you don't have any black customers.  He said, No, I don't have any.  I'd like to get some.  And I said, Well, I think I can tell you how to get some.  If we give you--if you would take our cosmetic line, and we'll give it to you exclusively for 5 years, black customers will have to come here to get the line.  And they need the line.  And while they're here, they will realize that Neiman Marcus does have things that they can afford.  And you can get some new customers.  He said, Yeah, that's a good idea.  I'll, I'll do that.  So I said--he said, But let's, let's finish the tour, but I, we can do that.  So we, we go on the tour, and then we get to the top floor where he is, I see he has some, some sales people sitting around.  And they have some Chinese garments that I'd read about that he was having a hard time selling.  And they were selling for $5,000.  And so I knew right away he's gonna sell me one of those garments.  He's gonna try to sell me one, and I have to buy one, if I want to sell him.  So he, he--and my, he, he was talking and he gets me to selling me this, selling me on the gowns.  And he said, You know this would--this was in November--he said, You know, this would be a good thing for your wife for Christmas.  And he walked somewhere else, and my wife said, "I don't want one of those things for Christmas" (chuckle).  I said, You don't have to get one for Christmas.  But I knew I had to buy it.  So I raised a few objections like I didn't have a credit card.  And he went away somewhere and came back in about 5 minutes with a credit card.  And I said, Fine.  He said, Well, I'm glad you came, and have your, have your man see our man downstairs.  And we'll put it in the store.  So he bought--I bought a $5,000 gown and he bought $20,000 worth of cosmetics.  So I thought it was a good deal (chuckle).  But the point I'm trying to make is that if you're selling, and I'm selling all the time, you got to think about the other person and what they want--not what you want.  I never talk about what I want.  I talk about what they want.  And I, I have never missed a case.
Speaker 2: And that's what I want to ask you.  Who mentored you on selling?  I mean I know you said you read the books, you know, Dale Carnegie's book.  But Pace-- was--he wasn't really a salesman?
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't a salesman.  No, he wasn't a salesman.
Speaker 2: So I mean where did this natural (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, it's, it, it came from I think intelligence (chuckle), realizing that you want to reach a goal and what it takes to get to that goal.  You know you got to sell people.  You know, like we had John Moutoussany, a black architect who designed this building [Johnson Publishing Company headquaters, at 820 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago].  And we were joking, and he was saying, You know, I, I didn't want to be a salesman, but I had to salesman in order to be an architect.  He said, You know, I took architecture thinking I would, I'd just draw some things and go to people.  He said, But first of all I got to convince people to, to let me build their homes.  And then I have to convince them to let me do it my way.  So it's selling.  So life is full of selling.  Lawyers have to sell (laughter).  You all got to win cases and convince people that their side is the right side (laughter).
Story_ID: 18296
Speaker 1: I want to go back to the original days of Ebony and your, you know, you did have a competitor.  People don't know about that competitor.  That was "Our World".
Speaker 2: I know about it.  I, I bought them out at a, at a--what's the, what's the saying--
Speaker 1: Fire sale.
Speaker 2: Fire sale, fire sale, yeah, I did.  I paid $14,000 and I got all their equipment.  And I also got one of the best photographers that I ever had, Moneta Sleet [Jr.].  Well, here again, John P. Davis was the owner of 'Our World.'  John P. Davis was a graduate of Harvard Law School and Bates College, and, you know.  And, and he, he was always trying to impress the people he was trying to sell about his own--education.  Like he'd say, you know, he'd go in and say, "I see you're a graduate of Harvard.  I was Harvard and such and such," you know.  White people didn't want to say that.  They didn't want black people to be their equal.  So I just went in as a poor--black man who has a good product that you should buy.  And it outsold him.  That's really what it was in the end.  And I, I didn't think he gave it a lot of thought.  See, in business, you have to give it a lot of thought.  I remember the last issue that 'Our World' put out was called, "Fifty-Eight Ways to,to Bake a Fruit Cake".  Well, nobody wants to know 58 ways to make a fruit cake.  They want to know about the one best way to make a fruit cake.  So anyway, I just outsold him, that's all.
Speaker 1: Now, did he--when did his publication start and when--I mean in conjunction with Ebony?  Were you first or was he first?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know who was first.  I just knew I was last (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing in the stories with, you know, Zenith and the other advertisers that came, how did you keep them?  See, I mean it's one thing to get someone.  How did you keep them?
Speaker 2: By, by, by doing what we promised.  By using merchandising ways of, of helping them to sell the product.  See, you can't be a phony.  You've got to be for real.  And, so--well, we kept Zenith so well that they asked me to serve on the board.  And I served on the board for a number of years until I decided to resign.
Story_ID: 18297
Speaker 1: I mean first of all, you gathered quite a staff.  People start, you know, either you were taking them from other publications (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, but you, you--I, I had to have the best people.  Like I found her (pointing, refering to Johnson VP Lydia Davis Eady who is observing the interview) with her father and mother, and they were on a tour (laughter).  And I was showing them that office, and I just happened to ask her, you know, "What are you doing?"  She said what she was doing.  And she had graduated from Har--from Howard--what is it?
Speaker 1: (Lydia Davis Eady:) Magna cum laude.
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: (Lydia Davis Eady:) Magna cum laude.
Speaker 2: Magna cum laude.  So I asked her father and mother if she could come to work for us?  And she said she wanted to come.  So she's here.  I don't know how many--that's been a lot of year ago.
Speaker 1: (Lydia Davis Eady:) November 16th, it'll be 23 years.
Speaker 2: Twenty-three years ago.  So we looked to get the best people.  That was my job, to find the best people I could find.
Speaker 1: But you had said also at some point, not, not during this interview, but in your book, that there was a point where you were experiencing--you were losing people too.  And you--because the thing about Johnson--
Speaker 2: No, you've got to understand what I said, now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't say--I said, I didn't want to lose people.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I said, I made, I made--I'll tell you what I said.  I remember exactly what I said.  I said, I made a list of the people I needed to be successful in this company.  And I put them on a cardboard.  And everyday when I'd come by to work, I'd say, what can I do today that will make these people so satisfied with me, that they would not leave?  Now, that, was that what you're talking about?  That's what, that's what I said.  I didn't lose them (chuckle).  I didn't want to lose them.  And then I, I just found ways to do it.  I mean you're--if you want to survive and you're a sales person, and I consider--you know, people ask me, "What do you consider yourself as most of all?"  I'd say a salesman cause you've got to sell people on doing things, you know.  You know, everything is selling.  Parents have to sell their kids on being obedient.  Husbands and wives have to sell each other on being in love.  Everything is selling.  And so I consider myself a salesman.  And I, I have not found an account that I could not sell.
Speaker 1: And your staff that you assembled was pretty amazing too, you know, because --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well, we got, we got the best ones.
Speaker 1: Herb [Herbert] Temple and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Herb Temple, he's still here, yeah.  Yeah, and Lerone Bennett [Jr.]  is is still here.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Doris Saunders was--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Doris Saunders.
Speaker 2: Doris Saunders was here a long time until she decided to move South.  No, we, we've had a lot of good people.  We had the best people over, over the years.  I, I was telling some people about--when I wanted, when we started 'Jet' [in 1951], I wanted to have a society section.  And the best society woman was Gerri Major out of New York.  And I, I tried to offer Gerri the job, and Gerri said, "Okay"  And then she went to tell her boss Dr. C. B. [Clelan Bethan] Powell, who was head of the 'Amsterdam News.'  And he cried, and she cried, and she called me up, and said, "Mr. Johnson, I just can't take the job.  I, I couldn't stand to see him cry, so I gave in and told him I would not take this job."  I said, Okay.  So I left it at that.  So then about a year later, Princess Elizabeth--what do they call, she coronated--what do they call it, coronation.  What is it?  Coronation when, for the Queen.
Speaker 1: Coronation.
Speaker 2: Coronation.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Coronation, yeah.  Princess Elizabeth, the one who's Queen [Elizabeth II] now.  This was, I don't know, whatever year that was [1953].  So anyway, I applied for credentials in her name without telling her (chuckle).  I got, I got her a seat on the boat, first class, that was going over 'cause planes weren't going that much then, mostly boats.  And then I called her up, I said, "Gerri, I, I know you can't leave Dr. Powell.  But I have something I just feel I have to run by you before I give it to somebody else.  I've been able to get credentials for Queen Elizabeth's coronation.  I've been able to get first-class accommodations on the boat," whatever the name of the boat was.  "And my offer to you still stands, but I know you can't leave Dr. Powell, but I just could not select nobody else without offering, running it by you 'cause you're the best person for the job."  So it was long silence.  She said, "Oh, Mr. Johnson, you know I can't turn this down, don't you?" (laughter).  I said, "I don't know. (chuckle) I hope you won't turn it down."  She said, "I can't turn it down.  You know I can't turn it down."  I said, "Well, how're you gonna handle Dr. Powell?"  She said, "I'm gonna write him a letter and leave town." (laughter).  And she wrote him a letter and left town.  And she, she worked with us until she died.  And she really turned 'Jet' around.  So, but here I had to give her something she wanted more than she wanted to please Dr. Powell.  And I could, I could spend days you about all the things I did in order to get things over.
Story_ID: 18298
Speaker 1: So now, you know, let's just look at the 1950s.  And that's--and if you could talk about the things that you thought more important that occurred during that time for your business, you know, that were sort of, you know, significant or seminal things.  And then you were building your staff.  The country was changing during that time.  But you were concentrating on your business.
Speaker 2: Well, I never worried about the country, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because as my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] used to say, "that's white folks business" (chuckle).  I worried about me, and what I could do to succeed.  And so I was always trying to succeed always.  I was always looking for opportunity, always thinking of ways to do better.  And that's, that's why I'm very proud to have my, my daughter [Linda Johnson Rice] as the new CEO because she, she has a lot of that drive.
Speaker 1: And it's a continuance of the legacy too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not much of that has happened in our community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that.  And so that's why I feel so proud that--I feel very confident that she can handle.  She's handling it now.
Speaker 1: So, now when--you also, though, acquired--I mean there were other--with 'Tan Confessions', 'Copper Confessions' (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well, we--yeah, yeah, see, what, what I was trying to do is to, whatever was selling on black newsstands is what I wanted to produce.  'Confession' books were very popular at one time in the black community.  So I bought out 'Tan Confessions.'  I bought out 'Copper Confessions,' and then 'Look' Maga--
Speaker 1: Hue, there was something 'Hue.'
Speaker 2: 'Hue,'  'Hue,' H-U-E.  Right, yeah.  And then, what else did we (unclear) bring out.  Oh, oh--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: Well, then we, then we had 'Ebony Man.'  We had 'Ebony Junior,' yeah--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You had Junior.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, we, we tried to go with the changing times.  We had to change--what we, what I said in several interviews is to change with the changing times.  And if the times change, you have to abandon some of them.
Story_ID: 18299
Speaker 1: Just in terms of, you know, people like Lerone Bennett and Robert [E.]  Johnson, can you talk a little bit about them because--
Speaker 2: Well, they were the best I could find.  Bob [Robert E.] Johnson came to work with us [in 1953]  from, from Morehouse [College] and from the, from the Atlanta Journal--not, no, the Atlanta Daily World, Atlanta Daily World.  The Atlanta Journal is the white one.  And, you know, I was helping him--I was asking him to help me find good people.  And he found Lerone Bennett [Jr.].  Well, he didn't find him.  He knew about him.  And he--and Bennett agreed to come.  And he came to work [in 1953].  So we were constantly looking for new people.  I, I remember Charles [L.] Sanders who was one of our editors.  I got him from the Cleveland Call and Post.  I kept seeing his name in the Cleveland Call and Post.  So I called him up and asked him to come.  And, and I did the same thing with Isaac Sutton [in 1953].  I saw his photographs in the Houston Chronicle or something.  So we were constantly--we knew we had to have good people, and, and we had them and we, we kept them.
Speaker 1: And you allowed them to establish their own reputations here too.  That's what I was--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, that helps, but that helps the company.  That helps the company.  Lerone Bennett is a noted historian.  That helps the company.  I know I was talking to--what's this guy's name?  What's his name?  What's the guy's name who, who has an investment business?
Speaker 1: John Rogers.
Speaker 2: John Rogers [Jr.], John Rogers.  John Rogers was having Bennett speak to some group he had.  And he was asking me, he said, "I, I have to introduce him.  What, what can I say about him?"  I said, "Well, I--what I can say is that I know a lot of writers who can write.  I know a lot of speakers who can speak.  But I don't know but one who can write and speak well, and that's Lerone Bennett." (laughter)  And that's true.  He, he's an excellent speaker, and he's an excellent writer.  And he's very creative.
Story_ID: 18300
Speaker 1: Now, talk about--you know, the thing I've also found interesting was your discussion about where you were going to try to get ad sales people.  You know, that you went looking around to try to find the right type of personality that could go--
Speaker 2: I really had, I really had to get them from Urban League.  And I had to get them from Urban League because I had to find blacks who were accustomed to dealing with white people on a corporate level.  And I also had to find blacks who were not afraid of white people.  See, if you're gonna sell, you've got to disagree with the person.  And if you're afraid of them, you can't disagree with them.  And so I, I got my best people from the Urban League and kept them a long time; as a matter of fact, kept most of them until they died.  And just one guy worked for me a long time, Ken, Ken [Kenneth O.] Wilson, I think it was, he died not long ago.  And then we had Leroy Jeffries who died not long ago.  They, they--you know, I, I--you had to have people who were not afraid to sell white, white people.  And so we built it up mostly from the Urban League.
Speaker 1: And did Johnson Publishing and the Urban League have any other type of relationship besides, you know, using their people to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I served on the board for many, many years, starting with Lester Grainger and on through Whitney Young, through all the people until recently.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, what--the other thing that, you know, so circulation was, you said, you know, you knew circulation.
Speaker 2: Well, I learned it.
Speaker 1: You learned it.
Speaker 2: I learned it.
Speaker 1: Okay, you learned it.
Speaker 2: I learned everything.  I didn't know anything.  I learned everything.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I learned advertising.  As I said before, I, I learned how to not make but one trip [to sell something].  I learned how to sell cosmetics.  And then I trained people to sell cosmetics.  I don't have to do it anymore.  But I had to do it then.
Story_ID: 18301
Speaker 1: There was a period of time that the, you know, things weren't--the sales at newsstands, and you said that, you couldn't really explain that, but they plummeted, you know, both--for all publications.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you did a very innovative thing.  And I want you to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Remind me, what the innovative things was that (laughter) that I did.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Well, with churches and subscriptions.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter) I mean that's the time I grew up.  You know, everyone had, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter), but I'm trying to think.  I did so many things, you know, I have to be reminded.  Once you tell me, I remember.  No, we, we started the church program.  And it started because I began to ask people here to help us sell subscriptions.  And a guy in New York decided to get his church, to sell subscriptions to his church and to get his church to sell subscriptions.  So I made him in charge of the church program.  I've forgot--do you remember his name, Della [Palmer, Johnson's personal secretary]?  I don't know.  It's Jackson, Jackson, I think.  Anyway, he's dead too now.  But anyway, he, he developed that.  So once we knew it was a good idea, then we brought it to Chicago and other places.
Story_ID: 18302
Speaker 1: So anyway, it--you do what you have to do.  See, you can't anticipate.  You do what you have to do.  And that's what it's all about.  I, I've served on the advisory board of the Harvard Business School for 20 years, until I just got tired of going to Boston.  And when I first went there, they, they were, you know, having, honoring an 'Executive for the Day.'  And so I was an 'Executive for the Day'  and I spoke to a number of, a number of students.  And when it was all over, the dean asked me would I serve on the board.  And I said, "Well, Dean, I, I'm just not sure I'm qualified to be on the board because I dropped out of college at, at the end of 3 years."  He said, "Well, all I know is what you do is what we preach and what we teach.  And you do it better than we teach it.  So we'd like to have you join."  And I joined.  And he was right (chuckle) because, you know, they were just dealing with all these erudite, high falluting things.  And they were just not dealing with common sense about selling.  And they were also training all the MBAs to go to Wall Street for investments.  And there was no entrepreneurial program.  People were just going to work for other people.  I said, "Don't you want them to do something for themselves?"  He said, "But do you employ any MBAs?"  I said, "No, I, I don't employ any."  " Why? MBAs--" I said, "Because they want my job.  And I'm not ready to give it up yet.  They always want to tell me how to spend the money I've already made.  I want somebody to tell me how to make more money." (chuckle).  So, I, I made a lot of changes during the 20 years I was there.  I influenced a lot.  I didn't make 'em, I influenced a lot of changes.
Story_ID: 18303
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to go back and talk about just the advertisers, you know, a bit.  And are you saying that you would--how were you identifying who you wanted, you know, Zenith [Radio Company], you said, led to several others.  You know, you also went--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, these are people that I think are heavy users of the product now.  And you can't fake it, you know.  Like, like in the early days, we sold mostly liquor and cigarettes cause they knew that black people used a lot of that.  But the time came when cigarettes were not popular and blacks were not drinking that much whiskey.  So we had to develop other things.  And we had to come up with creative ideas for, for Pillsbury flour or automobile--that was the hardest one to crack.  But we cracked it.  So you, you just have to find, find ways to prove to them that they'll make money if they advertise in 'Ebony.'  And we've done that.
Speaker 1: But you were doing a lot of those sales calls basically, you know, company president to company president, I mean--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  Well, what I learned early in the game is that no advertising manager was going to place an ad in a black publication if he didn't know how the CEO felt about it, you know.  It's just not something they would do.  So I realized early that we had to sell the CEO first and in effect, get his permission to sell his other people.
Speaker 1: So can you recount any situation where you had worked really hard to get an account, and then you lost it?  Are there any--
Speaker 2: I don't want to brag, but I didn't lose any (laughter).  I didn't lose any.  I, I thought I wasn't gonna get one.  That was Sears Roebuck.  I knew, I worked on Sears Roebuck for a year with a guy [George Struthers] who was the advertising manager.  And finally one Friday, he called me and told me to come over Monday.  He was gonna give me an order for some advertising.  And then I read, the papers said, over the, over the weekend, he fell dead.  So I said, "Even, even the Lord doesn't want me to have-- "(laughter).  But I went--but the guy [James Button] who took his place was from Canada, who didn't know anything about race.  And he called me up.  He said, "I was going through--"whatever that guy's name was, "his things.  And I see where he was gonna give you an ad on Monday."  He said,  "We, we're gonna be busy with the funeral this week, but next Monday, if you want to come over, I'll do what he promised."  And he did, and I've been getting Sears ever since.  You know, I, I, you know, I think it's just hard work, you know.  It's just like the law, the, the most--the lawyers who, who are most creative and persuasive, and who wins the most cases, does the best.  And that's--we've had no competition close.
Speaker 1: I know, but then that's why, you know, then your--you know, 'Life' goes out of business. 'Ebony' still stays and stays strong.  And I mean what do you contribute, you know,--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I said, I said, 'Life,' 'Life' Magazine, Henry [R.] Luce, I got to know very well, who founded 'Life.'  If he had lived, Life wouldn't have gone out of business.  But Life was run by a committee.  You can't run a company by a committee.  Somebody has to be able to call the shots, and that person has to be willing to take a chance.  And so, plus Life magazine had five people doing what we have two people doing.  I mean there was a lot of waste.  So I think it's good management.  I don't--I know I remember a lady from the New York Times was calling me up, telling me about black newspapers who were losing so much circulation.  And how I'd regained mine, and blah, blah, blah.  And "I just don't understand it."  I said, "Lady, did it ever occur to you that maybe I'm smarter than those guys? " (Laughter) So, so anyway, it, it's hard work.  I, I don't, I never saw anything I couldn't sell.  If I had enough time, and if I knew enough about the people.
Story_ID: 18304
Speaker 1: So what of your covers or your stories.  You know, there's the case of Emmett Till, that, that was, you know, that was bold decision really.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you see, but I, I had the permission of the mother [Mamie Till Mobley] The mother called to say that she had given the, understand, the, the funeral director instructions that if 'Jet' came by to let us photograph him.  She said, "I want the world to know what they did with my boy."  But it still required some, some boldness, some, some, some willingness to take a chance.  I remember I was standing--I was checking newsstands.  And I remember one little girl came up, she was about sixteen years, she, she put her hand in front of her (head  She said, "That's terrible what Jet has done about those, that boy.  I don't, I don't know why they could do that.  And let me buy 10 copies (laughter)."  And so, so anyway, I, I just think it's, you have to take a chance.  You have to take a chance, and that's, and, and that's what, that's why if you control the company, you can take a chance.
Story_ID: 18305
Speaker 1: So Negro Digest was more serious--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then it, it got to the point where it became, in the '60s [1960s], 'Black World', right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Well, it died, and then it came, it became 'Black World.'
Speaker 2: World, World.
Speaker 1: And then you had Ebony that you had started out more, I don't want to say--it was to be appealing, it was a picture book, right?
Speaker 2: No, Ebony was always a picture book.
Speaker 1: Right, it was a picture--but I'm saying it was a picture book.  I'm saying it was appealing as a picture book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: But then after that, and you were--you had, I forget his name, but he--it was more sort of sex and sensation and then--
Speaker 2: That's, Ben Burns [Ebony's first executive editor] who was working here then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and he, he--circulation was, was not too good.  And we had a meeting, and he--his theory was to give more sex in order to get more things.  But I had just started the church program [selling subscriptions through churches] and, and sex was not what I wanted to do.  So I dismissed him--he would go over to the press and try to change things.  So I, I dismissed him at the printers for, for trying--and I, I--we had a meeting and I de-sexed Ebony (laughter).  And we, we went with the church program.  And you have to know when to change.  And he, he didn't see it.  And so we had to get rid of him.  He tried to get his job back, and I, I just didn't want to do it again.
Story_ID: 18306
Speaker 1: I want to, so why don't why don't we talk, like in the '60s [1960s], you know, things changed.  You know, there was, you know, things had changed.  You had--first of all, I think, correct me if I'm wrong, you had been running your business and really focusing on it.  And then people started really to seek you out and, you know, presidents started--you had, I think Dwight Eisenhower was the first time you had been--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I was invited to the White House the first time under Dwight [D.] Eisenhower, and I've been invited to dinner at the White House under all presidents since.  It's about ten now.
Speaker 1: And your favorite president though was--
Speaker 2: Was Lyndon [B.] Johnson.
Speaker 1: And tell us--can you say why?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I liked Lyndon Johnson because he got more done.  See, I liked John, John F. Kennedy, but he didn't know where the bodies were buried in Congress.  And he couldn't get things through the Congress.  Lyndon Johnson could.  He'd been there thirty years.  And he, he took a great pride in civil rights and in, and in making unusual appointments.  I know the man [Andrew F. Brimmer] who, who was the first [African American] member of the--Federal Reserve Board, he [LBJ], he told us one that--in a little meeting, that he had to have the approval of the senior senator of Louisiana to get this guy appointed.  And he said he told him, he said, you know--[Russell] Long was the, was the Senator then, said, "Senator Long, you know, I'm about to appoint one of your constituents to the Federal Reserve Board if, if I have your approval."  He said, "He has three degrees from Harvard, including a Ph.D.  I think he'll make a good member of that board."  He said, "Oh, yes, Mr. President, I could support that."  He said, "I'm very glad to hear you, hear you say that because he is an African American."  He said, "You tricked me, Mr. President."  He said, "But you gave me your word, Senator."  And so that's how he got into it.  And he was always doing unusual things.  I know I, I sat with him again when he was, had just appointed Thurgood Marshall as Solicitor General.  He said, "Mr. Johnson, I don't need to tell you why I appointed Thurgood to that Marshall--I mean Thurgood Marshall to that position, do I?"  I said, "I don't think so, Mr. President.  I assume you're grooming him for the Supreme Court, and no one can say that he's never, you know, dealt with it."  He said, "That's right."  So he, he was, he was a likable guy.  Of course, in the beginning, he ordered me to the White House.  And he was very angry about some things that had been printed in Jet.  And so I just said, "Well, what do you--?" and he cursed and "I've, I've done this for your people, and I've done that for your people."  I said, "Well, Mr. President, what do you want me to do about it?"  He said,  "I want it stopped."  I said, "Well, it's stopped." He said, "Just like that?"  I said, "You're the president, aren't you?  Just like that."  He said, "Okay, Johnson, you're okay."  After that, he invited me to the White House so many times, I didn't even tell my friends.  I was embarrassed to tell 'em (chuckle).  So I, I got along well with him.
Speaker 1: You spent a fair amount of time with President [Richard M.] Nixon too, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And I was criticized a little bit for it. And I said, well--see, he--well, it wasn't just me by myself, now--it was the press, black press.  He in--there was, we got, the first African country to get its independence was Ghana.  And [Dwight D.] Eisenhower was president, and he sent [then Vice President] Nixon to represent the, the U.S. Government.  And Nixon, looking forward to bigger things, invited a lot of journalists, black and white.  And so we went with him to, to Ghana, and then we went to eight other African countries.  And then a year later, he invited the same group to go with him to Russia for the American fair there, the time that he got into a big fight with Khrushchev in the, in the kitchen, and we were in the dining room.  And I thought maybe we'd never get out of Russia.  And, "Ooowoowoowoowoo" (shakes his finger) but so, I, I knew quite a few of them.  When people were giving me criticism of going, "Why would you go to, to Russia with Nixon?  And why would you go to, to Africa with Nixon?" I said, well, he was the only vice president going who asked me to go with him (laughter).  So if somebody else had been going, I might have gone with him.
Story_ID: 18307
Speaker 1: So what did you learn though, on those forays, you know, to, when you were making trips like that [overseas]?  Were they at all, you know, sort of eye-opening experiences for you?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I learned anything.  It was more--just able to go.  I mean I learned, I learned something going through--not, I didn't learn anything about the people now.  I learned something about the people we were visiting.  Like with Ghana, for the first time, I saw a black supreme court justice.  I saw a black attorney general, and I saw black people doing all kinds of important things.  [Kwame] Nkrumah was saying, you know, "Don't let people say you're not prepared."  He said, you know, " I say, prepared or not, our time has come.  And we will not--we want what's due us."
Speaker 1: And Nkrumah was an interesting person cause he had been trained, you know, here--
Speaker 2: In America, well, he went to Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania.  He went to--
Speaker 1: Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Lincoln [University], in Penn--Lincoln, in Pennsylvania.  Yeah, as a matter of fact, he, he worked as a, as a waiter in Harlem.  So he, he knew, he knew all about--he came, he later came to visit us at my old building [Johnson Publishing in Chicago].  And he, he--we had a lot of new equipment then.  And he said, he had his guy writing, and he said, "Mr. Johnson, will you tell my men how to get this?" And he said, "I want to know how to get this, that and that." (laughter).  So we, we had a very friendly relationship with him.  He had a fair there.  And I sent models over there for the fair.  One of--he, he courted one of them, and she didn't come back (laughter).  He gave her a house, servants and chauffeurs and she, we never saw her again (laughter).
Story_ID: 18308
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit more about how this building [Johnson Publishing Company headquarters, 820 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago]  came, you know, into being?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll have to cut it short because I, I spent ten years trying to build this building (laughter).  But here again, I was determined to do it.  And I, I had to get, you know, a large, a large--we haven't gone onto that before, have we?  I had to get a, a large insurance company to agree to say that if the building was built, they would reimburse the bank for the money they'd put into it.  And anywhere I went, they said, "No, no, no, no."  So I finally asked Whitney Young, who was then head of the Urban League.  And I was on the board of the Urban League.  I said, "Whitney, next time you have a big dinner, and you could invite the head of an insurance company in New York, that can make, can sup-, can guarantee a mortgage for me, invite me and let me sit next to him.  So they had a dinner, and the president of--the CEO rather, of Metropolitan Life Insurance Company was there.  And I sat next to him, and I had my things that I always carried with me, trying to convince people to, to finance the building.  And the guy said, "Well, we, we're kind of busy here.  Why don't you come over and see me tomorrow"--this was a Thursday night, "--tomorrow morning.  And maybe we can do something."  So I went over, and I presented it to him again.  And he said, "Yeah, I, I think we can do it." I said, "The only problem is, I have to get the commitment today."  He said, "We've never made a commitment in one day."  And he said--I said, "Sir, I always heard that when, that in between board meetings, that CEOs--big board meetings and executive committee meetings--that CEOs were like God.  They could do anything they wanted to do.  Why don't you just see if you can do it?  You're a CEO."  He said, "Johnson, I know you're putting me on now, and I want you to know, I know you're putting me on.  But I would like to see if I can do it. " So different people would come in, and he would tell them we were trying to make this mortgage.  And we're trying to do it today.  They said, "Oh, we've never done a commitment today."  He said, "I know, I know, I know.  But I just want to see if I can do it.  Do I have your support?"  Now, he knew he had their support.  So anyway, by the end of the day, I had the commitment, and I was on my way back to Chicago.  Now, the reason I had to get it that day is that the builder was gonna stop building on Monday.  And the reason for that is that I, I could not get anybody to commit in advance.  So I finally put, I finally saved up $2 million that I didn't need in the day-to-day operations of the business.  And so I put it in trust at the First National Bank with--in the name of the builder, but he could only draw it down, based on approvals from the architect that he had completed a certain job.  So and it was gonna run out Monday.  So he had said earlier, he said, "Gee wiz, $2 million on a $6 million building, you know, you're gonna run out fast.  Now, what, what are you gonna do when, when you run out of this $2 million?"  I said, "I'll assume you'll quit building, right?"  (Laughter).  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Don't worry then."  So anyway, I came back with the commitment, and, and he didn't have to stop building.  And that's how we got going.
Speaker 1: And it was important also because you insisted that a black architect be used.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I ran into problems with that because they, they said he [John Moutoussany] had never--he's black.  He's never built a commercial building before.  I said, I know he hasn't, but nobody would let him do it..  He's built schools.  He's built homes.  He's built what corporate America would let him build.  So if he can't build my building, whose building can he ever build?  So anyway, it, it worked out.  But then the bank, had problems with the bank, but we, we worked out.  But I had to be persistent, and I had to believe, and I had to be persuasive.  And I was able to talk them into it.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Johnson, of the things you've done, you know, like, you know, Fashion Fair Cosmetics, Ebony Fashion Show, through, you know, T.V. stations.  You had a cable invest--you know, cable investment, what are you probably most proud of, you know, out of that, the publishing.
Speaker 2: Building this building.
Speaker 1: The building.
Speaker 2: You know, this is the only building built by a black man, from the ground up, in any city in America.  There're none in New York, none in Detroit (chuckle), none anywhere.  You have blacks in downtown--in the downtown buildings, but they didn't build them from the ground up.  This is the only one.  So I guess I'm proudest of that.  And I'm also proud because my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] was there, and she was able to see the fruits of her investment.  So--and then she had a, we have an office for her in this building.
Speaker 1: And in the, in the deciding of what the building was going to contain and how many--because I mean, even how many stories, was that--how was that determined, how many stories (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, originally, originally, we were supposed to build 8 stories.  You know, I'm trying to build what I could afford to build.  And then Moutoussany told me, he said, "You know, we could go another three stories and you wouldn't have to spend any more money right now.  We'll just put the shell up there, and if and when you felt you could afford it, we could fill it in and you could have three extra floors.  And it really started off to be an 8 and it ended up being 11 because we eventually--when we first moved in the building, there were three floors vacant."
Speaker 1: And what, who--the plans about where things were gonna be located, the cafeteria, you always have had a cafeteria in the (unclear) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I had to have a cafeteria.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  That served a lot of different reasons.
Speaker 2: Well, no, but we, we had it because I attempted to take an advertising client out for lunch one day, and they wouldn't serve us.  And so I thought, well, the best thing for me to do is to build my own cafeteria.  So I a cafeteria in the other building, where we could talk, you know, to people and not be embarrassed.
Speaker 1: But this was--it wasn't any kind of cafeteria either.  I mean you, you served good food, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we served good food.  I, I know, as a matter of fact, what I'm trying to say, there was some guy whose--he said, he was being asked what was a good restaurant in Chicago?  He said, "Well, if you could get an invitation to Johnson Publishing Company, that's the best place to go." (laughter)
Speaker 1: Well, see that, and even--you know, I thought--what about 20th Century Fox and you serving on the board there and having--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I served on the board of 20th Century Fox, and they had a board meeting here.  And they wanted me to find a place for them to meet.  They wanted a place where they could have lunch.  They could have a meeting, and they also wanted to screen a movie.  And Ms. Foster, who was our Director of Human Resources, and I, and they said, maybe we can find a private club.  So we were, we were looking.  We went to several private clubs.  I remember we went to one at the Ritz Carlton, and it's in the basement.  So after we got through looking around, they said, well, the best private club in Chicago is Johnson Publishing Company.  So we had it here.  And it worked out very well.  They had meetings on the 9th floor.  They had lunch on the 10th floor.  And we had movies on the--what floor was that?  Seventh floor, seventh floor.  And they were here.  Princess Grace came and her husband [Prince Rainier III of Monaco] came and the two kids.  They had two kids then who came.  So it worked out well.  The Princess and I were, were very friendly because she was the only woman and I was the only black.  So we called ourselves the minorities on the 20th Century Fox board meeting.
Story_ID: 18309
Speaker 1: I want to ask, though, you talk about Earl Graves [publisher of 'Black Enterprise' magazine] being your friend.  How did that friendship develop?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  We just liked each other (laughter).  We met each other, and we liked each other.  And we never knocked each other.  See, the people at, at 'Essence' [magazine] would be critical of us and we'd be critical of them.  People at other magazines would be critical of each other, but Earl and I just never wanted to be critical of each other.  It's just like John Sengstacke and I were friends.  We were never critical of each other.  So we--I never criticized him, and he never crit--I ran stories about him.  And he ran stories about me.  So, I don't, I don't know how you can determine friendship.  Either you like people or you don't.
Story_ID: 18310
Speaker 1: When you look at the black community today and where it is, what are your thoughts about that community in terms of, you know, are you hopeful for the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we've, we've come a long way.  You know, you, you, it's--there's still things that are not the way they should be.  It's just like Martin Luther King said, "We've come a long way, but we still have a long way to go."  But we can't not appreciate where we've been.  And we can't--we wouldn't be going forward unless we've done the things now.  So I, I, I'm still optimistic--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --'cause you have more qualified people.  You have more educated people.  And education is key.  We have, we have more people in politics.  So I, you know, we just [2004] got our second black senator from Illinois.  So I think things are optimistic.  As far as I'm concerned, I'm optimistic about the future.
Speaker 1: But--okay, so you're optimistic--do you--why then are some of the same issues being discussed over and over again?
Speaker 2: Why what?
Speaker 1: Why are some of the same issues being discussed over and over again?
Speaker 2: Well, I can never be responsible for what other people do.  I'm only responsible for what I do.  So I don't know why they doing it.  I'm not doing it (chuckle).  And, and I, and I think some people, you know, like to talk and, and, and fight, and you know, I hope, but I don't fight.
Speaker 1: So if you were coming along right now, would you--what bu-, what line of business do you think you would go in?
Speaker 2: I feel I could go in the same businesses.  You know, I think it's what you, whether you believe in yourself or not.  I believe I could start any business and be successful, but I have to believe it.  And I have to work at it.  I, I don't know any business I couldn't succeed in if I wanted to.  But you have to, you have to have that belief now.  You can call it cocky, you can call it whatever you want to call it, but you need it--if you want to make it.
Story_ID: 18311
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That I helped--that by highlighting black achievement, I helped black people to believe in themselves.  That's as good as I'd want to be.
Speaker 1: (Pause)
Speaker 2: And what do you want people to say about John Johnson?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I really don't care what they say about John Johnson.  My record will speak for itself.  My record, I mean, I--what I've done still stands.  And I recorded in the book, I've just had a school named after me at Howard University [the John H. Johnson School of Communications].  So it'll stand.  I don't think I have to sit down and worry about it.  The record is there, and whatever people want to think or say is all right with me, plus I won't know about it anyway (chuckle).
Story_ID: 18312
Speaker 1: Talk about Moneta Sleet, and how he came to work here--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and some of the things, and if you have a favorite Moneta Sleet story, you know, I'd like you to share that.
Speaker 2: Well, I first met Moneta Sleet at a place where they were selling 'Our World' [magazine]  'Our World' went into bankruptcy, and I went there to buy whatever was left of it.  They had some artwork, and I bought that.  And I bought the right to, to the photographs they had.  And I guess I bought the right to try to hire Moneta Sleet, who worked for "Our World' magazine, which was owned and directed by John P. Davis.  John P. Davis and I were rivals for about two years [in the late 1940s].  But in the end, I was able to sell more advertising than he could.  John was a very learned guy, very articulate and insisted on expressing this to the people he was trying to sell, who didn't appreciate it.  I said, I was just a poor boy trying to get a start, and they were more willing to help me than they were to help him.  And so I remember that the last issue of 'Our World', he had a story on 'Fifty-Eight Ways to Bake a Fruit Cake'.  It never occurred to him, I guess that people only wanted, people only want to know the one best to make a fruit cake, (chuckle) not 58 ways.  So I met Sleet there, and I had followed his work in 'Our World'.  And he was interested in coming to work for us.  And we hired him.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you know of his background at the time that you hired him then?
Speaker 2: I knew that he was a great photographer because I read 'Our World'.  And some of the best very photographs in 'Our World' were some I wished I had published in 'Ebony.'  So I was aware of him in that way.
Speaker 1: Now, he had some--he became a Pulitzer Prize winner, photographer, yes?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, yes, yeah, he--
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, you know, the picture that, you know, won the Pulitzer Prize?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, what happened is, we were all at Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s funeral.  And the white photographers had an organization which determined who would sit where in making photographs.  And they first determined that no one could do it who didn't live in Atlanta.  And we appealed to Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King, and she said, "Well, if, if 'Ebony' can't be here, you can't be here".  So they quickly changed their minds.  But they gave us what they thought was not the best possible way to view the funeral.  They gave us a spot in the--they, they took the best spots, which was in the balcony, where you could see the whole thing.  And they gave us a spot on the main floor.  It turned out that the main floor was the best floor because that's how Sleet was able to shoot the great Pulitzer Prize photograph of Mrs. King, hugging her daughters, who is--her daughter who is now a minister.  You could, you could see the, the shyness on the part of the daughter, the, the feeling of, of just sorrow in the face of Mrs. King.  And so that photograph was the best one taken that day.  And it's a part of what I say in my book--you try to make the most out of whatever you have.  And he made the most out of that, and he got the Pulitzer Prize [in 1969].
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he, you know, when the announcement was made, how you, you know, felt because that was a great honor here.
Speaker 2: Oh, I felt, I guess I was almost as happy as he was.  He was the happiest, obviously (laughter).  And I felt, I was the second happiest, I guess, after his wife and children.  But it, it was a great recognition for us.  And--'cause no black photographer had ever won the Pulitzer Prize.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any of his photographs, any others that are your favorites 'cause you, you know, he has a whole body of collection here.
Speaker 2: I guess I don't have any favorite 'cause he--of course, obviously, the King was "the" favorite.  And he shot many, many more things and covered the whole Civil Rights Movement.  I, I don't think I have a--that is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Now, also, let's--well, I want to ask another question about the funeral with Mrs. King and even your relationship with, you know, Dr. King.  What--can you talk about that funeral and the whole aspect of, you know, your participation there or any remembrances you have from that day?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, we, we--it was well covered by our staff, writers and photographers.  And I, I was there.  It, it was a sad day.  I think all of us were shedding tears because it just, you just wondered what's gonna happen, as, as the singer said, "What's gonna happen now that the King of love is gone?" because he was just doing so many things and changing the lives of, of black people and our country.  And we just wondered how could we make it after that.
Story_ID: 18313
Speaker 1: Now you had had a--quite an affiliation already with Atlanta in that some of your best, you know, writers came from there.  You had gone in and--and taken the city, so to speak (laughter).
Speaker 2: I always tried to get the best possible writers and photographers, and some of the best of them were in Atlanta.  I first got Robert E. Johnson, who was later editor of 'Jet.'  And he told me about Lerone [J.] Bennett [Jr.], who also worked on the Atlanta 'Daily World'.  They both worked on the Atlanta 'Daily World'.  But they were not well paid, and they looked forward to coming Chicago and working on Johnson Publishing Company.  I remember Bob telling me the story that he came to work one day with a new bicycle.  He just had an old one up until then.  And the, the publisher, Mr. [Cornelius Adolphus] Scott, said, "Bob, where did you get enough money to buy a new bicycle?"  He said, "I know we don't pay you that kind of money (laughter), so how did you get it?"  He said, "Well, a relative loaned me some money."  So, he--they were just, they, they admired Mr. Scott, they enjoyed working there, but he just didn't pay good wages.
Speaker 1: And they came in the, in the '50s [1950s], right, was it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They joined in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: They joined in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].  And now how did Bob Johnson come to head up 'Jet'?  How were--did you make up--make that decision?
Speaker 2: Well, when we started a Edward [T.] Clayton was the editor of 'Jet', and Bob was his assistant.  And it became clear that Bob was a better writer and a better editor than Clayton.  So we gave it to Bob Johnson.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite Bob Johnson story you'd like to share?  He was here a very long time.
Speaker 2: He was here a long time.  And he was, not just a worker, he was a good friend.  I guess the best one is the new bicycle.  But I--we, we sent him many places, and, and he--you could be--if Bob was assigned a story, you could be sure that he was gonna bring back something.  It might not be all that you want, but he would bring back something.  He was aggressive, very determined and likeable.  So I can't think of any particular thing, but Bob--if, if we wanted a story, we sent Bob Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 18314
Speaker 1: Was it apparent to you when you brought Lerone [J.] Bennett [Jr.] on that he would, you know, become what he has become here?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't apparent to me.  And I'm not sure it was it was apparent to him (laughter) because what happened is, I went to the inauguration of the first prime minister of Ghana [Kwame Nkrumah] in 1963 or '53  '53 I think [1958].  And I--for the first time I saw black supreme court justices and attorney generals.  And I, I just became filled with the desire to let black people know about black history, particularly the African part of it.  And so I talked to Bennett about--cause he was there too, about writing a series of articles in 'Ebony' [magazine].  And he said, "Well, you know, it'll take quite a bit of time."  So I said, "How much time do you need?"  He said, "Maybe a year or so to really do the proper research."  And so we gave him fourteen months to do a series of articles called "Before the Mayflower".  And people would miss some of the stories, and they'd come in after about the third or fourth, and they'd want to know "How can I get the others?".  So that's how we decided to start a book division.  And our first, the first book we published was "Before the Mayflower", by Lerone Bennett.  I don't think that he, in the end, in the beginning had the feeling that he would become a famous historian.  But he did.  And, and he did because the people wanted to know more about black history.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, you know, in Ghana, tell, tell me how you felt that one time, you know, 'cause people often talk about, you know, when they first have discovered, you know, much of our history.  But you're talking about our history outside of the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what brought, I mean if you can just remember back then, what sort of struck your fancy, you know, or made you realize it was a world outside in many ways?
Speaker 2: Well, it made me realize there was a black world outside of it, one that we could all be proud of because we had not learned a lot about Africa or about the great things that had been happening there.  And I, I was impressed, as were all the other people who were there.  And, and I, I think that from that moment on, I felt that we needed to tell, the magazine needed to tell the story more about, about our, our beginnings in Africa.  And as I said before, Bennett did a great series of stories in, in Ebony, and we made them into a book.  And, and he did some other books, and then he became a famous historian (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Now, did you work closely with him with those series of articles or did you give him carte, carte blanche?  And how did even the title come?  I mean those are the things--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I gave him carte blanche.  I, I only talked to him about two [book] titles.  One was about Martin Luther King and I, "What Manner of Man", I--that was my suggestion.  And then he did another one in which I suggested "The Great Black-- "The Great Black Histories"--no, great black something, I'm trying to think now.  The Great mo--"The Great Moments in Black History".  That's another of my suggestions.  But otherwise, it was all his idea.  And I had nothing to do with the books except to furnish the money and the time, which I was delighted to do.
Speaker 1: So really, with "Before the Mayflower", it was a series of articles and then became a, you know, then got collected into a book.  But it's just a, it's viewed as such an important piece of work.
Speaker 2: It is, and that's why we made the book, made it into a book because the people--as they read the, the various issues of, of Ebony, which were the beginnings of the "Before the Mayflower", we, we knew we had something.  And we knew it was something we could be proud of.  And Bennett was enthusiastic about it.  So that's how we started our whole book division.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your plans with the book division?  What did you, you know, what did you sort of see--because you had already excelled at magazine publishing.  So once again, you didn't have, you know, it wasn't like there was a roadmap to follow.  I mean that's what's clear about everything you did in your, you know, career in life.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I never thought about roadmaps (chuckle).  I just thought, is this something we should be doing?  And once I decided it was something we should be doing, I decided, well, maybe I can do it.  And it turned out that I could do it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite Lerone Bennett story that hasn't been heard?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't--Bennett is not the kind of guy you have stories about (laughter).  So I don't have a favorite story about him, except to say that he, you know, I, I think I might have said before, that what he--he has a special talent.  He's, he's not only a writer, but he's also an excellent public speaker.  And those are the things that I admire about him most.  He's, he's not a guy to tell stories (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Johnson, how did you balance off, like you said you gave him fourteen months, you know, and, you know, you gave him that time to write it.  So how were balancing off the business aspects, you know, of, you know, making a profit with, you know, actually incubating something?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, you know, I wasn't writing the book.  I was selling advertising and making money.  (laughter)  He was writing the book.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 2: So it did not interfere with the gross or the growth or development of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did any of the things that he wrote, were they controversial, you know, at all, and did it backfire?  You know, did you ever have any advertisers say, you know, we don't particularly like this or, you know, we don't the approach or tone, you know, you're taking here and--I means beside, you know, there's a story that you told of, of President Johnson, you know, being upset.  But that's different, that--you were talking to, to, about him, that's right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He, we, we never really had any, any serious objections.  I remember we--one issue of 'Ebony' that Mr. Bennett, of course, was in charge of called "The White Problem in America".  And we said things that white people weren't particularly proud of because we said it was, the whole race problem was, was not a black problem.  It was a white problem.  And I remember the night before we closed, Era Bell Thompson, who was associate editor--I mean not associate, she was co-editor of 'Ebony', she always called me 'Boss', and just before we closed that issue, she said, "Boss, do you know what you're doing?" (laughter)  "This is serious stuff."  I said, "Era Bell, I don't really know what I'm doing, but I'm gonna do it anyway."  And we did get a few objections from advertisers.  And I, I remember one man from Mississippi, and I told him, I said, "If I ever put out a issue of 'Ebony' that completely freezes--pleases you, being from the South and knowing what your background is, you really shouldn't advertise in it 'cause blacks won't be reading it."
Story_ID: 18315
Speaker 1: So, first, you were sort of building your, you know, your editorial team, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, that was important.
Speaker 1: And sort focused on that.  That was important, right.  And you had already--and you had already learned about circulation and the things, you know, related to that.
Speaker 2: Well, I had to learn about circulation it because it was--that's how I got started.
Speaker 1: And you also told the story about Gerri Powell, you know, and how you got her and the whole Coronation.  Is it Gerri Powell?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Is it Gerri, wait Gerri--from Jet, Jet, the--what am I--?
Speaker 2: Major.
Speaker 1: Gerri Major was her name.
Speaker 2: Okay, sorry, Gerri Major.
Speaker 1: Gerri Major, yes.  She was one of my favorite writers.  And I tried to--and I had the most difficult time to get her.
Speaker 2: Now, why did you feel that she was important in helping turn 'Jet' around?  Why did you--?
Speaker 1: Well, not turn it around, but move it forward.
Speaker 2: Move it forward, okay, move it forward, sorry.
Speaker 1: And what happened is that we had a black society then.  In all the cities there were people who were discovering, you know, their heritage.  And Gerri was a society woman.  She, she knew friends all around the country, and we wanted a society column in the, in Jet.  And we felt that she could give Jet some recognition in the so-called society world.  And that's why I tried so hard to get her.
Speaker 2: And was that, are you saying, sort of underlying, that the society was sort of made in New York because she came from New York or she just had her pulse, you know, on that?  I'm just trying (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: She--Gerri had her pulse all around the nation.  She, she had friends in various cities who were giving affairs and whose daughters were coming out, and who--people were getting married, anything that, you know, had some society effort to it.  Gerri knew friends all around the country.  So it was wasn't just--although she was in New York, it wasn't just in New York.  It was throughout the country, New Orleans, Chicago, many places.
Speaker 2: You know, what has been curious to me was the whole role that even Philadelphia played in many ways, you know, 'cause their black community goes back, you know, many--a long time.  And, you know, "Jack and Jill" was founded there, "The Girlfriends", "The Boul", but with "Amsterdam News", cause that's where she was, now her--were they upset to see her leave (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, you want me to tell you again (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I mean you told the story, but you didn't, you just said that she went--she says, I'm going to the coronation--
Speaker 1: No, no.  I said that she was, was very friendly with Dr. C.B. Powell, who was one of the co-owners of "The Amsterdam News".  And when she told him that she wanted to leave the "Amsterdam News" in order to work for Jet, he cried, she told me.  And she cried, and he said, "you, you just can't leave me."  And she said, "after we both cried, I decided I, I couldn't leave him at that time."  And she called me and said, "Mr. Johnson, I just can't take the job."  So I said, well, Gerri, well, we'll hope and pray that some-one day you'll change your mind."  And it took a whole year for the opportunity for, for me to reach something that would make her change her mind.  And that was when the Queen of England, who's now the Queen was, was being--what do they call it, Coron--
Speaker 2: Coronate.
Speaker 1: And I knew about it, and I wrote and got credentials in her name (chuckle).  I had got a first-class ticket on the boat cause we didn't--we weren't flying then, in her name.  And so, when it was all set, I called her and said, "Gerri, I, I know you can't leave Dr. Powell, and I'm not calling trying to make you leave him.  But a great event is happening in London.  It's the kind of event that I can see you as being someone who wants to be present at that.  So I've, I've gotten the credentials in your name.  I got the, the boat, first-class accommodations on the boat in your name.  If you decide you can't take it, obviously, I'll [have] to change all of that.  But I just could not get somebody else to do what I know you would--in your heart, would like to do.  So what do you think?"  She said, "You know I'll have take this.  It's what I've dreamed of, being in that kind of company and covering that kind of story".  I said, "Well,  how are you gonna handle Dr. Powell?"  And she said, "I'm going to write him a letter and leave town." (laughter).  And that's what she did, and she came to work for us, and she worked here until she died cause we--she worked out of her apartment.  She didn't have to go to the office.  She worked out of her apartment.  She worked mostly by the telephone, and she would come out here about once a year.  The last time she came, she came in a wheelchair.  But she, she was here until she passed away.
Speaker 2: Now, how did she move to take things forward, just because she had her pulse, you know, her, her hands were on the pulse--
Speaker 1: Well, she, she--we, we for a long time, we used "Society World".  There's not much "society" now, but "Society World" and she had stringers, we call them, correspondents around the country who would be in touch with her and tell her what, what was going on.  And she wrote a column, and then she also did stories--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now--
Speaker 1: --and allowed us to have a presence in, in all the major cities in the country.
Story_ID: 18316
Speaker 1: Now, did she play a role in the book you did, "Black Society"?
Speaker 2: Yes,--
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about that book?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she really was the author of the book.  She didn't play a role, she was the author of the book.  We couldn't have written the book without her.  Doris [E.] Saunders was the book editor then, but Gerri Major wrote the book.
Speaker 1: And that--
Speaker 2: And she knew all those people.  She, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that book was important, the, you know, there hadn't been another book like that before, I think, what, the "Those Kind of People", I can't remember, you know, that came out in--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there's been another book quite like that one.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Like that one, right.  Can you talk about how that idea originated, you know, and, once again, did you sort of give your blessing on it?  I'm just trying to, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it was not my idea.  It was Gerri Major and Doris Saunders who collaborated.  They, together they decided that this would be a book that should come out and one that would chronicle the lives of the people who established the first society in the black community.  So--it had my blessings because I thought it was a good idea.  We lost money on it, but I still think it's a good idea cause you can't always make money on things that are good.
Story_ID: 18317
Speaker 1: Now, Doris Saunders, can you talk about how you identified her, you know, and how she came to work here, and her role here?
Speaker 2: Well, I was constantly looking for people to, the best people in journalism.  And Doris was called to my attention by a friend, and I invited her here to talk.  And she was interested in taking the job because she was interested in books.  And we hired her as the first head of the book division.  And she did a good job.  I lost a lot of money (laughter), but she did a good job.  And she, she was active in various other forms in the company.  I remember that she, she started our credit union, which has been very valuable to employees.  And they've just celebrated their 50th anniversary.  So she, she was very important in the development of our company.
Speaker 1: She was a very organized person and believed in your vision, right, you would say?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She, she did.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Well, if she worked here--if she
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) For that long a--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) If she didn't believe in it, she had to say she believed it! (laughter).
Story_ID: 18318
Speaker 1: Hans Massaquoi--my wife had a relative who was a social worker, and she told us about another social worker who had a, who was married to a young man who had just come to this country from Germany.  And he was half African and half German, and he was looking for a job.  And he had gone to the University of Illinois and gotten a degree in journalism.  So Hans Massaquoi came by to see me.  And I was impressed with his credentials.  And he was likeable.  And so we employed him [1958], and he did a good job.  He, and he left of his own accord [1997]  He, he married a woman who was, who was from New Orleans.  And she convinced him that he had reached retirement age, and they should retire in New Orleans.  And as far as I know, they're living happily ever after in New Orleans (chuckle).
Speaker 2: Now, what role did he play here, sir?
Speaker 1: Well, he was a co-managing editor.  He, he had a top job.
Speaker 2: And what skill set did you find that, you know--I mean how did he add value here is what I'm, you know, I'm--
Speaker 1: Well,--
Speaker 2: --'cause he had a different background and perspective.
Speaker 1: Well, I, I don't know that it was a different background.  He was able to, you know, Journalists are supposed to write about anything.  As a matter of fact, we, we had women writing about sports and men writing about cooking fifty years ago, you know (chuckle).  So we, we thought there were never any limitations to a good journalist or--and so, whether male or female, they could write about whatever they decided they wanted to write about.  So it never occurred to us that he was German (chuckle) or that he was half German or half African.  He was just a good writer.  And he, he did a good job.  And we were sorry when he left.  But we can't fight marriage and (laughter) things like that.
Speaker 2: Well, what you're basically saying, is when people came aboard, they became part of the Johnson family.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's true.
Story_ID: 18319
Speaker 1: Now, Basil Phillips, can you talk about how you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  We, we were looking for someone who could handle photographs and who could also, was also aware of books and, and someone said, "Well, we know this guy, Basil Phillips who works at the Newberry Library."  And so I said, "Well let's see if he'll come by and talk and see if he's interested in working with us."  See, you know, we were starting from the bottom.  We were trying to get people who had experience because we couldn't give it to them.  They had to have it before they came.  And so Basil came by, and he was interested and he's been here over fifty years.
Speaker 1: Now, what was, how extensive was your [photo] collection at the point that he came on [early 1950s]?  It certainly grew over all that time.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was not very much, no, no.  He helped to build it.  He helped to build it.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what things did he sort of add value and put in place because you're talking about the fact that he an archival background, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, whatever it was in the past, he had to adjust to what we wanted him to do here.  And he, he attended all the book, book conventions.  He--when we started our Book Division [JPC Books, started 1962], of course, he was, he was the sales manager, among many other things.  We, we operated on the theory people had to always do more than one thing.  We just couldn't do it.  You know, people would say, well, I have, I have a, my, my qualifications--my, what--I'm trying to think of the word--
Speaker 1: "My training or background is this."
Speaker 2: "Is this or that."  And but I'd say "You, you do that, and you do whatever else we ask you to do."  I know in Bookkeeping Department we hired a bookkeeper.  And, of course, we had a cashier.  This was many years ago.  And I remember one day the cashier became ill.  And I wanted the bookkeeper to open the mail so we could make a deposit in the bank.  And she said, "Well, that's not a part of my--" --it's another word for it, "That's not a part of my--"
Speaker 1: Job description?
Speaker 2: That's it.  Job  description, "That's not a charge of my job description."  I said, "Well, all I know is, if we don't open any mail today, and I don't have any money in the bank, you can't get paid.  Do you want to think about that some more?"  "I think I can open the mail."  (Laughter)  So she opened the mail.  So we just say, you, you do what you have to do, you know.  You know, people have seen me moving typewriters and helping move desks and do whatever is necessary.  You, you just can't say, "I only do this" or "I only do that."  So it, it was always understood here that you, you did whatever you were asked to do.
Story_ID: 18320
Speaker 1: Now, what about--your, your photography team.  Now, Isaac, was it Isaac Sutton?
Speaker 2: Isaac Hayes--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Isaac--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Isaac Sutton, Isaac Sutton.
Speaker 1: Sutton, right?
Speaker 2: He used to cover Isaac Hayes a lot, but it's Isaac Sutton.  I, I kept reading newspapers around the country.  And I remember reading a paper in Houston [Texas].  And they, they had a lot of good stories about blacks, photographically.  And in one of the issues they ran a picture of Isaac, and they said he was their photographer who had taken these pictures.  So I called the paper and got his name, and called him, and told him, you know, we'd like for him to come to Chicago and work for us.  And he came, and he worked until he died [in 1995].  And he was good.  And we transferred him to the West Coast [in 1975].  And he, he was likeable.  And that's what we needed on the West Coast.  Movie stars fell in love with him cause he, he knew how to talk to them in ways that showed respect, but in the same way, press for whatever story he wanted.  I know one of his best friends was Sammy Davis, Jr.  As a matter of fact, we--when Sammy was, went to Australia, we sent him to Australia with Sammy.  So he, he, he served (unclear), you know.  It, it's--when they come to work here, we say it's till death do us part (chuckle).  Lydia [Davis Eady, a Johnson vice president observing the interview] is about to be an exception (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I know. I heard that.
Speaker 2: (Lydia Davis Eady:) I'll always be a part of the (unclear).
Speaker 1: She's always the one true part, always a part.
Speaker 2: And she's gonna be in something where she can work with us from time to time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, no, that's right.  So she's not, she's not saying goodbye.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (Lydia Davis Eady:) (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, she lives close by.
Speaker 1: That's right So she may, you may be seeing her too often.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, not too often.  I don't think I could see her too often.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 18321
Speaker 1: Now, what about Herb [Herbert] Temple?  How did he come to be here too?
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: Is this another one of your recruits?  I really--Mr. Johnson, were people around the country not wanting you to come around them?  What did all the black newspapers--you were like stealing (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: If they any good--and anything good, sure.  Number one, we paid better.  And, and we had more benefits.  See, the black newspapers never paid very much money.  And they--we paid better cause we knew we had to pay better.  And so we did steal a lot of their employees.  Well, they, they had the only trained employees.  So if we're trying to build it, we had to steal from somebody.  So we stole from them.
Speaker 1: Now, Herb Temple, how did he--?
Speaker 2: Temple just called up one day and asked us could we use an art director.  We didn't have one up until then.  I said, "I don't know.  Why don't you come by and let's talk about it."  So he came by, and we talked about it.  And he showed me some of his work.  And we hired him.  Well, fortunately, I owned the company, so I didn't have to consult with a whole lot of people.  I could make the decision on the spot.
Speaker 1: And what did you see, you know, because at that point, art--like you said, you didn't what art direction was necessarily.  What did you see that he had in terms of layout?  And who was doing--were you supervising the layout up to that point?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We didn't have any layout up to that point! (laughter).  We just had writers who wrote.  And we, we didn't really have any artistic presence in the magazine.  And he gave us some.  He gave it to us. And he's still here.
Speaker 1: And his training, where had he been trained because I'm looking--Newberry. I mean Basil must--
Speaker 2: I don't know where he had been trained.  You know, we didn't really check on where people had had training.  If they could do the work, we hired them.  And he showed me what he had done.  So we hired him.
Story_ID: 18322
Speaker 1: Now, the building of your sales team because sales was what you knew.  And, you know, and you--and I know you've been the head of that effort.  But how many people were part of your sales team, and who were some of the, you know, the important members of that team, and--
Speaker 2: You know, yes, I had some good ones.  But unfortunately, the two best members have passed away.  The best one I ever had was [William P.] Grayson, out of [Johnson Publishing Company's office in] New York  I stole him from the papers in, in Daven--no, in, in the, what's the--
Speaker 1: Amsterdam News?
Speaker 2: No, no, that's New York.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Out of Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, the [Baltimore] 'Afro American'?
Speaker 2: The 'Afro American.'
Speaker 1: They didn't like you there either.
Speaker 2: No, they hated me there, and they should have 'cause I stole a lot of their people (laughter), but they were good people.  And I paid them more money, and they came to work for me.  Bill Grayson, when Bill Grayson went to work for me in New York, I was only selling I think something like $50,000 worth of advertising for the whole.  And Grayson, at the end of ten, about ten years, he had increased it to $10 million a year.  He, he was a great salesman, a great salesman.  And he was almost as good as I was (laughter), but I couldn't be in New York.  But he was--and I also had one, Leroy Jeffries, who I got from the Urban League.  He was head of the Industrial Department of the Urban League, which is--this is the Department that spent all their time calling on large white companies, trying to get them to employ more blacks.  So I needed to have black people were not afraid to talk white--talk to white people and who were not afraid to disagree with them, cause you can't sell anybody if you don't disagree with them because they're saying, no, and you've got to say, yes.  And so I recruited most of our early sales people from the Industrial Department of the Urban League in various cities.  And the next best person to Grayson was Leroy Jefferies out of New York.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know when you first--you knew he was a good one.  That's why you were recruiting him, but had you heard of him by word-of-mouth or you--
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't heard of him.  I, I just talk to people who--they had jobs.  He had a top job at the Urban League, you know.  He, he--
Speaker 1: You mean, that's Leroy Jefferies--
Speaker 2: Leroy Jeffries.
Speaker 1: --at the Urban League.
Speaker 2: At the Urban League, and, and mostly, I just hired people in various parts of the country who worked in the Industrial Departments of the Urban League, because they were dealing with the kind of people I needed to sell.  They were trying to sell them on employing more blacks.  I wanted to sell them on advertising in Ebony.
Speaker 1: Now, what--but Grayson, how did you know that he--I mean what did you see in him, and why was he so good, is what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that I was told by some friends in Baltimore that--I said, "Who do you know at the Amsterdam--at, at the Afro-American who would be good?" And they said, "Bill Grayson, if you can steal him.  He's good."  And so I called him up, and gave him a ticket to Chicago.  And we talked, and I offered him a lot more money than he was making.  And so he wanted to go to New York anyway, so he moved to New York.
Story_ID: 18323
Speaker 1: In New York, what--because this is what year that he--did you bring him [advertising sales rep William P.Grayson], on when you opened your New York bureau, because--in Rockefeller Center?  Or was it later?
Speaker 2: No, we, we got him before that.
Speaker 1: You got him before, oh.
Speaker 2: We got him before Rockefeller Center--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause he, we got him when we had an office on 43rd Street, across from the library, which was not that good.  As a matter of fact, the man who, who owned that building also owned the building on, on 5th Avenue.  And I knew about that, so I went to see him to see if I could move from, from where I was, which was not an industrial business area.  And he said, "Johnson, you, you're not ready for Fifth Avenue yet." He said, "But I'll let you know when you're ready." (laughter).  So then I knew I had to find other places cause he was not gonna help me.  So that's when I began to look for places, and Grayson helped me look for places.  And he found a place in Rockefeller Center.  But they claimed that it was not available and could not be looked at.  And I had met Winthrop Rockefeller at--here again, I, I was on the Board of the Urban League.  So the Urban League was, was the one organization that dealt with blacks and whites without fighting or fussing or disagreeing.  NAACP was challenging all the time.  And the Urban League was doing it in a, in a way that was acceptable.  And so I, Winthrop Rockefeller was active in the Urban League before he went to Little Rock to become Governor of Arkansas.  And so I had met him.  And so when I couldn't get into Rockefeller Center, I called down there and asked to speak to the Governor and tell him that it's an old friend of his from the, from the New York Urban League.  And he got on the phone.  And I told him that I was trying to get space in Rockefeller Center.  I, I was told that there was space, but they won't admit that space.  They won't--I said, "You've worked with the Urban League enough to know what I'm talking about."  He said, "Yeah, I know that."  He said, "Do you know there's space?"  I said, "Oh, yes, I know there's space."  And he stuttered, and he said, "Do you have the money?"  (laughter)  I said, "I have the money."  He said, "You got it."  And so the next day, the man who had said there was no space called me from, from New York to say, "The governor called me and says that you were, you were interested in space in Rockefeller Center".  He knew we were interested in Rockefeller Center.  "And I just want you to know that we do have space, and it will be available to be shown to you at any time at your convenience."  And so that's how I got Rockefeller Center.
Speaker 1: Now, did you find--
Speaker 2: And I'm still there, incidentally, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Which is pretty--right--for how--that's a long time you've there, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a long time ago, maybe forty-some years.
Speaker 1: Forty-some years.
Story_ID: 18324
Speaker 1: Now, did you find that [Johnson Publishing Company advertising executive William P.] Grayson, I mean what did things that he have to do because, you know, New York is the advertising center, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so, you know, with your move there, and the growth--location is one thing, but approaching, how to go and approach, you know, the advertising agencies and things like that.  I was just wondering if it changed your business model any?
Speaker 2: Well, Grayson was just a guy who was a salesman.  And he knew how to sell.  He knew how to organize.  He knew how to employ other people to sell and some of the things that he put in place then, we still use now.  And--
Speaker 1: Can you talk about those, some of those?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, for example, Grayson would assign accounts to people.  And he would give them so many months really, he'd give them months, to make a sale.  And if they couldn't make a sale, then he would rotate the accounts among other people on the staff.  And if they all failed, he'd fire them (chuckle).  And so that's about the way, that's about the way it was.  He, he did them the way I did him cause I told, I gave, I, I--the truth, I gave him an office really, which was larger than mine at the time [Grayson started in ca. 1948].  I paid him more salary, more, more--I, I paid him more money than I paid myself cause I wasn't paying myself a big salary.  I gave him a secretary that was more attractive than mine, and I threatened to take it away from him every week when he didn't produce (laughter).  And he produced (laughter).  So, we, we missed him, you know.  He, unfortunately, didn't have a good marriage.  And he and is wife were disagreeing all the time.  And he had a stroke and he lost his speech, and he, he could not express himself.  So I went to see him, and, and we talked and I, I could talk to him.  And I understood what he--I'd have to say what I know he wanted to say to me.  And then he'd say--I'd say, "You mean so and so?"  And he'd say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah."  So, anyway we, we stuck with him a long time.  We, he, he had trained a lot of people so it was not hard to keep running.
Speaker 1: And so he set the bar high, with you setting the bar high?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But the-- was there any way that you had to change to deal with advertising agencies because the story that you told is really going to the head of the, you know, company.
Speaker 2: I quickly learned that was the only way to do it.  In other words--see, there were, there had been, prior to 'Ebony' in terms of--'Negro Digest' was not taking advertising.  So prior to 'Ebony,' there had not been any [black] publication that was soliciting advertising from major companies and agencies.  So--and I tried talking on a lower level, and they just weren't gonna make the decision.  They didn't have the, the authority to make the decision.  So I quickly learned that you have to go to the top.  So I went to the top.  I, I put my, my, my--Did something fall? (Pause--Looks downward) Something did fall!
Speaker 1: Did something fall?
Speaker 2: (Interview observer:) She just put some paper down on the floor.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I know my eyes are not that bad. Anyway, I, I would call the, the heads of companies and the sec--always the secretaries.  I think most people make a mistake.  They call to ask to see Mr. So and So.  I never would call and ask to see Mr. So and So.  I called to ask to speak to his secretary.  And if you can sell the secretaries, they can get you an appointment sometimes.  So I would call the secretaries, and I would find out what their birthdays were and send them cards and send them flowers.  And, and my, my thinking was, my strategy was that if the president of the smallest company, nation in the world, comes to America, our president, as a matter of protocol and public policy will see them.  So I said, Well, now, you know, I'm, I'm the president of a very small company, but I am the president.  So will your president see me?" I never missed.  They, they all were willing to, to talk.  And I never lost a sale because I talked--I, I did a good job of, of researching the companies and the man, and looking him up in "Who's Who" and knowing all the things that might move them to act.  And so when I--I often said, "I'm 'One-Trip Johnson'", but 'One-Trip Johnson' had spent maybe two or three months working up on that one trip.  So that you had enough information to convince the man that they should be, should be advertising in the magazine.
Speaker 1: Now, what I'm trying to understand the role between you and Grayson because Grayson, he wasn't meeting with the presidents.  So were you double-teaming people?  Was he--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  He was in New York, and I was all over the country (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, so, but was he meeting with presidents?  He wasn't meeting with presidents.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't meeting with presidents.  He, he--
Speaker 1: He was meeting with the ad agencies, and--
Speaker 2: And, and he was selling them, yes.  No, he was selling them.  See, New York has a lot of advertising agencies, and he, he attended certain meetings of advertising clubs and what not.  So he found ways to do what I was doing.
Speaker 1: And the reason I'm trying to concentrate on this some, is that you were also essentially creating a market, you know, for black advertising, I mean, you know, a reason.  You were creating the market that you were addressing, so--
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and the reason was, I wanted to survive.  You know that, that song about "I Will Survive".  I mean you, you can't survive without advertising, and I quickly learned that.  So I did what I had to do to make the sale.  And, as I said before, in New York, it was kind of sophisticated and there were a lot of advertising agencies.  And there were many groups that Grayson could join and attend that would give him access to some of these people.  But I didn't have that in Chicago or in, or in some of the other cities that I visited.  So I had to do what I had to do to sell.
Story_ID: 18325
Speaker 1: Now, you had talked also about the, your automotive accounts being the more difficult ones.  And I'm wondering, what was your first automotive account?  Do you remember getting that?
Speaker 2: Yes, the first automobile account I didn't sell (laughter).  John F. Kennedy sold it for me (laugher).  He, he was running for president, was going to run for president.  And he sent word to one of his black assistants that he wanted to see me and would I stop in to see him when I was in, when he, when I was in Washington [D.C.]?  Well, I thought, I said, "Well, gee if he wants to see, why doesn't he come to Chicago and see me?"  He said, "Well, he can't come to Chicago and see you.  But he wants to see you.  What if I could get him to extend a social invitation to you?  Would you go to see him then?" I said, "Of course.  [The] Kennedys are not a bad group of people to hang out with.  If he extends to me a personal invitation, I will come."  So, it's--I, I think I have a copy in my book.  I have a copy in my book the letter that I got from Jacqueline Kennedy saying that, we understand you and Mrs. [Eunice Walker] Johnson are gonna be in Washington on such and such a day--it was a Sunday afternoon--"and the Senator and I would like for you to come by for dinner."  So we went by for dinner.  They lived in Georgetown, and we had dinner out, outside.  Caroline [Kennedy], who is very active now, representing her mother, was a baby in a buggy.  So we sat there and talked.  And, and he said, "Well, you know, my concern is that I'm not being treated fairly by your Washington office."  Said, "Mr. [Simeon] Booker, for some reason, writes negative things about me.  And he's always talking about I don't have a [black] secretary in my Washington office."  He said, "He neglects to say that I do have a black secretary in my Boston office.  And Mr. [Richard M.] Nixon, my opponent, doesn't have a black secretary anywhere."  So I said, "That's unfair, Senator.  It, it will be stopped."  He said, "Just like that?"  I said, "Just like that."  He said, "Well, now, if you're gonna do that for me, what can I do for you?  You know, I'm going to be president."  I said, "I believe that."  He said, "Do you want to be an ambassador to an African country?"  And they--in those days, you could only be an ambassador to an African country.  I said, "No, I don't really think I want to be an ambassador.  I'm trying to build my business now.  And if I was an ambassador, it would take away too much time from my business.  So, but I understand that your father is active in the liquor business.  Maybe you could get me some liquor advertising.  That would be helpful."  He said, "You know, he's, he's not in that business anymore.  But if you do this for me, I'll get you advertising from somebody.  I'll make somebody give you some advertising."  I said, "Well, whatever you say.  I, I trust what you say."  So about two weeks later, my secretary tells me that I have a call from Henry Ford II.  I said, "Miss--Henry Ford II wouldn't be calling me."  She said, "It sounds like him."  I said, "How do you know how he sounds?"  She said, "All I know, if I were you, I'd get on the phone."  And so I got on the phone and sure enough, it was Henry Ford II.  He had a strong, loud voice.  He said, "Mr. Johnson, Senator Kennedy was, was visiting with us not long ago--" No, no, he said, "Mr. Johnson, I was up at Hyannisport visiting with, with Senator Kennedy.  And he told me that you're a nice young man, and that you have a good magazine.  And he has asked me to consider giving you some advertising from Ford."  He said, "Oh, hell, I'm gonna give you some advertising from Ford.  And I want you to know it's coming from Senator Kennedy."  I said, "Thank you, please tell the senator I will remember it at the proper time."  And so that's how I got my first ad from Ford.  And I've been getting ads from Ford's ever since.
Speaker 1: And then did Ford open up everything else, then for automotive?
Speaker 2: It didn't open up everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, for automotive, though?
Speaker 2: No, it opened up Ford.
Speaker 1: It opened up Ford, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they're competitors.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: So, then, they don't do what the other one does unless they think it's good.  No, we had to sell the other people too.  And it was the first one, but whenever you get the first one, it's easy to sell the second one.  So we, we were able to sell others; used different techniques, but selling others.  It open, it opened the door.
Story_ID: 18326
Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide to have your in-house legal department?  When did you decide that, 'cause June Rhi--
Speaker 2: I started that when my outside counsel was not as active as he wanted to be and--
Speaker 1: As he wanted to be or as you wanted him to be?
Speaker 2: As I wanted--as he could be, that's the word.  He was getting older.  And--
Speaker 1: Can you give the name of the outside counsel?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, J. Norman Goddess.  And I got him because I--I don't know, we, we probably went over that before about the, about the War Production Board?
Speaker 1: Yes, you did.  That's a great story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, anyway, he was the one who told me how to do that.  So I used him.  And I used him until he was getting old and about to retire.  And June [Acie] Rhinehart came to me--she was, she was my assistant.  And my daughter  was still in college.  And June was smart enough to know that when my daughter [Linda Johnson Rice] graduated from college, she was going to be my assistant.  (Chuckle) So she decided that her best bet was to get into the legal part of it.  So she said to me, "If I go to law school and graduate, do I have a chance?"  I said, "Yes, if you pass the Bar."  (Chuckle)  If you go to law school, and you--and she was going at night which was not interfering with her daily work, and she went to law school.  She graduated from Loyola [Chicago] at night.  And she passed the bar the first time.  And we made her General Counsel.  And, of course, she had the advantage that she had been my secretary for 18 years.  So she knew the company.  I think that helps for a lawyer to know the company.  They can't just know the law.  They got to know the company.  And we've been very pleased with her since then.
Speaker 1: Well, that helped with the easy transition with that because often there could be, you know, competing interests or not understanding.  So she--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, now, what were your thoughts though about, I mean cause you could have easily said I'm gonna go--I know she came to you, but you could have said, you know, this person is getting older, but I'm gonna find, you know, another outside counsel.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, number one, she is still the best secretary I ever had (chuckle).  And, when I, when I, I almost cried when I made her General Counsel cause I couldn't give her any letters any more.  I had to just sit down and think about it.  I could just tell her what I wanted to do and she would, she knew how to do it.  So it was, I was just delighted that she was, was gonna do it.  And, and I've never regretted it.  That's been many--I don't know how many years ago.  It's been many years ago now.
Speaker 1: So what were the issues?  What were a lot of the legal issues that were, you know, coming in or, you know, presented, just so people understand sort of the--
Speaker 2: Well, the legal issues that you have, is number one, not to print anything that's gonna get you a lawsuit.  And so the lawyer reads everything--not so much 'Ebony', but 'Jet.'  Everything that goes into 'Jet' is read by a lawyer before we go to press.  And so it tends to keep you out of court.  And so the, the, I think the goal is not to win a suit--the goal is to not to have one.  And Miss Rhinehart, June, has been able to do that.  And, of course, she brings in people to work with her.  And she trains them to do that.  So, we close the magazines on every Friday and Monday.  And they're here after work going through the stories to make sure that we're not running anything that would get us in trouble.
Speaker 1: Now, was, Goss (sic), was he doing that before, reading--
Speaker 2: Who is that--
Speaker 1: He was reading every--
Speaker 2: Who is that?
Speaker 1: I mean your outside counsel, was he reading every--
Speaker 2: He was, he was not.
Speaker 1: But this was a--
Speaker 2: But he, but he met with us once a week, and tried to give advice on what to avoid.  He, he was good.  But it's not as good as having somebody reading the stories.
Speaker 1: But who--
Speaker 2: And they, and they called him.
Speaker 1: Okay, but who instituted that policy about Jet?  Was there some incident that made that, you know, "we should do this"?
Speaker 2: No, there was no particular incident.  It's just that I knew it needed to be done.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, you--
Speaker 2: So I got-- you got to give me some credit for having some kind of vision (laughter).
Speaker 1: I, I give you a lot of credit for having a lot of vision, not just some kind of vision.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, I know.
Speaker 1: I left here the other day, I was just telling people, he, you know, he started everything at 24.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's--"and he was a millionaire by thirty." (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's what I'm saying--so I mean I give you a lot of credit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's, it was also determination.  And, and some advice that my mother gave me years ago.  She said, "Son, always treat people the way 'you' want to be treated".  And you make a lot of friends like that, you don't make many enemies if you treat people the way you want to be treated.
Story_ID: 18327
Speaker 1: Now, Simeon Booker, you had mentioned him in the whole story with Kennedy.  And I want to ask how he happened to come here, and when were the bureaus opened up and what order?
Speaker 2: Well, well, the first bureau was Washington [D.C.].  And it opened up because Simeon Booker had studied at Harvard on some special journalism program.  He came back, and he was working for the "Washington Post".  And he was not satisfied.  And he called one day and said, could he work for me in Chicago?  And I said, fine.  So he came here and he had a tele--what he called a "telephone beat".  He would call people in Washington and other places where he thought there would be a story.  And he did it, so the time finally came, I said, "Booker, we really need to open a Washington office and so many things are happening in Washington, and blacks seem to be coming into their own".  And he said, "Well, I'll interview some people."  So after about two weeks, he said, "Mr. J, I've interviewed a lot of people, and none of them are qualified."  None of them are good enough to head that office.  If you don't mind, I'll just take the job myself."  (Laughter)  I said, "Okay," 'cause I knew him and I respected him.  And so, he took the job himself.  So he went to Washington, and that's how he happened to be in Washington.  But what I didn't know is that he was a Republican.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay (whispered)
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  That's why he was taking these, these these ja-, ja-, things, you know, little, little things at the people [iDemocratic politicians].  And he never knocked them openly, but he would take little--
Speaker 1: Junkets (sic)?
Speaker 2: Junkets at, jabs at them.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, jabs at people.
Speaker 2: Jabs, he'd take little jabs at them.  And so, I, I didn't know that.  I, later, I did learn, but that's why I, that's why he was taking--that's why he was not knocking [Richard M.] Nixon, and he was knocking [John F.] Kennedy [during the 1960 presidential campaign].  But I learned something in talking to Kennedy because what he said, he said, "You know, as you move along, you're gonna deal with a lot of political people.  It's not so much that we want you with us.  We just don't want you against us."  And I followed that advice over all these years, and it's especially true with Ebony.  Wherever there's elections, we never take sides.  We've never endorsed anybody.  But Ebony has an issue, which covers, which is out now--it came out before the [November 2004 ] election, in which we select a group of questions that we think would be, issues rather, that would be important to black people.  And we ask them, "What will they do about it?"  And so, that has been our way of, of doing it.  And that's why--how I've been able to be invited to dinner at the White House under every president since Eisenhower.
Speaker 1: Now, with your Washington, D.C. office, did you find you had to operate a little--I mean the bureau, I'm sorry.  Did you find you had to operate a little differently there or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, we called it an office. I--it, it's a bureau.  But I, I just say the Washington office.  And we're, we're half a block from the White House.  So they, they have good relations with, with the White House.
Story_ID: 18328
Speaker 1: Was there any difference in operating in Los Angeles at all?  The black community would have been happy to have you there, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I was with them for a while, but I was trying to get away (laughter), cause they didn't live in the best neighborhood (laughter).  See, I always wanted to be in a good neighborhood.  As I say in the book [autobiography], I wanted to be on "the front streets of America."  And when I first went to Los Angeles [California], I was in--what, what is the black section called?
Speaker 1: Watts?
Speaker 2: No, not Watts.
Speaker 1: No, L.A., the--
Speaker 2: (interview observer:) Central, South Central.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Cen-, South Central
Speaker 2: South Central, South Central.  No, I had an office in South Central.  I was not pleased with it.  And I was still trying to get on Wilshire Boulevard.  And I had--but I, I went to Wilshire Boulevard.  The guy showed me a nice place, and he said--but then, then he called me.  He said, "I need to talk to you again.  Something has come up about your, your ability to, to pay the rent."  I said, it's, it's a-- "I'm trying to get into the building on a lease of three years.  What if I paid you all three years, cash, in advance, would you, they'll need to check my credit?"  And he said, "No."  He said, "It's not me." (laughter).  "It's my boss who doesn't want to rent to you."  He said, "I think you should get it.  I'm not very high up at the company now, but if I ever get a top position, I'll get you a place on Wilshire Boulevard."  I forgot about it.  I thought he was just talking, being nice.  But about two years later, he called me.  He said, "Remember the guy who told you he'd get you on Wilshire Boulevard?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "I'm the guy, and I can get you there now."  He said, "We--I'm, I'm now the vice president.  And I can make final decision, and there's a new place opening up."  I don't know what our address is there now, well, it's, it's changed since then cause we've gone further North, further, further--moreso, we're in--what are we in now?
Speaker 1: What county is it?
Speaker 2: What's the, what's the--?
Speaker 1: (interview observer:) Beverly
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (interview observer:) Are we--? Beverly Hills?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh, you're Beverly Hills.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in Beverly Hills now.  But we wanted to just get higher up on Wilshire Boulevard.  And, and he got us a place.  And we stayed there for years and years.  So, out of that I learned, which I knew all the time, there are good white people in the world (laughter).
Speaker 1: But all these markets you had to open up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were essentially saying to them that we're as good as anyone.  And--
Speaker 2: I never used that word.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Oh. What did you use then, Mr. Johnson?
Speaker 2: That I will be a 'desirable'--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay (whispered)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --person (laughter).  See, you're not ever challenging them.  And that, that challenges them.
Story_ID: 18329
Speaker 1: (Lydia Davis Eady, Johnson VP of Promotion:) He's [John H. Johnson] been my surrogate father and mentor over my whole career.
Speaker 2: I know.  I know.
Speaker 1: And I'm the godfather to her son, so.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So we--and I stole her from her mother and father. Out of that room over there  (points), they were on a tour.  But this is what I mean by always searching for talent.  Lydia was on a tour with her mother and father.  And they, they got up here to me and had been over the whole building then, and I said--then they introduced me and all.  I said, "Young lady, where, what school did you go to?"  And she said, I graduated from Harvard--tell 'em.
Speaker 2: Howard University.
Speaker 1: Howard University, I mean, what's the, what's the title you had?  Cum--
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated from Howard, then my Dad piped up, "Magna cum laude."
Speaker 1: Magna cum laude.  So magna cum laude.  So I said, "Well, you know, is this a place you'd like to work?"  She said, "I'd like to consider it."  And so she came to work, and she tells me now it's been twenty-three ago.
Speaker 2: Twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: Twenty-three ago.
Speaker 2: See-- So really--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So, but here again, it shows what I was trying--I was always looking for someone who could add to the, to Johnson Publishing Company.
Speaker 2: And add value.
Speaker 1: And add value to the Johnson Publishing Company.
Speaker 2: Which was not always the case with other--well, they couldn't afford it.  A lot of entities couldn't afford.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But even those who could afford it, didn't afford it (laughter).
Speaker 2: They wouldn't put the money up, that's right.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't put the money in.  And I learned early, you, you've got to pay good money to get good people.
Story_ID: 18330
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about Jackie Robinson?
Speaker 2: Well, about two weeks before he died, he came to visit me in this building [Johnson Publishing Company headquarters in Chicago, Illinois].  We, we ran stories about him.  We, we talked to him.  I guess we don't have any particular stories about him, except that he--Jackie was always a person who admired black progress.  Somebody told him that I had built this new building on Michigan Avenue.  And he wanted to see it.  So he paid a visit here just to see it.  And he died about, oh, a month or so later.
Story_ID: 18331
Speaker 1: What about Joe Louis [Joseph Louis Barrow]?  Did you have much contact with him--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of contact,
Speaker 1: --because he, okay.
Speaker 2: I had a lot of contact with Joe Louis.  I guess the biggest contact I had is that his wife fell out with him, and--
Speaker 1: His first wife.
Speaker 2: First wife, yeah, his first wife.
Speaker 1: Her name was--
Speaker 2: Marla , Marla [sic, Marva] Trotter.
Speaker 1: Marla, that's right.
Speaker 2: And Marla fell out with him, and she wrote us a letter and told us he was throwing away his money.  And he was gambling, and he'd lost a lot of money.  And we [JPC] were foolish enough--we didn't have an inside house--we didn't have inside counsel then.  And we were foolish enough to run it.  And so Joe Louis sued us.  So, and we--the lawyer said, "Well, maybe you can get her, since she told you this story."  She said, "Hum, what are y'all talking about?  I never told you anything like that." (laughter).  So, so the suit pursued.  And I called up Joe Louis.  And he said, "I, I have no desire to hurt you, but I wondered why y'all trying to hurt me."  I said, "Joe, I, I really was not fully aware of it because I have nothing but great admiration for you."  He said, "Look, I don't want to be in any suit with you.  I'm trying to move ahead.  You have moved ahead.  If you will give an apology and pay my legal fees, I'll forget the whole thing."  And that's what he did.  And the only other story I have about Joe Louis is that he was poor and down and out, and he was in London.  And he was a greeter, at a casino.  And I sent one of my writers to London to do a story on him.  He said, "No, I, I don't want young people to see me like this.  I, I have not come to a good end.  The government is on me about taxes.  Tell him, tell him to let me go by on this.  Tell him I let him go by on one, and he should let me go by on this one."  So we never published the story.
Speaker 1: Why do you think, Mr. Johnson, he met the end that he did, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, he had bad advice in, in his, in his tax situation.
Speaker 1: But that was also some lawyers, you know, there was another firm.  Is it Bing, Bing--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Bing?  Is it Bing?
Speaker 2: Bing, Bing, not Bing.
Speaker 1: Another lawyer, wait, I may have his name wrong.  But--
Speaker 2: Who did what?
Speaker 1: I thought he went to jail also.  He died in jail because of taxes and I thought he was Joe Louis's lawyer.
Speaker 2: No, don't know.  Joe Louis--
Speaker 1: I think I have the name wrong.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Truman Gibson.
Speaker 1: Well, it was Truman--
Speaker 2: Gibson.
Speaker 1: --but there was--
Speaker 2: Truman [K.] Gibson and Ted Jones, who was a CPA.  He was a CPA.  But what happened is--and I knew them both, what happened is they were--Joe Louis always tried to have black people employed.  And they--when Joe Louis and Marva divorced, they came up with the idea that they could save him taxes by not paying alimony.  And they could list her as his manager.  And then he could pay her as his manager and wouldn't have the tax burden.  And the government quickly saw through that.  And that's how they got him.
Speaker 1: But it was just because of the taxes they were going after him.
Speaker 2: It was, it was all the taxes.  This was all the taxes.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, cause--
Speaker 2: That's the only government has to get you is your taxes (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You're a lawyer now, you should know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, no, no, I know.  But I was just wonder--you know, because the whole story.  You tell that story, and then I think in dying, at--in Las Vegas, you know, that he was also a bouncer out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and later he was also a bouncer there.  But by then he had married a rich woman who was a lawyer.  I've forgotten what her name was.  She was from Las Vegas, but he married rich woman who was, who was a lawyer.  He married--first he married the woman--
Speaker 1: Rose Merrill [sic, Rose Morgan]
Speaker 2: Rose Merrill, who was well-to-do, cause he realized he couldn't make any more money.  So he decided he had to marry women who were well-to-do.  She was well-to-do.  And then he married a rich lawyer, who, out in Las Vegas.  And that's how he survived.
Story_ID: 18332
Speaker 1: Now, what about Sammy Davis?  Do you have a story about him?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Did you have much contact with him?  He--
Speaker 2: I had a lot of contact with him.  He, he used to come to Chicago all the time.  He also wanted us to have him cooked, home-cooked meals, like fried chicken and (laughter) collard greens (laughter), you know, all these kind of things.  No, Sammy was a, was a friend.  And he, he came here whenever he was in town.  And Sammy also appeared at the Chez Pari which did not allow blacks, but Sammy said, I have a few that, black friends, and I can't come to Chicago unless they can see me.  So they had a special Sammy Davis table.  And whenever he came to town, he invited to sit at his table, which means that's the only time we could see him at the Chez Pari.  And so, and then and I, I saw him in Vegas.  And I, I saw a lot of him.  Then we also covered him whenever he wanted to be covered.  Isaac Sutton went with him to Australia.  So we had a good relationship with Sammy.  I, I grieved when he died.
Speaker 1: And his, and you knew his wife, Altoviese?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not as well as I knew him.
Speaker 1: Knew him, okay, yeah.  And you had known him a long time.
Speaker 2: But I'd known him a long time.  I knew him before he was famous (laughter).  And he was always the same.
Speaker 1: Now, what about--do you think his experiences mirrored yours but only Hollywood style in some respect, cause he had to break barriers.  Do you think there was any, any--I mean you were--he was not a business person.
Speaker 2: Well, he had a talent that could not be denied.  So I don't think there's a comp--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that there's anything between us, except we were friends.  And, you know, what got him into trouble was he was, he fell in love with Kim Novack, who was a white movie star.  And he, and she was from Chicago.  And her parents were approve--they, her parents approved of the marriage.  But Hollywood people who had invested a lot of money in her though they'd lose it if she married a black man, which they probably would have.  And one the, the head of one of the studios wanted to put out a "Hit" on Sammy to, to kill him.  And I saw this several times in other media.  And, and he called up Mickey Cohen, who was a, a Jewish Mafia guy.  And it turn, it just turned out that Mickey Cohen was a friend of Sammy's. And they wanted him to get a hit to kill Sammy.  And he said, he's a good boy.  I, I--there's got to be another way.  There's got to be another way.  I, I just can't order a hit on this kid.  He's too good.  He means too much, he mean to, means well too much.  What else can we do?  He said, well.  He said, what if he marries a black woman, a colored girl, he said.  He said, yeah, that'll work if he, if he--this, it was around 12:00 o'clock, if he marries before sundown.  (Laughter).  So, so Sammy--I think the lady's name was Lorraine (ph.), somebody.  So she was the only one who was appearing in, in, in--he, Sammy was in Las Vegas, and she was the only one appearing, Lorraine, somebody.  So she was there.  And so his, Sammy's people, got in touch with her.  And she agreed to marry him before sundown for a certain amount of money with the understanding that after reasonable time, she would divorce him without requesting alimony.  So Sammy married her, and they took the Hit off.  And (laughter), and then, and then there was something else I read.  I'm not even sure where I read it, where Sammy was near death and she went to see him, this white girl that he couldn't marry.  And when she came in, Sammy said, you know I always loved you.  She said, I know because I always loved you, but it just couldn't be.
Story_ID: 18333
Speaker 1: But Diahann Carroll, what about Diahann Carroll?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew Diahann Carroll.  I, I didn't interview her, but my editors did, and she visited the company [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois].  And I knew her as a friend. Mmm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I remember that article, I saw an old 'Ebony' recently, actually, that my parents had.  There was a whole article about her relationship with Sidney Poitier.  And then in hindsight, it looked, you know, it sounded sort of scandalous (laughter).  I mean it went on, you know, and it told about their love--you know, and--
Speaker 2: What, what happened is they, they fell in love, you know, on--she, they were making a movie in Paris.  Paris something.  And they, they fell in love, and, and they were supposed to get married.  And Poitier went to Mexico and got a divorce.  And Diahann was in a hotel while he went there.  And when he came, when he came back, she had run up a great big bill at the hotel.  And he decided he couldn't afford anybody who was gonna run up, run that kind of bill up.  So, so he canceled, he, he canceled the wedding.  And Diahann, of course, married a young guy who worked for us, Bob [Robert] DeLeon.  And I was his Best Man, and we, we--she got married in the apartment that she and Poitier had bought together.  And she was telling the story.  She said, "You know, I worked too--I, I kept this apartment because I worked so hard to get it because when Poitier and I fell out, he and the landlord wanted to sell the apartment.  He gave me two weeks to come up with my share of it.  And I couldn't come up with my share of it.  So he bought it for him--so, I, I was--" No, she said, "I could--in the end, I came up with my share of it."  And she said, "I'm not even gonna tell you all the things I did to, to get this money.  So I'm not gonna give up this apartment."  So she still had the apartment.  And she got married in that apartment with Bob DeLeon.
Speaker 1: And then he died mysteriously.
Speaker 2: He, he died, it seems like he--number one, Bob, they should have gotten married because he was a really, a very bright, up and coming editor.  And when they married, when they first married, I understand she told him she was gonna move to Chicago.  And we told him, I said, "She's never gonna move to Chicago."  And she didn't.  And so he kept flying out there, trying to dream up stories in Los Angeles.  And finally, I, I called him the room, in this very room here, and I said, "Bob, you got to choose between us.  You got to either choose your job or choose your wife."  And--because you can't keep flying to California.  You've just, you've just made your last trip.  So he just said, he said, "As much as I hate to, I guess I got to give up my job because I, I want to stay with her."  So he went to stay with her, and she got a few jobs for him, being producers of things she was trying to do.  And it seems like they were having a heated argument, and he--and they had been drinking.  And he drove home around an area that he was used to driving in, but somehow he didn't drive properly that night, and the car turned over, and killed him.
Speaker 1: So, it was probably a case, he didn't, he didn't have anything to do, and she had all the celebrity?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he had nothing to do.  And he, he didn't want to give up celebrities, and he didn't want to give up his job.  But, so, celebrity won out.
Story_ID: 18334
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]?  Did you have much contact with him?  'Cause he was always such a character.
Speaker 2: He was a character, but he,
Speaker 1: [laughter]
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--he was a--he was a loveable character (laughter).  I knew him well.  And he, I remember he, he visited us here in this building--no, it was the old building.
Speaker 1: At 18--
Speaker 2: Eighteenth, eighteenth place. He visited us there, and he was still married to Hazel--what's her name, Hazel?
Speaker 1: Hazel Scott.
Speaker 2: Hazel Scott.
Speaker 1: Hazel, he was still married to Hazel Scott.  And they were acting like they hadn't met for, for a long time.  They hap-just happened, both happened to be here at the same time.  And I remember Adam saying that--Hazel saying really, that "nobody understands Adam and me, but we understand each other."  He, he was a, he was a--blaze--he, he was a great guy, who was handsome, well-educated and willing to take risks to improve black development, although, you know, he could have passed for white.  As a matter of fact, at his church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York], they called him "Mr. Jesus".  And--but he was very much into the black community.  As a matter of fact, when we, when we went to Ghana for the, with, with, on the, for the, for the inauguration of Ghana, which was the first African, African country to get--freedom, Adam was there.  And I remember he--they were dancing, and he selected the blackest, fattest, African woman he could find and got out on the floor and started dancing (laughter).  And they said, "That Adam is okay."  (Laughter)  But he, he had no--although he could have passed for white, he refused to do it.
Story_ID: 18335
Speaker 1: I was just asking about Adam Clayton Powell and his sons.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] had two sons, one by Hazel Scott, who named her son Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. [sic Adam Clayton Powell III], I believe.  And then he and, and Hazel Scott divorced.  And he used to go to Puerto Rico all the time.  And there was a Puerto Rican woman [Yvette Diago] who was, worked in the, in the place where you buy tickets.  And he fell in love with her and married her.  And they had a son.  And she wanted to name her son, Adam Clayton Powell [IV]  And so the news people were asking him, "How can there be two?"  He said, "Oh, she's my wife.  She can name him anything she wants to name him."  (laughter).  And she did.  And they both live in New York.
Speaker 1: But do you have any other stories about him, any things that you sort of remember.  You know, he had his--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he had a great desire for females.  And I remember we had a girl in our fashion show, Corrine, Corrine Powell, I think it--Corrine something--
Speaker 1: Corrine Huff.
Speaker 2: Corrine Huff, yeah.  She had been a--she won a beauty contest, I know.  And she was in our fashion show one year.  And then during the, during at, at--during the down time, she was working for Adam Clayton Powell in his office in, in Washington.  So I wanted her to be in our show the second year.  And she said, "Well, I, I can't be in it unless you get permission from the congressman 'cause I'm working for him now."  And I called him up, and he said, "Well, John, I can talk frankly to you.  This girl has a great opportunity in Washington working under me--did you get that, 'under me'?"  I said, "Yeah, I got it Congressman.  We, I'll not call again about that." (laughter).  He was that kind of guy.  (laughter)  If I didn't hear it the first time, he, (laughter) he told me the second time.  And then, of course, she, she went with him Bhemani (ph.), you know, when he lost his case, she was with him in Bigamy.  And he was never there, and when he came back, at one time, she had married the Captain of his boat (laughter).  It was a jet black guy.  And so they were asking her, and she said, "Well, he was never home.  So I had to marry somebody (laughter) who was home."
Speaker 1: Because he, you know, I remember someone saying that, when they were starting the [Congressional] Black Caucus and he, you know, they went to him, and he's like, "Why is (unclear) there a Black Caucus, there's me.  (Laughter).  There doesn't need to be a Black Caucus."
Speaker 2: Well, no, he, he did a lot of good things.  I remember that before blacks were engaging in politics as active as they were, he made a speech at the, at the--here in Chicago, at the--where do we have the Fashion Show?
Speaker 1: Out there at McCormick Place [Convention Center].
Speaker 2: McCormick Place, he made a big speech at McCormick Place.  And he said, blacks need to seize audacious power.  We need to run for mayor; we need to run for congressman; we need to run for governor.  We need to run for anything you can run for.  And pretty soon after that, blacks started running for some of these offices.  He, he was, he was a, a pioneer.  And he wouldn't have lost that suit if he had showed up in, in, in New York.  You know, he was sued--he called a black woman a bag woman, and there was--and she sued him.  And the jury expected, they were all looking forward to him coming and, and listening to his testimony.  And he refused to go, and he lost the case.  And that was kind of the beginning of his downfall.
Story_ID: 18336
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go to your family and, you know, your children and their adoption--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and I want to know, because you adopted in 19--was it first 1957 or '58 [1958]?  Was it '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd have to look it up (unclear) exactly.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay, I think that it's 1958--
Speaker 2: First, I adopted a son--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and later I adopted a daughter.
Speaker 1: Now, talk about what was the decision that sort of led up to that because you--
Speaker 2: Well, we--my wife [Eunice Walker Johnson] had several miscarriages, and I wanted someone to carry on the, the company.  And so I thought it could be done with the son.  And I adopted a son.  And I named him John, Jr. [John Harold Johnson, Jr.] I didn't know at the time, and, that he had--didn't know until he was about three or four years old that he had sickle cell anemia, which is a deadly disease.  And I remember calling the adoption agency and, and saying that, "Gee, shouldn't you have had a blood test of, of my son?"  "Yeah, we, we made a big mistake, and, and it's our fault.  And we'll take him back."  I said, "Lady, you got to be crazy now.  He's been in my house for three years.  He's my son.  I don't want to take him back.  I would not take him back under any conditions, and I love him.  I care about him.  But you should be more careful for other people."  And, of course, he--he, he lived until he was twenty-five.  And he had a good life.  I, I cared about him deeply, and I, I supported him in every possible way.  I remember he got married when he was eighteen years old.  He, he--and I, there's a picture of us, you know, my mother and my, my wife and I sitting at the, at the, at the--where he got married.  And you would think we were at a funeral cause we were all so sad about it.  But we couldn't tell him he had time.  He didn't have time.  So if he wanted to get married, he married.  So he, he married a white--this was a white girl.  He married the white girl from Vermont the first time.  And then later on, he married a black girl.  And, and we, we--so whatever he wanted to do, I tried to help him do it.
Speaker 1: Mr. Johnson, what did having children sort of add to your, you know, life?  I mean at the time your children came, you had achieved great financial successful, but I was just wondering, what did you feel it added?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt fulfilled because I think everybody wants to be a father and a mother.  And I wanted to be a father.  And I--and even though my son did not make it, I never regretted it.  I say that in my book.  Not once in all of his illnesses, did I regret adopting him.  And if I had to do it over again, I'd do it over again.  And I'm kind on the religious side.  I think the Lord meant for him to be with me cause he couldn't have lived that long with anybody else because we had to go to the hospital all the time.  I, I lived near the University of Chicago Hospital, and we could just race out and take him.  And we could give him the best care, and, and, and he lived a good life because what happened is that, they had just come out with blood transfusions.  And I remember and I went to see the doctor and the doctor said, "We have this new thing.  We don't know what the consequences will be in the future, but for now, it means that we take out all the sickling blood, and we put in the new blood, the good blood.  And during this period, he is, his health is good.  He doesn't have sickle cell anemia.  And, but you have to change it every six or eight weeks."  So we're sitting there, and he's saying, well, what do--he's asking me, "What do you think?"  I said, "It's not for me to say.  It's for my son to say.  Whatever he wants to do, I want to do."  He said, "Well, I want to have a good life, even though it's shorter."  And that's how he did.  And so he, he had a good life.
Speaker 1: Did you find that having kids brought out a different side of you?  I mean, you know, you had been--I mean all of, you know, when you adopt, the kids are there, you know.  And so, do you remember that period when, you know, all of a sudden the house was full of little people and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I enjoyed it.  I, I enjoyed it.  I enjoyed having the little people around.  I never, I never regretted the adoptions of my son, even though he passed away.  And you know I don't, I don't regret my daughter [Linda Johnson Rice], who is now the CEO of the company [Johnson Publishing Company] and doing a great job, doing all the travel that I didn't, would not like to do (laugher).  I know, just, I think it was Monday, she--there was a big board meeting of an advertising agency, and she left at 6:00 o'clock in the morning and came back at midnight that night.  I would not like to do that (chuckle), but she loves to do it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know much about sickle cell?
Speaker 2: I knew noth-I had never heard of it until the doctor told me, never in my life had I heard of it.  And I'm kind of glad I hadn't because I would not--I might have had some reluctance and, and he had a good life.  And I had a good life with him.
Speaker 1: But do you think there was as much known about the disease at that time?
Speaker 2: There was nothing known about it.
Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna say.
Speaker 2: No, there was nothing about sickle cell.  I don't think there's that much known about it now.  See, it's a black disease.  And so, white people control the media, and they don't know anything about, and they don't write anything about it.
Speaker 1: Now, your daughter now, when--she got adopted pretty soon after your son.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--about, about two years after.
Speaker 1: And can you talk sort of about her as a, you know, a young person, a young child?
Speaker 2: Well,--
Speaker 1: Did she spend more time with your wife?
Speaker 2: No, she spent time with both of us.  I guess they both spent more time with my wife because they were at home with her.  But I think they divided their love between us.  And, and then and now (chuckle).
Story_ID: 18337
Speaker 1: Tell about the story of why you--wait, when did your wife [Eunice Walker Johnson] start getting active back in the business.  I mean or did she ever, you know, leave cause she was there with you at the very beginning, you know, licking envelopes, you know, doing all of that.  Was she there the whole time, or did she, you know, go and do sort of the wife and the mother thing?
Speaker 2: Well, not that--during the time that the kids were growing up, she spent time with them.  She did not spend time at the office.  She, she spent time at the office as--well, she's not spending much time.  But she spent time in the office when, when she began to be active in the [Ebony] Fashion Show.
Speaker 1: So, but the Fashion Show, as you told it, was really sort of your idea that came out of--wait, it was--
Speaker 2: Out of New Orleans.
Speaker 1: New Orleans, right.
Speaker 2: Mrs., Mrs., Mrs. what is her name?
Speaker 1: (Interview observer):  Mrs. Dent.
Speaker 2: And she was with Dillard, you know--was it?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Just Mrs. [Jessie Covington] Dent.  I was saying--
Speaker 2: (Interview observer): But Dillard--her husband, was President or something
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--No, her president--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--her husband
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--was president of Dillard University.  That's what that was.
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: I was on the board of Dillard's Department Store, so I didn't want to get that confused.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But her husband was, was President of Dillard University.
Speaker 2: And you--and the thought about that, so did your wife get excited about that or was there--I'm just trying to see, was there a joint--
Speaker 1: Well, in, in the--no, no.  In the beginning now, Freda [C.] DeKnight was alive
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh that's right, okay. (whispered)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --and was the one who put the show together.  My wife didn't have anything to do with it.  She went with me to, to the opening of the show, but--and then Freda died.  And then my wife took it over.
Speaker 2: But your wife took it in a new direction too, didn't she?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) With the, you know, looking with French, you know, at fashions, you know, the high couture--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, no, Freda did all that.
Speaker 2: Oh, she did that, okay.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, the first trip that my wife and I made to Paris, we made with Freda. Mmm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Now, what was Freda's background?
Speaker 1: Freda DeKnight I met--Earl [B.] Dickerson, who was a counselor for Supreme [Liberty] Life [Insurance] had a party for Paul Robeson who was in town.  And Freda DeKnight was always cooking and helping people.  And she cooked the meal that night.  And so I said to him, I said, "Gee, counselor, this was an excellent meal.  Did Mrs. Dickerson cook it?"  He said, "Oh, no, she couldn't cook anything like that.  It's Freda DeKnight."  He said, "She wants to meet you anything because she--she wants to  meet you any way because she wants to write for 'Ebony'."  And I said, "Fine."  So we met her, and she told me she wanted to write a cooking thing for "Ebony", and she did.  And she worked with us until she died.
Speaker 2: But cooking for "Ebony" and writing the column for "Ebony" is different than doing high fashion.
Speaker 1: No, but she, she was a--
Speaker 2: She had it.
Speaker 1: She had a lot of talent, and she was always doing more than one thing at a time.  While she was doing the thing for "Ebony", she also put the first show together for, for Mrs. Dent.  She was, she just was talented, very talented and knew how to grab anything and get the most out of it.
Speaker 2: And was--
Speaker 1: And her husband, her husband had been, Ren DeKnight had been a member of the Delta Rhythm Boys.  And that's a, it was a, it was a group, a singing group.  And she had traveled abroad to Paris and Rome and other places when they were in the early stages of their marriage.  So she, she was really--she knew what was going on in the world.
Speaker 2: Now, did--you know, speaking of groups like that, do you--I had done Cathy Hughes recently.  Her mother was part of the International Sweethearts of Rhythm.  Do you remember that group, sir?
Speaker 1: I remember hearing about them, but I don't anybody in there.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, with--how did you know that you had something with, you know, the Ebony Fashion Show, and that you wanted to pursue this, not just as a, you know, a sort of a special event, but as a business?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened is, as I said before, when we gave the first show, Mrs. Dent and her group made about $6,000.  And since we were paying for everything, we lost about $20,000.  But I could sense that we had a good idea.  And Mrs. Dent said, "I'd be willing to call some of my friends, who would love to put on a show like this."  And she called about ten of her friends, and we put on about ten shows the first year.  And then, now we're putting on about 200.  So, yeah, I think you have to have some ability to sense things.  And I, I could tell right away, this is a good idea.  And it was.
Speaker 2: And was there any criticism--because you know, Ebony Fashion [Fair] Show led to, you know, Fashion Fair Cosmetics, but was there, was there any sense or thing that, okay, this is getting far from publishing--maybe we shouldn't be doing it? Or you considered it all an extension of your brand?
Speaker 1: I, I--it never occurred to me that it wasn't the right thing to do.  Anything I do, I felt was, anything I did, I felt was the right thing to do.  And I never cared about what other people said.  You can't care about what other people said.  My mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams], who, who did a lot of Southern talk, she said, "Don't ever let no one monkey stop no show."  (Laughter)  So, I never cared about what people said.  If I believed in it, and--then I did it.  And so far, it's worked out.
Story_ID: 18338
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Johnson, when did the, in terms of like expansion of "Ebony", you know, internationally, when--you know, or the Johnson Publishing Enterprise International, when did that really occur, and when did you--you know, because your focus--I'm going back a little bit, but your focus was on the United States at the beginning, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was--I focused on what I could deal with.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  But--
Speaker 2: But I was never against going abroad.  I just didn't have the capacity to go. Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I understand, so when did that come about?  When did you decide that it was the right time to do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I decided it was the right time when we got letters from people in London [England]--they were--the distributor was distributing "Ebony" to London before I even knew he was, you know.  It was, it was just listed as foreign.  And so we were selling 25,000 copies a month in, in London alone because you have so many West Indians and Africans who were delighted to read the magazine.  And so I just think in business you have to be aware of trends, to sense whether there's something in it for you.  As a matter of fact, I remember Mr. [Earl B.] Dickerson, that I used to talk to all the time, he said, "Johnson, you always have to look at a situation and see if you are in it.  Now, if you're in it, move on.  But if you're not in, back off." (laughter)  So, so whenever I was in it, I moved on.
Speaker 1: You mean, wait, if you have to look at a situation and see if you're in it, meaning that you a future--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, whether I can, you have to, see if you have a future in it.
Speaker 1: A future in that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you have a future in it, then you've got to pursue it.  And we've done that with so many things now.  And we never regretted any of them.
Story_ID: 18339
Speaker 1: When we look at your life, the '40's [1940s] were building, the '50's [1950s] were building.  The '60's [1960s] is when you really sort of expand, you know, and get really active, politically and civically, and on boards--
Speaker 2: And get active in what way?
Speaker 1: Politically, civically and on boards.
Speaker 2: Yeah, never politically now.  Never politically.
Speaker 1: But, okay, but you don't consider that--but being invited to every President's--I mean to the White House--
Speaker 2: I got invited because I wasn't involved in politics, you know.  I explained before, that John F. Kennedy told me, "We don't so much want you with us.  We just don't want you against us."
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So y-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --Now, now, if I had been with them, I would have to endorse them.  And I would have to endorse some Republicans and most blacks are Democrats.  Or if I endorsed a Democrat, all my advertising is white and Republican.
Speaker 1: But you were still able--Okay, let me just say this.  You were able to see politics from the highest level in many ways.
Speaker 2: But I never saw it, I never thought about politics in that way.  I just thought that politics was something we should cover in an impartial way.  And, and we did it, and we still do it.  We--I, I think the last two issues of "Ebony" had a story about [George W.] Bush and [John] Kerry.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: So we would have been invited no matter who, who got elected.
Story_ID: 18340
Speaker 1: Now, your involvement on boards though, what--I know we told the 20th Century--
Speaker 2: 20th Century Fox.
Speaker 1: --thing, but what did you learn, I mean, you know, people say, one board leads to the other, you know--
Speaker 2: And I think that's true.
Speaker 1: And, and once you get into the circle, you know, you sort of--but what did, you had been dealing with people at, you know, you had been meeting with the presidents of companies, but once you got sitting on those boards, what vantage point did you start to see the world at differently?
Speaker 2: I never saw it differently.  I just realized that they were not as smart--they were not smarter than I was (chuckle), that my experience could match theirs any day.  And--because they all came up out of different sections of the company or either they--different division of the company.  Either they were, come out of accounting or they came out of public relations or they came out of law.  But I, I knew the whole spectrum.  And I was able to be quickly devoted--I mean quickly promoted from just being a board member to being on the executive committee of most of them once.  It's because I had a knowledge and a, and a sense of what, what the business should be about.  And it could be about any business.  Business is business.  I think I could go in any business and succeed, if I knew enough about it.  And I can learn enough about it.  I was never in the publishing business.  I was never in the, in the fashion show business.  I was never in the cosmetic business.  I just learned.  And if some other business comes up, I'll learn again (chuckle).
Story_ID: 18341
Speaker 1: I met you actually when you were getting involved in cable television.  And can you talk about that whole, you know, the process and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it would, here again, it was something new coming to the City [of Chicago, Illinois].  And a group of blacks got together, and they used, you know, they used to call this Johnson City because it was Al Johnson, John Johnson, and--
Speaker 1: George Johnson.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: George.
Speaker 2: And George Johnson, yeah.  And, and George and John were the best known ones.  And so they were trying to organize something.  So a group of us got together and said we were gonna buy some stock in, in the new thing that was coming up.  I remember I was in--when, when the stock issue came up, I was in Vermont, attending a board meeting of Greyhound.  And I called, and they said, "Well, we're gonna decide tomorrow who's gonna buy what."  So I got the people at Greyhound to put me on a private plane, and I got to Chicago the next day.  And I bought the most stock.  Then there was an argument about who gonna be Chairman.  And George wanted to Chairman.  Al Johnson wanted to be Chairman.  And somebody else wanted to be Chairman.  I said, "But this is, this is not in a field where you all are best skilled at.  I think I'm more skilled than you all are in this field."  They said, "All right, Johnson, you can be Chairman, and you can buy the most stock."  And that's what I bought, so I bought, I bought the controlling.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy your experience with the cable industry?  You don't get as deeply involved as you have with your other businesses.
Speaker 2: Because you couldn't.  I had too many people.  See, I don't have any Board of Directors here.  I don't have to ask.  I, I can make a decision without calling a board meeting, and, and we were arguing all the time.  We never agreed on anything.  So, no, I, I--it was no way to, to do it without arguing.  And so, so I think I could have done better if I had been given the right to do it.
Speaker 1: You mean if you had been the only player in there.
Speaker 2: If I'd been the only player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I, if I had been the controlling player.
Speaker 1: If you had started a cable company yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, myself-
Speaker 1: And went and bid like the others.
Speaker 2: --the others did, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, that, you could have easily done that, actually on hindsight, don't you think?
Speaker 2: It's possible, but I, I had so many other irons in the fire--
Speaker 1: Right, I understand.
Speaker 2: --I didn't have an iron I could put in that fire (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.  Now-
Speaker 2: So, you had to choose, and I never was that interested in it, then or now (chuckle).
Speaker 1: You think it was just--but had it come along at the time that, you know, would you have reacted differently?  You had done the radio station and had gotten really actively involved, but you could own that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but the radio station [WJPC-AM] was in this building [Johnson Publishing Company Headquarters, 820 S. Michigan Avenue, Chicago].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I could call the shots.  And it, and it was something that was easier to know.  See, the cable business, you [interviewer Julieanna L. Richardson] were in it, it's complicated, then and now.
Speaker 1: That's right
Speaker 2: So, no, I, I--you have to know, well, they always say, "a good actor has to know when to leave the stage."  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: So it was not for me.  I'm very satisfied that I didn't get into it.
Speaker 1: But you did okay, it did have some return, right, eventually?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I made money.  I made money.  No, I'm trying to say that I didn't, wasn't trying to control anything.  But I'd give my time and my energy, which I could not have done because they were always arguing.  And a matter of fact when we, we had partners who wouldn't even tell us where the bank account was (laughter).  So, these were white partners.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was your Continental, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Continental.  They wouldn't even tell us where they put the money.  So I, I, you know, I did what I thought was best for me at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I were doing it over again, I'd do the same thing.
Story_ID: 18342
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Johnson, your relationship with--I mean you say, okay, I wasn't politically involved, but you lived, you exist in a very political city.  Your relationship with the [Chicago Mayor] Daleys, how was that relationship, you know, both Daleys?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I was very friendly with the--
Speaker 1: Father, the Papa.
Speaker 2: With the father [Richard J. Daley].  I'm not unfriendly with the, with the son [Richard M. Daley], but I'm not friendly with him.  The father, the father, the father was like the Godfather, you know.  If, if you helped him, he would help you.  And I helped him without getting involved, and he helped me in many ways.  And so I never attempted to be friendly with, with this Daley.  But the father, I was very friendly with.  I knew him, I mean, you couldn't get anything done like this building.  I, I called him all the time about it because this is, this was the second electrical building, all electric, all electrical building in the city, the second one.  And there were all kinds of things that, that the people in, in City Hall didn't understand.  And I'd have to call the Mayor, and he said, well, I'll take care of it.  And he did.  So, we were able to, to move on.
Story_ID: 18343
Speaker 1: Okay, so, can you talk about, you know, I was asking you the question about, you know, the combination of Mr. Pace--I mean--right, Mr. Pace and Earl B. Dickerson and your mother, that those, it seemed like--
Speaker 2: Well, if I had to name the most important people in my life, I'd name them, starting with my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams].  Then I would get to Mr. [Harry H.] Pace, 'cause he was the one who discovered me, and then I would get to Mr. Dickerson, cause he was the one who saw development in me.
Speaker 1: Why Mr. Pace versus Mr. Dickerson?  Let me, you said, he, Mr. Pace discovered you, but Mr. Dickerson developed you.
Speaker 2: Well, what I meant by that is that I met Mr. Pace [in 1936] because I was being honored as a high school student.  And he said, "I've been hearing good things about you.  What are you gonna do with the rest of your life?"  "Well," I said, "I'd like to go to college, but I have a scholarship and it's only a tuition scholarship.  And I need a job because I do not expect my mother to continue her domestic work in order to put me through school."  And then he said, "Have you ever thought about working part time and going to college part time?"  I said, "No, I never thought about it cause I didn't have a job."  He said, "Well, I'm going away for the summer.  I'll be back on the first work day in September.  If you'll come in to see me, I'll find you a job."  So, that's why I say, he discovered me.
Speaker 1: And, but you say Mr. Dickerson--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see Mr., Mr. Pace didn't live very long.  Mr. Pace--this was in--I started my business in 1942.  Mr. Pace died in July 1943.  And so I spent the rest of the time with Mr. Dickerson.  He made his secretary.  He was, he was, when he was elected a member of the [Chicago] city council, I was, I was his aldermanic secretary.  And I saw him every day, and then, then he always treated me with respect like he, this affair he was giving for Paul Robeson, I was just an office boy.  And he invited me there as, as a guest like all other guests.  And he always treated me as, as an equal even though I knew we weren't.  You know, he treated everybody like that, but the other people--his name was Earl Dickerson, and they called him Earl.  I never called him Earl.  I always called him Mr. Dickerson.  He said, "You don't have to call me Mr. Dickerson, you know, I'm, I'm a lawyer.  Why don't you call me Counselor?" So after that I always called him Counselor.  But I could not find a way to call him Earl.  He had done too much for me.  I looked up to him too much.  He was not my, my equal or rather I was not his equal.
Story_ID: 18344
Speaker 1: And your mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] was a case of, what you'd call it mother wit?
Speaker 2: She had mother wit. She never, my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams] never went beyond the third grade.  And yet she had more common sense than anybody I've ever met.  She knew what to do and when to do it and how to do it.  And even when I was in business, I would call her and tell her what my problems were, and she would have the good answers.  She had common sense, and in the South, we call it "Mother Wit."  She had that.  I don't know how she got it, but she had it.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your advice to you, you know, in times of calling, can you give any of those stories?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the best advices my, best advices my mother ever gave me is, after I got started in business with 'Ebony' [magazine], I didn't have any advertising.  And I was beginning to think maybe I can't make it.  So I remember calling her one day, and said, "Mother, I, I'm just not sure I can make it."  She said, "Son, are you trying?"  I said, "Oh, yes, I'm trying."  She said, "Are you really, really trying?"  I said, "Mother, I'm really, really trying."  She said, "And always remember, son, as long as you're trying, you're never failing." (chuckle)  And I remembered that.  And so, that's good for y'all too.  As long as you're trying now, you'll never fail.  She's [interview observer Lydia Davis Eady] about to go in her own business.  So as long as you're trying, you're never failing, now, you and your business.  You, you got to, you can't lose, you can't lose faith.  You just try harder.  And that's what my mother taught me.
Speaker 1: Did she have any other sayings, sir, any other things that you, you know, you think about from time to time that she would say to you or--
Speaker 2: Well, the only one, that I think I've said, when she said--I was thinking that somebody was not going (unclear), she said, "Son, don't let no one monkey stop no show now".  (laughter)  So, so you go it alone, if you--it's better to have company, but if you don't have company, do it yourself.
Speaker 1: You know, you know, I've often--I was thinking cause I was looking at different sayings people, you know, said in these interviews, and I'd wonder sometimes, where the wisdom came from, you know, from people and how, you know, they touched, tapped into these things that, you know, if you follow it, it works.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum, yeah.  I, I'd call on my mother all the time, and remember things she told me.
Speaker 1: Now, what--I want to ask, I just want to ask your thoughts about black America because you, this is something that you've specialized in from the beginning.  And, and I'm wondering, Mr. Johnson, what--I know you say, if, you know, "I could have gone into any business, and I could--you know, if I were starting again, you know, I feel like I could be successful with anything."
Speaker 2: I believe that.
Speaker 1: Okay, which is--
Speaker 2: But the word, the key word is "I believe that".  You have to believe it.  See, I, I think what, what a number of blacks do in terms of black communities, they don't believe they can do it.  They look around and they don't see other people who have done it.  I think, maybe I'll be the first one.  And so I think you have to believe in yourself and, and that's, that's what I've, I've always believed in myself.  And that, that came from my mother.  I won't take credit away from her.  She, she believed in herself.  I mean, you know, she, she was a woman who went to the third grade, and she was picking cotton.  And she couldn't go to school, and yet, she wanted me to have a  better education, better education than she had.  And she knew I couldn't get it in Arkansas City [Arkansas].  So she saved her money and her friend said we could come to Chicago [Illinois], and she came here, you know.  She didn't know anybody except this friend.  She didn't have any skills except keeping house.  And so when we came here, she took a job making $3.00 a day, plus carfare to go and work for, for people on the North Side.  So I just think if you, if you saw that, and said, "Well, if she did all of that with nothing, what can I do with something?"  And I guess the thing I'm proudest of is that I didn't disappoint her, and that she lived to see thirty years of my success.
Story_ID: 18345
Speaker 1: And then you see your daughter [Linda Johnson Rice] who doesn't want to disappoint you either.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, and she's doing a--
Speaker 1: --as much as--
Speaker 2: --and I even have a granddaughter [Alexa Rice] who doesn't want to disappoint me either.  So, so, and I happen to believe that women are as smart as men, sometimes smarter.  I think I'm looking at two that I think are smarter.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's so sweet! (laughter).
Speaker 2: But you see, most men think a man has to do something, you see.  Not only are women smarter, but they're more honest.  They're more honest.  You, you can trust them more.  So, I, so I'm delighted.  So people always say, are you--I know when my, when my granddaughter was born and I was on the board of the, of the Continental Bank.  And when I said, they said--it was in the newspapers that I had a granddaughter.  "Wasn't you disappointed?"  I said, "No, I wasn't disappointed.  Why would I be disappointed?"  She, she, she's--and that's when I told them the story about I think women are just as smart as men, or smarter sometimes.  So why would I be regretful that my granddaughter is a woman, a girl?  No, I'm not.  (chuckle).  And I wasn't, I wasn't--my daughter was not disappointed and my granddaughter--my granddaughter is, is--she's strong.  I, I remember the, her father--did I tell the story about her father?
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: Her father, her father was with her, her father is--they're divorced.  Her father and her mother are divorced now, so I can speak freely (chuckle).  Her father's kinda close with the money (laughter).  And, and our driver, my driver that I pay for takes her horseback riding.  And the father was riding with her out there.  So their way back, she was saying that, "Dad, I, Dad, I want a, I'm hungry, I want a hamburger."  He said, "Sweetheart, I don't have any money."  And he was asking Raymond, the driver, "Raymond, do you have any money?"  He said, "The only money I have is the money that Mrs. Rice gave to me to hold for Alexa." Her name is Alexa.  And Alexa said, "Don't give him my money." (Laughter).  She said, "Dad, you're a grown man.  You ought to have your own money."  He said, "Sweetheart, what are you gonna eat and buy the hamburger?  I still don't have any money."  She said, "I won't eat.  If I have to spend my own money, I'm not eating." (laughter).  And she didn't eat.
Speaker 1: So you're--so you're creating some strong women.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she--I, they--she's, she's strong.  Well, you know, she comes to the office, and she sees that there're more women here than men.  And she's already plotting and planning on what she's gonna do when she takes over.
Speaker 1: That's what Linda was telling me, that she already has her ideas about her plans for the company.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she, she said, she said, she was telling her mother, she said, "Mama when I--Mother, when I, when I take over, there're gonna be some changes made around here."  And she said, "Well, what about me?"  She said, "I'll try and find a place for you."  (Laughter)  So, but I think that's good for women to have.  Then they're not gonna let men push them around.  Men will push women around now, if they're not strong and determined and don't let anybody push them around.
Story_ID: 18346
Speaker 1: Mr. Johnson, you are one of the few companies that there're--you know, that exists now, where a legacy has been passed on.  And that's why I was asking you your thoughts about that, I mean because--I was just asking your thoughts.  You know, I wanted to know your thoughts about--
Speaker 2: Well, my thoughts are that I am very happy and pleased with my daughter, Linda [Johnson Rice].  And she showed signs of, of being able to run the company [Johnson Publishing Company] long before I made her CEO.  And she--I'm just pleased with her.  And she's, she's likeable.  She, she's, she's on more boards than I was on.  And I didn't put her those boards.  Quite a few of them are boards, boards I was not on.  But when they met her, they liked her, and so they, they invited her to serve on the boards.
Speaker 1: She's a good person too.  You've raised a good person.  But, but my question is, how is the black community gonna create legacy if things are not passed on?  I mean are you for, you know, like Burrell Advertising [Burrell Communications Group] and he [Tom Burrell] started--he, you know, his company is sold, you know.  I mean the story is--
Speaker 2: No, I see all these stories, and I, I feel sad about it because I think they want to make quick money.  And they're not willing to pay the price because if you wait, if you're willing to wait, the money might not be quick, but it can be abundant.  And so, I, I just struggled too long to turn this over to somebody else.  And here again, I say, here again, I say I'm a religious person.  Maybe the Lord knew which one of my children to let live because my son was not interested.  He, he just wasn't interested in the business.  He told me he wasn't.  I said, what--I remember asking him, "John, what do you want to be when you grow up?"  He said, "Dad, I really don't know what I want to be.  But I know what I don't want to be.  I don't want to be a publisher."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "You work too hard.  You work hard all day at the office.  Then you come home with a shopping bag full of newspapers and you're up half the, up until midnight reading them.  I don't want that kind of life."  So, you know, he, there's a divine thing there that picks the best one.  So she clearly was the best one.  And, and she, you know, travels all the time.  She, she's on a board that was in Paris [France] not long ago.  She's on one that was in Korea, you know.  She's--one that was in Australia.  No way in the heck I would ever want to go to Australia.  It's too far, it's too far. (chuckle)
Speaker 1: Now, did you talk to her about what legacy or what's important for you, you know, with the company [Johnson Publishing] or you think you don't have to discuss that cause she already knows.
Speaker 2: No, she, she knows.
Speaker 1: She knows.
Speaker 2: And not only that, I think she ought to have a right to do what she wants to do.  And, you know, I don't want to try to tell her to live by my standards.  The world might be different then.  I know Lerone Bennett [Jr.] was asking me to, interviewing me about the five things in "Ebony" [magazine], five questions, and one of the questions, he was saying, "Well, you know, you started all your businesses in November" which I did.  He said, "Well, do you think you'll start another one in November?"  And I said, "No, because my daughter, Linda, is now CEO.  Maybe November won't be her lucky month.  She, she can start another magazine or any other venture in what she thinks is her lucky month."  So, I'm not gonna try to sit down and say, what did you do?  No, I don't try to, to tell her what to do.  I see in editorial meetings with her, but, and I've been other kind of meetings and--but she's, I don't try to take over.  She's the CEO.  They'll ask me, "What do you think about that?"  I say, "Why don't you find out what she thinks about that?"  (Laughter)  We'll do what she wants to do.  And she's proven that she knows what she's doing.
Speaker 1: So you've passed the mantle, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 18347
Speaker 1: [Did you know] Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: I knew him well.  As a matter of fact, I got, I, in effect, got him his first job at "Life" [magazine].  And the reason I got it because Gordon was a freelancer for "Life".  And we were invited to go to Haiti by the, the ambassador there.  And they wanted us to do a story on Haiti.  And I didn't have--at that time, I didn't have a really talented photographer.  This, this was in 1948.  So I invited Gordon to go out and do the story.  So he did a fantastic story for us about Haiti.  So then I offered him a job, full time to work on "Ebony".  And "Life" which had never offered him a job before, he went to them and told them he had this job offer from "Ebony", and they immediately employed him and sent him to Paris.  (laughter)  So I always say, I helped him get his job.  But he deserved it, and he was, he did a great job.
Story_ID: 18348
Speaker 1: And, now, Muhammad Ali, do you have many--you should have a lot of Muhammad Ali stories.
Speaker 2: Oh, we have--well, well, I have one, one good story.  Muhammad Ali was, was here for lunch.  And he had just married the--
Speaker 1: Kalilah?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Is it Kalilah, no.
Speaker 2: (Interview observer:) Veronica.
Speaker 1: He had just married, Meronica--Veronica [Porsche Ali], Veronica.  And he was saying to me that, that he--she was sitting at the lunch, and he said, you know, I--we were saying, we were saying to him, "Why don't you quit boxing?"  He said, "I can't quit boxing.  I need to make the money."  He said, you know, "I, I bought my, my mother a house.  And she divi--she divorced my hus--my, my father and put him out.  So then I had to buy my father a house.  My brother used to fight for me when we came from school, so I had to buy him a house.  And then he divorced his wife, and I had to buy her a house."  He said, "And now I've married this beautiful lady, and I got to buy her a house.  So I can't stop working."  (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's cute (whispered)
Speaker 1: And that's the way it was.  We were having lunch on the, on the tenth floor [of Johnson Publishing Company].  He, he was full of fun, but down to earth and, and a really, all-around good guy.  And he said, he's got to keep working cause he had to keep buying houses (laughter).
Story_ID: 18349
Speaker 1: Now, Ray Charles, do you have any Ray Charles stories?  Have you seen the movie, sir?
Speaker 2: I've seen the movie three times.
Speaker 1: The movie, isn't it wonderful?
Speaker 2: It's a fantastic movie.  I think I told you the Ray Charles story before or maybe I didn't.  Huh?  No, I didn't, well anyway, Ray Charles, from time to time was on drugs.  He would, he went to Europe and there was a story about the fact that he was paying off some people in Europe not to arrest him for using drugs.  And the story was, it was just a short story in the "San Francisco Chronicle" and 'Jet' magazine picked up the story.  And Ray Charles sued us.  So, so I called him up, and I found his number.  And I said, "Ray, why, why would you sue us?"  I said, "You know, you, you like to be called Brother Ray, and I'm gonna call you Brother Ray, and you can call me Brother Johnson cause I'm a great admirer of yours.  Now, we ran the same story that the San Francisco paper ran."  He said, "But no black, the black people don't read the 'San Francisco Chronicle' (laughter).  They read 'Jet', believe me."  He said, "About a hundred of them have called me up."  So, so and he said, "Brother John, I don't want to hurt you.  So I have a solution.  Why don't you apologize for this story, pay my law fee and let's forget it."  I said, "Brother Ray, you got a deal."  (laughter)  So that was the only contact I ever had with him.
Speaker 1: But it's a brilliant movie, don't you think?
Speaker 2: It's a brilliant movie, yeah, we, we've, we've shown it here several times.  And I've seen it one time since then.  No, I--and then, of course, we, we ran stories.  We ran it on the cover of "Ebony" and on the cover of "Jet".  And he, he was a talented guy.  I, you know, I liked it because his mother was such a important character in his life.  And when he, when he found out--have you seen the movie?
Speaker 1: Yes, I have seen it.
Speaker 2: Yes, and when he, you know, when he, when he found out he couldn't, they couldn't--his mother found out he couldn't see, he was seven years old, she said, "Now, I don't want you acting like the other blind people.  I don't want you going around with a cup begging and with a, with a dog ." (laughter)  I want you to learn a skill so you can take care of yourself.  And, of course, he did.  And I remember that, when he wrote, he wrote "Georgia".  When he first to, went to Georgia, they tried to arrest him and they mistreated him, and they did all kinds of things.  And then after he wrote "Georgia", they then had black members of the [Georgia] state [legislature].  Julian Bond was one and several other black members of the, of the state legislature.  And they got the Governor to agree, to apologize to him for that, and to invite him down and to treat him like the celebrity he was.  And they, they, they did.  They invited him down, and they, you know, gave him a great send off.  And when one of the men next to Ray said, "I wish your mother could be here to see that."  He said, "She's here (laughter) in spirit" because his, his mother was just that devoted to him.  And she made a real man out of him.
Speaker 1: Don't you think his mother reminded you of your mother?
Speaker 2: That's why I admire her so much.  She did remind me of my mother [Gertrude Jenkins Johnson Williams].  Yeah, my mother said, "Son, you can't stay down here picking cotton for (laughter), for fifty cents a hundred (laughter) and chopping cotton from sun-up to Sunday."  She said, "I do it, but I don't want you to do it.  So we've got to leave here [Arkansas]."  So, no, my mother was like her.  In many way, they were, they were alike.  That's why I admired her so much, but I, I remember the guy saying, and he said, Ray, said, "She, she's here" (laughter).  She's with me always.
Story_ID: 18350
Speaker 1: What, Mr. Johnson, makes a good publisher?
Speaker 2: One who prints things he's afraid to publish.  You know, I remember that, in particular, that whenever I was--I think I might have already said, whenever I did the white on--white, "The White Problem in--Problem in America," and the Associate Editor, the, the Co-Editor, Era Bell [Thompson], was saying to me, "Boss, do you know what you're doing?"  I said, no, I really don't know what I'm doing.  But I'm gonna do it anyway.  And so ever since then, "Ebony" says, a good story is one that I'm afraid to publish.  I know Lerone Bennett [Jr.] did the story on "Was Abraham Lincoln-- ?" --what's the word?
Speaker 1: A white supremacist.
Speaker 2: Huh, a white supremacist.  I was afraid to publish that cause white people admire Abraham Lincoln.  But it turned out to sell out--that issue sold out.  So a good is one I'm afraid, I'm afraid to publish.
Speaker 1: And what is a good black person?  What would you say--
Speaker 2: A good black person is the one who wants to live a better life than they're living now and who wants that for all black people and within their means to try to pass that on to other black people.
Speaker 1: And a good businessman? Person?
Speaker 2: A good business person is one who never gives up.  And as I've said often, failure is a word they should never accept.
