Story_ID: 9382
Speaker 1: This photo was taken in the early years of working with Head Start [child development program] to begin some publicity regarding my work with it.  Which had to do with becoming a supervisor for the county, actually.  And then specifically for L.A. [Los Angeles, California] County Schools.
Speaker 2: Would that have been in the Head Start?  Was that the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: That was the '60s.  In fact it was 1965.
Speaker 2: [Shirley Jones, 1965.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9383
Speaker 1: This is James, James Henry Warner, my newest grandson.  I've been with him since birth.  And they give me the pleasure and privilege of being able to be grandma and grandpa.  Because we live in the very same area.
Speaker 2: This is a recent photo--.
Speaker 1: James, James is named for his grandpa [Dr. James L.] Jones and his grandfather on his father's side whose name was Henry Warner.  So he's James Henry Warner.
Speaker 2: [Shirley Jones's grandson, James Henry Warner.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9384
Speaker 1: This photo was taken as a publicity process for 'The Burden of Truth' which was a documentary sponsored by the United States Steelworkers of America [labor union] and one of my first full-length feature films.  It was premiered in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with Governor [George M.] Leader, [Governor of New York] Nelson Rockefeller, and the cast members of '[The] Burden of Truth.'  It was a--it was a documentary regarding the housing--racial issue for housing.  That's basically what that was about.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photograph for the documentary film 'The Burden of Truth,' one of Shirley Jones's first full-length films, which she says was sponsored by the United States Steelworkers of America labor union.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9385
Speaker 1: That's--when I get to that the center [Kedren Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California] was named for her [Kedren Jones]...
Speaker 2: Psychiatrist, he [husband, Dr. James L. Jones] was one of the first black child psychiatrists.  In fact, there were only four hundred psychiatrists in the nation.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so he said,  "I want to name this something. "  And I said, "Well,  'Kedren' and 'clinic' go well together."  And that's all it was.  However, Kedren, the name Kedren had a procedure in itself.  I made that up.
Speaker 1: Oh wow!
Speaker 2: I sat up one night.  And the last name was Jones.  So I decided I'm gonna name the kid something else.  And, you know, something that--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: --would help it out a little bit.  Give Jones some whatever.  Anyway, what happened--,
Speaker 1: We just need you to--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Kedren?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Spell it,  right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Kedren.
Speaker 1: Spell Kedren.
Speaker 2: K-E-D-R-E-N.
Speaker 1: And that's the woman on the far right.
Speaker 2: That's the woman on the far left.
Speaker 1: Far left, camera left.
Speaker 2: Camera left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--the young lady in the middle is my youngest daughter.  That's Marne who studied in France and graduated from Hampshire College [Amherst, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And spell her name.
Speaker 2: That's M-A-R-N-E, accent aigue on the "E".  Marne Jones. And the last person there on the--is Shawn, who's actually my oldest daughter.  Shawn is a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate and lives in Maryland and is pursuing another career in infant care, infant massage therapy.
Speaker 1: And is that S-E-A-N?
Speaker 2: S-H-A-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, Shawn.  Okay on the right.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: And of course, that's mama in the middle.
Speaker 2: Now what year was this taken?
Speaker 1: This was taken probably, probably in the seventies [1970s].
Speaker 2: [Shirley Jones (center) with her daughters (from left), Kedren, Marne, and Shawn, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9386
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Dr. James L. Jones. The late Dr. Jones.  Dr. Jones was one of the few child psychiatrists in the nation.  There was four hundred of them totally at the time that he graduated, which was in 1960--well by 1965 there were four hundred of them in the nation.  Because psychiatry, child psychiatry was a very new field.  And it's still growing tremendously.  He's the founder of Kedren [Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California].  And I'm--what I would consider the co-founder of Kedren.  Or what is considered the co-founder of Kedren.
Speaker 2: What year was this taken, approximately?
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1965.
Speaker 2: So it was taken the year that he graduated.
Speaker 1: The year that he graduated?  I'm not sure if he graduated in [19]65  'cause he graduated from--he finished his residency in [19]65.
Speaker 2: Okay, fine.  Okay.
Speaker 1: [Shirley Jones's husband, Dr. James L. Jones, 1965.]
Story_ID: 9387
Speaker 1: The latest graduation that this was taken.  I, I graduated with--received my doctorate in psychology [from the American Behavioral Studies Institute, Santa Ana, California] as late as 1998.
Speaker 2: [Shirley Jones' doctoral diploma from the American Behavioral Studies Institute, Santa Ana, California, 1998.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9388
Speaker 1: These are pictures of my oldest daughter and her two sons and her husband, Vaughn.  That's Austin--I'm sorry. That's Jordan, Vaughn, Shawn and Austin in that order.  They live in Maryland.  Vaughn is a First Vice President of Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] .  I think it's Fannie Mae.  Anyway it's one of those.
Speaker 2: Right.  When was this photo taken approximately?
Speaker 1: This photo was taken about two years ago.  So [19]99.
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: [Shirley Jones's daughter, Shawn (top), with her husband Vaughn and her sons, Jordan (left) and Austin (right), 1999.  From the collection of Shirley Jones.]
Story_ID: 9389
Speaker 1: I'm Shirley H. Jones.  Dr. Shirley Jones.  My most recent accomplishment.  I got that quite late, maybe about four years ago [1998] and I'll be seventy-three the first of November [2001].  So.  I'm pretty proud that I worked that out.
Speaker 2: And I need to have your birth date.
Speaker 1: November 1, 1928.
Speaker 2: And I need to have today's date.
Speaker 1: Today is July 24, 20--2001.
Speaker 2: And will you--,
Speaker 1: Today is July 24, the year 2001.
Speaker 2: And I want to have the location we're at.
Speaker 1: We're at 11400 Ayrshire Road in Brentwood, California.
Speaker 2: Can you spell Ayrshire for us?
Speaker 1: A-Y-R-S-H-I-R-E, one word, Ayrshire.
Speaker 2: And the other--the last thing I want, your profession.
Speaker 1: A combination.  I'm a psychologist now.  I started as an elementary school teacher.  And out of the curiosity of trying to determine how best to treat children, to work with children, to get them to learn, I went into child development.  So I have a Masters [degree] in child development.  And the curiosity kept going.  So it led into the psychology.  So--,
Speaker 2: Let me ask you.  If we were gonna put you in a category, 'cause we have different categories [unclear].  Would you--would we put you under education you think?
Speaker 1: I would think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Because that's how I use it.  I'm doing a conference in, in Florida, a national conference for parents.  And the newest information that we can get is from the emotional development of children.
Story_ID: 9390
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: You know, I'd have to say barbecue.  And then sushi, [laughs] in that order.  I graduated [laughs].
Speaker 1: [Chuckle] Okay, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.  Especially in the East.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Greece.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's nice.  And, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The best is yet to be."
Story_ID: 9391
Speaker 1: Your father [Howard Higginbotham].  I know you didn't know much about him.  But I'd like to have his name.  And I know you only saw him twice, you know, in your life.  But I'd like you to just, you know, state his name, or anything else that you might know about.  He and his background.
Speaker 2: I know he was an attorney.  I'm bi-racial [laughs].  And that I know about him.  He had blue eyes and red hair.  I saw him that once.  And that's about it.
Speaker 1: And--,
Speaker 2: And I may have some brothers and sisters on the other side.
Speaker 1: So you've never--you've never really explored that.  When you saw him was there--what were those circumstances under you meeting?
Speaker 2: In his office.  And I was sitting in his big chair.  I think that was one of the few meetings that we had that--I couldn't have been very old 'cause it's a vague, vague memory.
Speaker 1: Do you--just not to go on, but how did that impact you, sort of?  That whole sort of meeting.  You know that this person is your--your, your, you know.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] You know, I'll tell you what I know about that relationship and what I know about my reaction to it.  Is that I did not know how men fit in the family.  I was brought up as an only child.  And my mother [Beatrice Newman] and my grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman] brought me up.  And I didn't realize how necessary a father may have been, because we did everything in the family.
Story_ID: 9392
Speaker 1: You know, my mother [Beatrice Newman] and I built a house.  We--the car was out of order, she fixed it.  We were in the country.  And she taught in rural schools.  But had a very pioneering spirit and a very versatile way of working.  She was basically a teacher.  But she taught at Southern University [and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] taught the blind and she taught home economics.  And then later taught in the South.  So I traveled with her wherever she taught.  And I went to banquets and the this and the that.  And, you know.  [Laughs] I'm thinking about when she would ask--when I--my first day at school, but I started to tell you about the traveling.  My first day at school, I had memorized the lesson.  And my teacher asked me, did I have my book?  And I said I didn't need it.  So I got my broom and I did 'Bob and Nancy Could Ride' and dramatized and told--took everybody's part.  And that's my first--[laughs]  recalling of my first day at school.  I wasn't even old enough to be at school.  But that's what I did.  So I wanted to be an actress.  That was going to be my thing.  So I would help pick the cotton on the different places.  We had a large farm that I grew up on.  And my mother and grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman] ran it.  Grandma had the, the little garden and the--she used to can a lot.  And we had a little house where she'd put everything away.  But we raised cattle.  We raised hogs and we had people to come and do all of that stuff.  We had a little cotton.  And my Mama [grandmother] would go out and pick cotton and I'd go with her.  So, when we--I wanted to pick cotton so that I could buy my lipstick and rouge.  That was my ambition at that time.  I could have been like maybe seven, six or seven.  And Mother said, "If you really want to do that," she says, "I'm gonna have to take you to California."  So the reason for moving to California was so that I could be near this industry.  And then my dream was to always go back home and teach.  But by the time I was ready to go back home to teach, which is Jennings, Louisiana, I was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  By the time I was ready to go back, half the South was out here.  So--and we were living in the Watts [Los Angeles, California]-Compton [California] area.  So my ambition to work with that particular population, especially, especially after I had, had the privilege of sending my children to private school.  The difference in the way their education went, and the difference in the way that we were even taught to teach.  That was my first introduction when my children began school, to the developmental process of teaching.
Speaker 2: Let's go back--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Which is very different.
Story_ID: 9393
Speaker 1: Your father's name.  His name was?
Speaker 2: Howard Higginbotham.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And let's go--I want you to tell me your [maternal] grandmother's name, and what you know about her background?  What type of person she was?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  Grandma was special.  She was--she educated both her sons [John and Major Newman].  Her name was Alice Carter White Newman.  And she wouldn't let anybody not pronounce her whole name.  She didn't read.  She wasn't educated.  But she raised three children and all three of them she sent to college.  And she tells me her story about--Mama [grandmother] was ninety-five when she passed--of how she washed and ironed, bought property and bought a lot of it.  And she didn't have money to buy clothes for herself,  so she would take the sugar sacks or the flour sacks and make her bedding.  And for her blouses, she wore my mother's [Beatrice Newman] dresses [sic, wore blouses as dresses]--that's how tiny Grandma was.  She was 5--maybe 5 [feet] 4 [inches] 5 [feet] 5 [inches].  No not 5'5'', 'cause I'm 5'5''.  But Mama [grandmother] was a short, beautiful woman in her being.  But tough.  She raised two--three children, my mother and two older sons.  And both of those sons died less than a week apart as adults.  He was--one of them was in Louisville, Kentucky and the other had been in the service.  He volunteered for World War I.  And so Mama was--.
Speaker 1: [Off-camera discussion.]
Speaker 2: Plus Kedren.
Speaker 1: --maybe seven to six years after slavery ended.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Her [grandmother's] father was an overseer on a plantation.  He was West Indian.  I knew that much about it  because she said her father came over on a boat to, to Louisiana from the West Indies.  So--her mother was what she said, "Full-blooded Indian, Choctaw."  And--but her mother died in childbirth.  So she was her father's child basically.  She had some stepbrothers and sisters eventually.  But Papa was a very--as she called him 'Papa.'  He played the banjo and she would--he, he drank a little bit.  So she'd go get him out the bar and they'd ride home on the horse.  And when they--when they were having good times, he'd play the banjo and she'd dance.
Speaker 1: Did she share any other stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of her hard times with having to work while the others went to school.  And she didn't have that opportunity.  And some meanness, that kind of stuff.  With her--from her stepbrothers.
Story_ID: 9394
Speaker 1: Your mother [Beatrice Newman].  Let's talk about your mother.  What--you said there were three girls that she--of, of, you know, from your grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman]?
Speaker 2: No that's just three children.
Speaker 1: Three children.
Speaker 2: Two of them were men [John and Major Newman].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she was the only girl.
Speaker 2: And Mother was the only girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And Mother was the only adult survivor.  The others died early.  The, the brothers--my uncles John and Major were the ones that died less than a week a part, but as adults.  And that must have been in 1926 or something like that.  '25 [1925], '26 [1926].
Speaker 1: And your, your--so what was your mother like?  Can you describe her and what type of person, you know, she was?
Speaker 2: Mother was a very soft-spoken woman.  Mother was about 5 [feet] 3 [inches], looked a very much like I do.  I--the pictures that I have of her or had of her, she was brown-skinned, closer to you [interviewer  Julieanna Richardson]  than I.  But maybe even darker than, than a dark shade of brown.  And my grandmother was also very dark with the broad features.  But the tenacity of these women was just so unbelievable.  Although Mother was a teacher, she had a job in the afternoon working in a plant.  In fact, when she came to California she became an ace speed welder.  As a young woman, she took pilot lessons from--with her first husband.  So she could fly a plane.  And I always thought of Mother as--she didn't know it couldn't be done. So she did it.  And as a teacher we worked at--she worked in the rural schools, and they were sharecroppers.  So they didn't have nine months of school.  And mother would put on programs, and have all the children come out and perform for the mayor.  And then ask, could they not extend the school year.  And most of the three or four schools that I remember her going to, they were expanded to nine-month school.  That was kind of her contribution.  And when she moved to California, she didn't teach again.  She worked as an ace speed welder.  And she and I built a house together.  I must have been about fourteen or sixteen.  But I remember so well that we couldn't get carpenters.  We got somebody to do the rough wiring and the rough plumbing.  And while I was at school, or if I couldn't hand her the joists or--we even did the inside of the house with a trial and a whiskbroom  'cause I wanted to have one of those walls with stucco on it.  So that's what we did.  We did the little fun stuff.  But she would take a, a rope and hook it around the joist.  And she had a coat hanger and she'd pull those up so that she could nail them.  Or I could hold them while she nailed them.  So we built the house.  It was three rooms.  And that's in the Watts [Los Angeles, California] area.  It's still there.  But those are the kinds of things that I know.  I remember her wiring the car.  And could cook the most wonderful things.  She would--she would make some of my favorite things, which are coconut pies.
Story_ID: 9395
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to just a few of your earlier memories.  Because you say in your write-up that, you know, that she [Beatrice Newman] was often away, and coming back on weekends.  And so it was you and your grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman].
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So much so that that was the most lonely time that I can remember.  So much so that I've understood now that, that was kind of like a not a completed attachment to my mother.  My grandmother was more like my mother.  And we were like sisters.  But such a wonderful relationship.  She would--when she'd come home, I had--I would run out to meet her with my arms wide open, greeting her and the car.  You know, I mean if she didn't stop and move aside, she could have run over me [laughs].  But the gentle thing I remember about Mother in contrast to Grandma was I was raised under absolutely two different kinds of discipline.  My grandmother when she got excited would whip me.  My mother on the other hand didn't believe in it, and wouldn't do it.  So I understood that she would sit and talk with me and work it out.  Grandma didn't have that kind of thing.  I think I remember two very extreme whippings from my grandmother.  I mean really whipping.  Until I got to the point where I said, if you--"If you do it again, I'm gonna take my skates off and run home."  Whatever--wherever it was.  So I knew what physical punishment was like from my grandmother  'cause that's the way she was brought up.  Mother on the other hand just didn't believe in it.  And she would talk to me. See, my mother died in her early forties here in California.  And Grandma lived on.  So Grandma was kind of my responsibility.  I came--brought--had the opportunity to take care of her as she had done of me.  But I remember going with her to--my grandmother--going with her to take her washing that she had cleaned up--that had washed and ironed. And she'd have the bundle that she'd have on her head and I'd have the socks on my head  'cause I wanted to learn to walk the way Grandma would walk with her, with her bundle.  And that was a big thrill for me to walk with Grandma to deliver the laundry.
Story_ID: 9396
Speaker 1: Back to your mother [Beatrice Newman] and father [Howard Higginbotham].  Did you know how they came--was that union a legitimate union or--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I never--Mother wanted to write this out for me before she passed.  And I said, "I know my mother.  That's enough.  I'm very happy not knowing any more than I do."
Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that you were a different color than you know, your mother and your grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman]?  There wasn't that sense?  You know?  No.
Speaker 2: I got more of that sense from the people around me.  From--in school.  'Cause I went to the same school that my mother taught at.  And I had that problem with other children.
Speaker 1: And what would they say?  What were the--what were the things they'd--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh that I--my feet looked like mice.  I was so pink.  And, you know.  Things like that.
Speaker 1: Now you--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They didn't get into calling me names, you know.  I didn't have that.  But I do know that I had little difficulty with--I think a lot of it came through the way that my mother brought me up.
Story_ID: 9397
Speaker 1: I was special.  She [mother, Beatrice Newman] made beautiful clothes for me.  She was also a seamstress. And you know that little envy that other children don't have exactly what you have.  And we were not rich by any means.  We had property.  And we had a new home and stuff that my mother had worked for and built.  And Grandma [Alice Carter White Newman] sold some of the property.  And we had income from some of the property that my grandmother had.  But that was kind of like a level above the, the average.  Except the ones who owned stores.  Those were only two primary incomes in the South.  You either owned a store or you were a teacher or a preacher.  There was no other things that we could get--make a living at.  We didn't even have black nurses or doctors at the time.
Story_ID: 9398
Speaker 1: Were you born in Peters--Jennings [sic, Jennings, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: In New Orleans.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's--for how long--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] At the Charity Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's right.  At the Charity Hospital.
Speaker 2: That's right.  [unclear].
Speaker 1: But--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Do you know how--but--was your--was your grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman] and mother [Beatrice Newman] in New Orleans at the time that--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] They went to New Orleans to have me.  That's why I would think that, that biracial business there we--could have not have been legitimate.  And I didn't ever ask.  But I know that, that couldn't have been at that time in the South.
Speaker 2: So you weren't--where you were in Texas was not that far from--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I was never in Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Peter--wait a minute (pauses).
Speaker 1: I was in Jennings.
Speaker 2: Jennings.
Speaker 1: Louisiana.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Jennings--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's where our property was.  That's where we lived.  We didn't live in New Orleans except to have me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's what I understood.  They had--that's why we went there.
Story_ID: 9399
Speaker 1: So you--so you were saying just, just part of it.  That you did meet your father [Howard Higginbotham].  You know that he did take care of you.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did send--I had accounts in the city where I could buy what I wanted.  And I'm a teenager now.  Almost teenager, pre-teens.  Before I came to California.  And they stopped.  And I assumed that he was dead.  And when I said Mother [Beatrice Newman] was going to write the letter for me and leave it for me.  She says, "I want you to know all about your background."  And I said, "You can write it.  But I'll never read it."  And I didn't.  She was dying then. It was her--near her end of her life.
Story_ID: 9400
Speaker 1: What were you like as a child?  What do you think--I mean this--'cause I--this whole thing of even wanting to go to California and be an--where did that come from?  And what were--you know, these are the days before television in some respects.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: So what were--how were you getting this information?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I liked to do--recite poems.  But I--when Mother [Beatrice Newman] would put on programs at the school, I would do a poem.  You know, she'd let me learn a poem.  And--or I would do a dance or whatever I was going to do.  And I liked that feeling.  I was on the stage.  And as a kid growing up, I would put on plays for the children on Sunday afternoon, after church  'cause I didn't go to church--I went to Catholic church.  I mean Catholic--I was a Catholic and a lot of the other children were Baptist and Methodist.  But they would--they would come and visit.  And I had sheets that I would put on the clothesline.  And I'd be the, the star.  I'd be Mae West [actress].  I could take my mother's gowns and I could fill them up with shaving.  This thing that came out of the old boxes and stuff.  And I'd put on a play.  And then I'd serve watermelon.  And they'd give me the pennies after [laughs].  So I was quite sure.  And then I would go--the only entertainment I had was going to the movies.  And so I would go watch the movie.  And come home and imitate the stars.  And sing and dance and what have you.  I never really learned to sing.  When I went into the theater, I went in as an actress.  And I did a lot of stage work.  I had my own show one time.  'Miss Jones's Play School.'  But that's how that came about.  And I liked to entertain myself.  You know, and entertain my mother and my grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman].  So that was a real part of my being--there were no brothers and sisters, you know.  So it was me, my--and the animals and, and Grandma and [laughs] Mother.
Story_ID: 9401
Speaker 1: Were you well-mannered?  Were you precocious?  Were you--,
Speaker 2: I was pretty well-mannered.  Precocious, yes.  Because my curiosity would have me looking to find out whatever was going on around me.  And I remember when Mother [Beatrice Newman] would take me to school with her, before I was a student.  That one lady would--made my [laughs] my breakfast.  And she said--she took me back to my mother kicking and screaming.  She said, "Shirley won't eat her breakfast."  I said, "She--it got too soft and she cut the bananas up in it."  And she said, "Well what did you tell her?"  I said, "I told her I'd rather go to New York than to do what she said do."  So that was kind of like, you know, that bristly part of me.  And I remember Mother attempted to spank me one day.  She says, "I'm gonna spank you for that."  And I said, "You can't do that.  You're not my mother." So you know, I had comeback.  And my grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman] would let me talk to her.  The only time she would really whip me is if--like for instance I went to walk in the sun to take her a hat.  She was building a house.  And she thought somebody had stolen me.  But I had--wasn't home.  I was around the other side.  And she whipped me all the way from there back.  She said, "When I tell you to stay home, I mean for you to stay home."  So, you know, that kind of thing.  But she wasn't always after me about "Don't do this and don't do the other."  I went everywhere with her.  When she went to work in the mornings, I went to work with her.  And I'm sure once she took the laundry back I went back with her [laughs].  But that was--as a student in school, I was not a student.  I didn't like to study.  And I hated arithmetic.  So I would take summer lessons.  I did like poetry and I did like to read.  And--but I became a student in my later years, when the curiosity about what I wanted to know was vivid.  Then I--I mean around the clock.  I'm prepared.  When I decided to work on my, on my Masters [degree], I had three kids [Shawn, Kedren, Marne].  My husband [Dr. James L. Jones] had just passed away.  And I wasn't working.
Speaker 1: I want to stop you there.  We're gonna get to that.  But I want to go--just to keep things within a--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 1: Chronology.  So were there other friends and things you had during this period?  And, you know, in Louisiana that you played with?  Or was it really more, you know--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was kept home.  I didn't go to play with a lot of people.  I had some school friends.  And one of them moved to California.  Annabel Booker.  And I--her son is my godson.  We had that close relationship with her.  But most of the time I grew up I--Grandma didn't let me go play.
Story_ID: 9402
Speaker 1: You say that, you know, you wanted to go to California.  And you were telling your mother [Beatrice Newman], you know, you wanted to go there.  And so she--so at fourteen that's when you moved.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You're fourteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what is this when you hear that even you're gonna be moving.  What is that whole thing like?
Speaker 2: That was quite--let's see.  What happened is Mother had gone into the service.  She became a WAC [Women's Army Corps, World War II].  And Mom [grandmother, Alice Carter White Newman] wasn't able to really do very much by herself, Grandma.  So Mother got out of the service because I was only twelve.  So I'm not too sure whether I came here at twelve or fourteen.  Now to make it, to put it all together.  Mother decided to move from--from, from Louisiana during the war years [World War II, 1939-1945].  And that to me was just exciting to come to California.  We came out on the train.  Mother came out first, bought a home.  And Mama [grandmother] and I came out.  Then we bought more property with what Mama sold from the other stuff.  But coming to California was great.  I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 9403
Speaker 1: It [California, upon her family's change of residence] looked physically different than the area you had grown up in,  right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean the palm trees and it's a whole different environment.  What was Watts [Los Angeles, California] like during that time?
Speaker 2: Palm trees, those little huts that they made, Quonset huts.  They had a lot of those out there.  And the house we built we rented to the other people who had come to work out here in the service--a lot of people who had come--migrated to California for--for the shipyards and the industry that was going on.  Boat building, all those kinds of things.  And Mother [Beatrice Newman] initially worked in a shipyard when she came out here.  That's how she became this ace speed welder.  But I went to Compton [California] to school.  In fact I was one of the people who integrated Compton [High School].  I did not go to Jordan [High School, Long Beach, California].  Jordan was where the majority of, of the black children went.  There wasn't a lot of integration in Compton.  Compton was lily white.  And they were proud of it.  The conductor on the streetcar would say something about, "You're in the city of Compton where the men, men and the women are proud of it."  Compton didn't get integrated until the later years.  Until the late [19]60s or early [19]60s.  Because we went to buy a piece of property in Lynwood [California], which is right next to Compton.  And we were not able to buy it.  They didn't sell to blacks,  colored people.  That's [laughs] what we were called at the time.  So--and the home that we eventually bought as late as the late [19]60s and [19]70s in Studio City [California], they had a clause when we received our, whatever they give you back that--the statement was that there would be no property in, in Studio City sold to blacks in that area which was Aredale.
Story_ID: 9404
Speaker 1: So you were at Compton High School [Compton, California] and, you know.  You, you were also--what are your thoughts about what you want to be and do at this point in time?  'Cause you're attending summer sessions at Compton--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I attended summer sessions at Long Beach Poly [Polytechnic High School, Long Beach, California] to make up for--so I could get into the proper grade at junior college.  So I did a lot of summer work.  I didn't--in terms of racial issues?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I'm just saying--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Just in--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] What is forming you?  What kind of--you know, what are you looking to be?  And, and how did you know that you--you know, 'cause you went from there into Compton Junior College [Compton, California],  right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I mean, you know, you could have easily decided, "Okay, I want to do something else."  You know, not gone on to college.  And so that's what I'm just wondering.  What was forming, you know, you as a person?  You--you know, you're still you, your mother [Beatrice Newman] and your grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman]--and I'm just wondering how the experience, you know, here from fourteen [years old] let's say to eighteen.  How did that--you know, what were the things happening that were shaping you as a person.
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the drama department.  And I was good in English and literature and stuff like that.  And so I made good grades.  You know, I was able to get through college.  It was never a question as to whether or not I was going to college.  [Laughs] In my--in my--that was just understood.  We didn't sit down and you know, plan it.  There was no talk about it.  My mother was a college graduate.  And it just seemed like that would be what I would do.  But I did--I was in the drama department.  And that was my steadiness.  That's what I enjoyed.  And then when it was time to become something, do something, it was teaching.  Because I worked on the playground in Watts [Los Angeles, California].  I had--my first summer job was playground and waitress. And so it just--that's how I went around doing what I was doing.  I did some plays and I started early in the theater.  In Nick Stewart's [actor/theater owner] theater [Ebony Showcase Theater, Los Angeles, California] and so forth. So I kept--drama was always a--I didn't stop until my children came.
Speaker 1: Now was this was it a black theater?  Or was it an integrated theater?  Or, you know.
Speaker 2: I did black parts.  That's all there was.  I did--,
Speaker 1: Give some of the plays you were in.
Speaker 2: We--I did an original that we toured San Francisco [California] with.  Oh God, I can't think of the name of it right this minute.  But [pause] Oh gosh.  Anyway.  We did that and we did it in San Francisco at the Gluddage (ph.) Theater.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Don't worry.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Anyway.  I can't think of the name of that play.  But we did--I did 'Hallmark Hall of Fame,' which was a television program.  I did the maid in that.  There was nothing else.  We didn't have an opportunity to do anything else.  I had my own television show with--it was called 'Miss Jones's Play School' on channel 22.
Speaker 1: Was that a little later though?
Speaker 2: That was much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 9405
Speaker 1: You're performing and everything.  And then you graduate.  You go on--you go on from Compton Junior College [Los Angeles, California]--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: To Los Angeles State College [California State University, Los Angeles]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  At Compton Junior College I had--I was elected as homecoming queen, which was a new thing for blacks.  And that was in the papers, it was so rare.  And so that was--and I recognized prejudice there. In that my partner and I who wanted to do ballroom dancing or something.  One of those things they were teaching.  And the teacher said, "You can't be partners." [pause] And of course, we didn't go into a whole dissertation about it.  But she took--called us over to the side. She said, "Well you know its' just the couple that are mixed we, we are not accepting."  And that which coming to California for this freedom, that it was so subtle that it didn't exist.  It was always there.  It still is.  [Laughs] We know that.  [Laughs].
Story_ID: 9406
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband [Dr. James L. Jones]?
Speaker 2: Crossing the street.  He was at Chapman College [Chapman University, Orange, California] and I was at [Los Angeles] State College [California State University, Los Angeles].  And he walked behind me and said, "You look like you know where you're going."  I said, "I know where I'm going.  I'm going to get my malt to eat my lunch."  I always ate my lunch in the car.  And I was basically a loner as I look back 'cause that's what I would do.  I would get my lunch and sit in the car.  And he said, "Well, I'd like to come with you."  I said, "Well, sure you can come with me.  But I won't let you sit in the car."  So [laughs] he stayed outside of the car and we talked.  And he said, "You know, your slip is hanging."  And I said, "Oh, okay.  Thanks."  And I pulled it up.  He said, "I'm doing a survey.  And I want to know all about all the pretty girls out here and how you got here?  And what you're doing."  So I said, "Well that would take some time."  He said, "How about your phone number?"  I said, "No.  You give me yours.  And if I decide to call you, I'll call you."  Then I didn't see him for a long time.  And Jewel, one of my dearest friends who is now also passed on, said to me, she said, "We're going to the Kappa's game, the Alpha Kappa game."  She said, "Fergie and I, we want you to go with us."  So I said, "Okay."  And we went.  And at that, she said, "I want you to meet a guy."  Now Jim's [Dr. James L. Jones's] brother who is Ike Jones was one of the first black producers.  They were taking me to meet Ike Jones.  And on the way there I saw James who was in a cast.  And I moved away from them and went over to speak to him.  I said, "Hi.  What are you doing with a--in a cast?"  He says, "Well I fell off of a fire truck." Or something like that.  He was also a part-time fireman as a student.  And from then on Jewel said, "Well, did you know him?"  I said, "Yeah.  That's James Jones."  She said, "Well, that's Ike Jones." She said, [laughs]  "I want you to meet Ike Jones"  'cause they both playing--used to play basketball in these things.  So one thing to another and we were engaged--I was engaged to a fellow in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when I met him.  And we were married within a year.
Story_ID: 9407
Speaker 1: And he decided eventually he was going to medical school. [Husband] James [L. Jones] was going to medical school when most people were coming out.  He was in his twenties, late twenties.
Speaker 2: And why did he want to go to medical school?  What was his dream and ambition about that?
Speaker 1: You know, I'm not sure.  I know he wanted to do something very special with his life.  And medicine was the highest goal that we knew about.  Business we didn't know.  As far as I know, that black people weren't interested in becoming like my young son--son-in-law [Vaughn Werner] there.  Who has been the executive director, has been the First Vice President of Viacom [International, Inc.].  And now the first black that's ever been in Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] or Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation], whichever one it is, I'm not sure.  But like he's in the eight hundred thousand dollar a year or something like that.  And income is enormous.  So we didn't have that.  We didn't talk about that.  Education, nursing and medicine.  Even musicians were not a challenge. We never thought about becoming singers or stuff like that.  But I know that he--'cause when we discussed it, he wasn't sure he wanted to go into psychiatry.  He says, "I'm not sure about this, and let's talk about it."
Story_ID: 9408
Speaker 1: 'The Twig Is Bent'.  That was the name of that other play that I did.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'The Twig is Bent'.
Speaker 1: 'The Twig Is Bent'. I just had to--
Speaker 2: The one that went to, went to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: That's the one we stared.  'Cause it started here.  When you mentioned the fact that he was going off to medical school, I began to cut my career back.  'Cause I had just been offered a contract.
Story_ID: 9409
Speaker 1: I was--we were engaged.  And he [Dr. James L. Jones] said, "You know, let's get married."  I said, "Well, I'm not too sure if I want to marry you if you're going to be going off to school."  He said, "Well, I'm not gonna leave you.  I'm gonna take you with me."  So--but that didn't work out.  I was looking for a job then starting--getting ready to begin teaching.  Because here I'm gonna be taking care of myself.  And I said, "Well, I think maybe we ought to get a divorce.  And then when you come back, [laughs].  When you come back, we'll get married again, if I'm still not married."  [Laughs]  He said, "That won't work."  [Laughs]  He said, "Let's drive out there and just decide--then we'll decide if you want--whatever you want to do."  I said, "Okay."  So we drove from Los Angeles [California] to--to Washington, D.C.  'cause he had been--yeah.  So when I came back, I had a job.  In fact, I had an interview.  But I didn't get that job.  So I went back out that same day and I said, "I need a job.  And teaching is all I know how to do."  And she said, "You are so lucky.  A half-day session has just come in.  Would you be interested in half-day sessions?"  So I by that time have agreed that I'm going to come back to California.  I'm gonna stay in California, because I didn't want to stay in Washington.  I didn't want to be away from my mother [Beatrice Newman] and my grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman].  And he said, "But you know, you're married to me.  You need to stay here with me."  I said, "Yeah, but I want to be with Mother."  I didn't know at the time mother was ill.  But it just seemed so far away from her.  In fact, that's why I didn't marry the guy in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  'Cause [laughs] I wasn't ready to leave Mother and Grandmother.  And anyway, the first year just before graduation--yeah.  I got pregnant.  So when I went to Washington to live, I found out I was pregnant.  And I wanted to come back home again to have my baby 'cause I taught in Washington while he was at school the first year.  The second year.  And--and I came home to have Shawn the first daughter.  I discovered then that my mother had cancer.  And mother was in surgery within three or four weeks of--before Shawn was born.  She recovered from major surgery and lived about nine months.  And passed away.  So then I wanted to stay with Grandma.  And so I, I worked and took care of Grandma and Shawn.  And sent him some stuff.  So I was doing the double duty again.  I was teaching and making films.  I had three or four films that I did.  Those little, little shows.  God! That's been a long time ago.  Anyway, I made that '[The] Burden of Truth' while he was in Washington.  And they sent for him to come at the premier that was done in Philadelphia. Governor [George M.] Leader, Lyndon Williams and Nelson Rockefeller were the guests and the supporters of this.  Because Rockefeller, Nelson took that all around the city and showed that.  Because it was the business about prejudice in housing.  Anyway, when he came home from medical school--I had been offered several contracts.  I did 'Hallmark Hall of Fame.'  I did a lot of--'Soldiers of Fortune.'  Little, little bit parts.  And--but they were--and I was in that thing that Dorothy Dandridge did, as an extra.  So I worked all the time.  I had that and my school.  Teaching was half day.  I didn't have to be at school until the eleven--eleven o'clock.  And I was doing a played called, 'A Streetcar Named Desire.'  I was doing Stella.  So I had that.  We did that fifteen weeks a year, whatever.  Anyway, that was how I, I did.  I would send him stuff for school.  I remember one day I had gone out and bought myself a whole bunch of stuff that I thought I wanted to have.  And he called me the next day and said, "I need a hundred and some'n dollars."  You know.  [Laughs] So I took all my stuff back and got--sent him the money.  So that was how I, you know.  We worked together doing that.  When he came back and decided whether he was going to be a surgeon, he said, "I'm not--my dexterity is not that good."  And he said, "And I think I'm too old to be trained for that.  So what do you think if I go into psychiatry?"  He said, "We won't make as much money."  He said, "But I am so interested in, in psychiatry."  I said, "Well, that's fine."  So that's what we did.
Story_ID: 9410
Speaker 1: And what was the nature of you know, the work as a black person?  You know, during that time?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I did 'Babe Parks.'  I did--they did a remake of Jean Harlow's story.  I worked in that.  I did 'Soldiers of Fortune.'  Now 'Soldiers of Fortune' I played a Navy girl, with Woody Strode was the other guy--was the other black in there.  And we did another one that never came out of the can.  I did that one with Jimmy Edwards.  He was a doctor and there was a scene where he palpated the abdomen of a Caucasian woman.  And Dowel--Dowel Chemical Company who had sponsored that film never showed it.  It stayed in the can.  Boon.  I can't think of Boon's name.  Anyway, he was the producer.  He had--that was his work in it.  Never got it on.  So the work I did was, you know bit parts.  But it was good money.  The last amount that I--that my agent--I had an agent.  I can't remember his name either.  But three hundred dollars a day was good money in the [19]50s and [19]60s.  [19]40s, [19]50s and [19]60s.  And the stage play didn't pay anything.  But it was a place where they could come and see.  And, you know, agents would then sell you for little bit parts.  I did magazine things.  You know, they'd come, and a shot with my baby giving her a bottle or whatever.  But all of it was work, print work.
Speaker 1: Was Ike [Isaac] Jones helpful to you during this time?  Did he help at all?  'Cause he was--but he was active still wasn't he?
Speaker 2: He was active.  But--'The Joe Louis Story' was done.  That I didn't get to do anything in it.  He, he introduced me to it.  But I--I can't remember.  I think Dorothy Dandridge did that.  No.  'The Joe Louis Story,' I can't remember who did it really.
Speaker 1: So who were the blacks big in Hollywood at the time?
Speaker 2: Lena [Horne, actress/singer], that didn't do maid roles.  [Pause] There weren't many.  And television was coming out.  So some of the things I did were on television.  We didn't have any major stars that weren't doing Steppin Fetchit and fun roles like that.  You know, comedy.  We didn't have anything.  We had Beah Richards and Nick Stewart's Ebony Showcase [Theater, Los Angeles, California] was the place that we--most of us trained.  And when they--when we were showcased in there, that's where I did 'A Streetcar Named Desire'  in the Ebony Showcase.  And I had write-ups from somebody in the 'Times' in--about my work.  And then eventually an agent picked me up.  But I'm trying to think of who the stars were.  Dorothy Dandridge had to have been about the only one that I know of at that time, and Lena.  Didn't have much that could be in a movie. See these people sang and danced.  We had lots of--some dancers,  Katherine Dunham.  And then they'd get those bit roles in those large extravaganzas.  But I didn't sing or dance.  So we had Woody Strode.  We had Brock Peters.  But the, but the woman of my time, there wasn't one.
Story_ID: 9411
Speaker 1: We were just so happy to have work.  But I think they may have thought that they were gonna launch, Dorothy [Dandridge] in this film ['Carmen Jones'].  Because it was the biggest film at the time, that I know of.  In color and Harry Belafonte  you know.  But he's singing opera [sic, even though Belafonte was a singer, the singing for his part was dubbed by LeVern Hutcherson] .  And whoever do the singing for her [Marilyn Horne's vocals dubbed in], she's doing 'Carmen' and in that tone.  And it just lost everything.  There was no love story to speak of.  The acting in that was not mastered.  Even for what they were gonna do.  It was just so out of context that it never really sold.  It never really did anything.  But we were just happy to be able to say that we have an actress doing a full role.  She was the star.  And then they tried other little bit parts.  But just--you know, there were other things that would keep her from doing those parts.  But that was the only substance from it was that we were working in a major film.  And we were--they had the leads.  They--all the actresses in there had the leading role.  While never in the history did they have Lena [Horne] in a leading role.  Except in that thing she did with [pause] her, her co-star was, was [Sidney] Poitier--was the first that actually had leading roles.  Belafonte remained a singer.  You know, his, his acting jobs were not of that caliber.  But Belafonte--I mean [Sidney] Poitier it was the--was the star.  He trained on the stage.  He came from the stage to doing film.  I would--I was doing something when he came out here [California] and we had one of his dear friends who had all had bit parts.  But I remember we cooked a big fish that night.  And he came out here to do [motion picture] 'Blackboard Jungle' [1955].  And we had all this big fish and we all sat around talking.  I said, "I'm gonna work with you one of these days."  I never did but he says, " I bet you will.  I bet you will."  And those were the days of hit and miss.  I was so glad I had a teaching job, though.
Speaker 2: Because it gave you a--let's, let's talk about that.
Speaker 1: That was the sustaining factor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 9412
Speaker 1: So your husband [Dr. James L. Jones] is back and he chose psychiatry, which is totally different for--I mean, 'cause I know--I--we interviewed [Dr.] Alvin Poussaint and it just struck me thinking, what would a black person think about doing psychiatry?
Speaker 2: Well, they asked him.  When he finished, Jim was asked, "How is it, doing black psychiatry?"  He said, "Well, you know the same dynamics that make white people crazy, are the same dynamics that make black people crazy."  But we always said, "We would never go crazy."  It was never identified.  And that was the most difficult thing to get the Compton [California]-Watts [Los Angeles, California] community--it took us weeks and months of meeting with community people who were the leaders in the community to allow that mental health center [Kedren Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California] to be there.  Because at that time we weren't willing to accept the responsibility of being black, poor and crazy.  And mental health meant being crazy.  "Nothing wrong with my mind," was the retaliation.  But they bought into it because it would provide jobs.  And when we opened the center, we opened it in a little storefront kind of thing.  The first Kedren was a refurbished theater.  We were waiting for the building grant to come.  But we had the staffing grant.  And we did something unheard of--it had not been done.  Mental health workers that they gave us the grant to employ were people who wanted to be in nursing or community people.  We took community people and put them through a whole series of training which Dr. Jones did on his own.  And gave them the money that would have been for the mental health worker.  Many of them went on to get their nursing career or went into various parts of that profession because by that time, the, the field of mental health was opening for psychologists.  Before that, psychologists couldn't practice psychiatry.  They couldn't treat.  I don't know if you remember that era or not.  But our license did not allow us to, to actually do treatment plans.  We had to be in correlation with the psychiatrist.  And then they would--and then they would--and we still can't do prescriptions.  So that was how we brought the community to accept this building being put there.
Story_ID: 9413
Speaker 1: But let's go back a little bit.  And just--how did this--because this is really groundbreaking [the opening of the Kedren Community Mental Health Center in the Watts-Compton area of Los Angeles, California].  We're talking about what, 1960--?
Speaker 2: You're talking about 1960.
Speaker 1: 19--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) '60, '65 [1965] 'cause the [Watts] riots broke out just by the time he opened his private office.  And we were at the same time working--I was at EYOA [Economic and Youth Opportunities Agency, Los Angeles] and he was working to get the mental health grant.  The Kennedy Act [the Community Mental Health Centers Act of 1963 and the 1965 amendments to the act providing federal funding] is what made that possible for us to apply for a mental health grant.  And the fact that it was a specific grant, without being a psychiatrist, without being a mental health professional, licensed professional.  No psychologist could have got that, that grant.  And the way that it was written, the proposal that he wrote, which was a masterful piece of work.  And following--but we had--we got stuck on the part that was called the matching grant, the matching funds for the grant.  So it was just about--we, we were still working in the, in the storefront thing.  He never lived to see the building.  All of those things came to fruition.  Now he's doing a private practice.  He's crossing town, which was in Bret--in Hollywood, North Hollywood [California], crossing town, going back to the, to the center in Watts and going with his private practice.  And then stressing and working through.  I'm sure that, that work brought his death closer.  We didn't know he had a congenital heart problem.  But I'm sure that the stress and the strain of getting that cooperation, and to, to--'cause sometimes I would take the meetings in Los Angeles from the senators or whoever else was going to be here.  And he would take the ones in Washington [D.C.].  So I was with him 100 percent with all of this.
Story_ID: 9414
Speaker 1: In the mean time, Head Start came out.  And my children were at the school that got the first pilot program [in July 1965]. Which was Center for Early Education [Los Angeles, California].  And they asked me if I would be one of the teachers.  And I--of course, I accepted it.  But I got so hooked into understanding how much those early years meant, I applied for a Head Start grant.  And I was first [January 1966] put under the Urban League.  Eventually I moved it from the Urban League to Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California].  And that was one of the sustaining factors because the funding came directly to the Kedren Head Starts.  And I had set up ten centers in poverty pockets.  And it served the mental health center in this particular way.  We didn't have--Kedren Mental Health Center did not have any visibility in the community.  It was a new corporation.  'Cause it was first his [husband Dr. James L. Jones's] private practice.  So when he applied for a non-profit structure for--from it, that was a big to-do because it was not known.  Urban League.  We had--here's another [laughing] thing.  No, no mental health situations out here.  So what we did was put Head Starts from Burbank [California] to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] to Watts [Los Angeles, California]-Compton [California].  We had something like twenty-five, thirty centers all in poverty pockets.  Kedren got its visibility.  So it was no more a little bit of a program.  And then the funding began to come through.  We got the first million and a half dollar grant out of the federal government that had been ever been gotten in Watts, black or white.  That's how important that work was.  A million and a half dollars.  Kedren now is a thirty million dollar operation.
Story_ID: 9415
Speaker 1: How did Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California], the idea--I mean what--here's your husband [James L. Jones].  He's, he's servicing patients there right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And you're working as--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He was servicing patients in his private--.
Speaker 1: In private practice.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but after the Watts riot [Los Angeles, California, 1965] there was a need identified, right?  Or--just--I'm trying to--.
Speaker 2: No, the, the way that happened is that he was trying to serve the general community.  There was no takers.  No--we didn't have any black clients.  Okay.  The people he had were out of Pasadena [California] and wherever.  And he went--he made home visits at that time, in psychiatry.  They didn't even have the, the welfare clients being serviced who really had problems.  So, they didn't have a community mental health center process going on.  They had the county mental health thing.  But that was watered down to the point where you didn't service unless you were already in trouble.  This--we had some preventative measures.  So what we did was--by the time he was really, really tired of trying to get clients in, we did see some prominent people in, in psychiatry--I mean in need.  But they were private one, two three patients, who couldn't pay.  But Kennedy--this is how it came to be available.  Has a sister [Rose] who is mentally problemed. [U.S. President] John F. Kennedy's sister.  So he went in to make some kind of preparation throughout the, the--what do you call those things that they do?  Like they give grants for different things.  He made available mental health grants throughout the country. There were two or three of them done here in Los Angeles.  There was one called Central City that folded, that was black.  Kedren is the only sustaining black community mental health center, that's still operating.
Story_ID: 9416
Speaker 1: So what are you saying you want to do with Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California]?  I mean what is the concept?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] The concept there is to--I, I must find that thing.  'Cause he [husband James L. Jones] wrote this.  It was to have people be able to motivate and move themselves from second-class citizenship.  To be able to take their place in the community.  Rightfully being able to compete.  Even through poor education, even through no jobs.  We have to have a mind set to be able to say that, this is what we're able to do, and we're gonna do it and go through all the rituals.  You know medical school is not an easy task.  Psychiatry, you didn't have ten people going through that kind of rigorous training.  Because after that, there's an internship,  there's a residency and there's a fellowship. There's a whole bunch of stuff that's even after medical school, is, is this thing.  So that was his, his foresight.  To be able to--because the board---the board of Kedren had to be made up of some representatives of the community to express the community's needs.  So we made home visits.  And we chose people from the--for the board of directors to represent some of their needs.  We did not get to have teenagers on it.  But that was one of the next things.  So it was to be able to have people take part in their--in their circumstances, and to understand how they came about.  What was it that they needed in their lives, in order to be able to make decisions?  They had to have a very clear process of thinking to be exposed to the levels of communication that were necessary, in order to be able to sustain instead of just take whatever job they had and not be able to be assertive.  All of that's part of psychiatry.  The way you raise your children.  And I feel that, that is what kept me going even after he [husband James L. Jones] passed away, is that I did not--I had questions.  People in the community said, "Why don't you build your house and live in this community?"  I said, "Because I can't bring my children up here.  I want them to know that they can compete at any level, anywhere.  So I want them to have the tools in which to go out."  And not one of my children went into teaching.  Marne taught after she graduated.  But she's now making films.  She produced one for--with King, Decatur and Gandhi.  So that's--she--and then she left that and went to--she's back doing that.  They're going back to Atlanta [Georgia] next week I think.  Anyway.  All I'm saying is that opportunities come from the ability to move your thinking out of the groove.  You don't have to be a teacher, a lawyer.  You can become whatever your assertiveness will permit you to be.  But that takes a kind of freedom.  That--the freedom--you don't get that kind of thinking in your general education.  You don't get that kind of permission to think that way.  So that's part of psychiatry.  Not necessarily--we got--we had the place for the--for the people who were too sick to function.  But psychiatry, mental health is being able to have the full power of your mind.
Story_ID: 9417
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to get to the heart of what Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California] was all about.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well Kedren for me was about helping children get a good secure base from within a family.  And to move away from punishment to being able to think things through, being able to plan.  One of the things I noticed in teaching--and I didn't know how it came about, was that the children whose parents had an organized way of being with them.  They had a time they had breakfast.  They did this.  They did that and the other.  Those children were consistently able to follow plans.  The ones who were moved around, no system, could not contain themselves long enough to be able to--and I didn't know the cause of it then.  I'm just--we're just getting into that.  But I did know that developmentally you don't push a child into something until there is readiness with all the faculties ready to do that job.  Like they put a pencil in their hand at two years old.  There's not enough coordination of all the things necessary to make that happen.  So my interest came from being able to see that the children had the kind of exposure.  And I ran a summer program with that in mind where I kept the, the children with me in doing different things.  Experiencing with a freedom.  Being able to go to a park.  Being able to swim, take swimming lessons.  You see, the restrictions were prejudice.  And they wouldn't readily accept my children, my, my Head Start children.  But I went to the--to the mayor of the city Lynwood [California], where that was and got permission and support for my children to come and swim at a certain time of day.  On one occasion, they came and poured the, the stuff in the pool to clean it up.  So what I'm saying is it was more than just practicing for sick people who--it's a, it's a--and by them being able to be on the board to make decisions about what they wanted to see is vital.  They were taking part.  And the people out in the community did.  The store people wanted to know what this was going to do.  What pro--what could they expect from it?
Speaker 1: Now did you find when you started doing these things with the children, what did you find happened?  What was the end result? Like when you started opening up their world and taking them to swimming and involving them in activities.  What did you see happening with the children?
Speaker 2: Interest.  Interest in their world.  Feeling a part of things.  Mothers and--mothers went too.  'Cause I, I rented a train on one occasion.  A--I'm trying to think of the congressman who sponsored that for me.  Anyway, I have his picture some place.  And we took--most of these mothers had never had a train ride.  These children had not been on a train.  They were right out of Watts [Los Angeles, California].  We took them fishing.  We arranged trips for exposure.  So that they weren't feeling out of place.  Like you know, Disneyland [Anaheim, California] was okay 'cause everybody--but these were specifics.  Picnics where there was integration.  So--we're now learning and we know very clearly that experience will change the shape of the brain, much less what goes in it.  In other words, if you--a person gets experience in one area, that particular area is more filled, than the other.  So our children were raised in sheltered circumstances.  Limited circumstances.  And consequently, we remained that way many times.  Many, many years.  We're just now feeling assertive to be able to get out.
Story_ID: 9418
Speaker 1: And I think the story of mental health is more widespread now than, than it was initially.  I mean unless you had some kind of a background like mine, you didn't know.  You didn't have permission.  And you cannot create. Because now the demand for, for, for an educated person is to be able to create a place for themselves in the world.  Because the old style is gone.  Papa can't leave you the store.  You can't have the old traditional, you go back to doing what your father did and you leave that, or your mother, or sister, or brother.  These children coming up now have to create a space for themselves in the world.  There's no profession that isn't overrun with workers.  So now you're coming into the technical world.  That's a different kind of education.  You know, you don't have to sit beside your worker anymore.  You may have to sit together by the machine.  You got something to do that's not you and that person relating.  So the acceptance of a lifestyle you'll be at the level of, of, of the, the--the heads of the things.  Big companies and stuff like that.  The industry.  That's still very select.  You don't have people investing in the, in the--in Viacom [International, Inc.] except through their paycheck thing.  Whatever that is.  What do you call that?  The K?
Speaker 2: 401K.
Speaker 1: 401K.
Story_ID: 9419
Speaker 1: I want to go back to Head Start.  Because you were one--this was one of the first Head Starts that you are--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was the first in this city [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: First in the city, Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about what attracted you to the Head Start program?  And it sounds like you're still very much an advocate of Head Start.
Speaker 2: Yes I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The opportunity for children to be able to have exposure that would make interest and learning, initially unless mother or father promoted learning in the home.  But the world was closed off to them.  They couldn't see how they could get out there and become a part of something else.  To do something else--sports.  In other words, it's basically what I found that my children were having.  An open field to pursue.  And our children generally didn't have it.  They were welfare recipients.  They were limited to a particular income.  And their ambition seemed to have been to grow up and be on welfare.  You know how many generations of welfare people we have?  And nobody broke out and got a job?  I saw this as an opportunity for a different kind of community education.  Community exposure.  A way to elevate a person.  And we did that through the jobs and the way we--we employed people. All of my Head Start people were not trained initially.  There was a problem because the head teacher had to have credentials.  I had a lot of people who volunteered from the other communities, who did have that exposure, who had gone to--had been in nursery school training. So I made arrangements with them to take the second job.  And have some black people to be--our people to be head teachers, 'cause that's where the big salary was.  But we also gave an education.  Every morning at 8:00 I met initially with my staff and began the training of what that--what they needed to know.  When I went to work at EYOA [Economic and Youth Opportunities Agency] my husband [James L. Jones] took that over.  Every morning,  every Monday morning the staff met.  And eventually they were sent to different--to Pasadena [California], to, to colleges.  Many of them that started as, as--at the middle level--one woman, Minnie Higgenbotham, who came in for--and I got them from, from the--from the, neighborhood aid--went to interview people from the neighborhood aid and put them on staff always with the idea that we were going to give them the kind of necessary training that they needed to stay in their jobs.  Eventually they got into classes.  Eventually they were able to go to different colleges that would give them the information.  But that's how we started it.
Speaker 1: Now who, who started Head Start?  How was--do you know a lot--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes I do.  I know that was because Mrs.--the president's wife--[U.S.] President--,
Speaker 1: Not [John F.] Kennedy.
Speaker 2: [Lyndon B.] Johnson.
Speaker 1: Johnson.  'Lady Bird' [Claudia Taylor Johnson].  'Lady Bird' thought that all children should have a right to preschool.  We had not had preschool.  You know, when we got them, they knew nothing about the formality in, in learning to become a student.  We still haven't right together in the, in our community of people.  We're bet--we're getting better at it.  But what you do with them in the first years.  That's what I'm going to talk to the parents more about in, in Florida.  And this is with the Buddhist group.  And that is to prepare your child for the task they have.
Story_ID: 9420
Speaker 1: And did you find--so you immediately took--this whole thing of Head Start, was it because there was funding available or did you just immediately sort of take to the program?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I immediately took to the program after the, the pilot program.  I was in with the people who did the pilot.  And they said, "Why don't you get a grant for yourself?"  I said, "How?"  So they gave me all the information.  And then the churches and everybody else, you know, began to do Head Start.  At that one time [1966-1969] initially here in California, I was the supervisor for every Head Start all over the county.  Because I had some background in it and I had a great interest in it.  So I had seven people who came as what they called field reps. And that's--eventually I left and went back to school.  But that's what I did.  And then when I went back to Cedars-Sinai [Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] to get training.  Cedars-Sinai had a grant that was specifically for an emotionally developed--emotional development for children.
Speaker 1: Now with Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California]--back--so the, the Head Start program started within Kedren.  But then you had ten.
Speaker 2: Head Start was never a part of Mental Health Center.
Speaker 1: It was never a part?
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: That was something you did totally--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That was my thing all by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And then I put it under Kedren after Kedren needed visibility.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: See that was my thing.  I was gonna do my Head Starts myself.  I never got a chance to do them.
Speaker 1: Because your husband [James L. Jones] dies.
Speaker 2: Well, because my husband died.  But because I was called to go do this other thing to become the field rep.
Speaker 1: For all the Head Starts.
Speaker 2: For all Head Starts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: And every Head Start that they had, they needed somebody to monitor the programs.  Whether they were Montessori-based or whether they were churched-based I--the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] had one.  By the time we--it came into the community, everyone had some part of it.  Any organization who wanted to take on early childhood education.
Speaker 1: Now so you're a very important part--person here you are, you know, a field rep for Head Start--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because with being and participating in that program meant dollars, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yes.
Speaker 1: Dollars (unclear).
Speaker 2: It meant dollars.  But it also meant a particular type of education.  In the school system we had a different type of education than Head Start.  You didn't have developmental education anywhere.  It didn't come into the school system until 1972.  So, meaning that the experiences that you give the child have to be at the right time and the right age.  So they had to be age appropriate.  And that's developmental teaching.
Story_ID: 9421
Speaker 1: You know, you were talking about Head Start and your successes in that.
Speaker 2: I started to tell you a little bit about that from where the teachers were selected, and the way the teachers were selected.  I wanted to integrate the staff for two reasons.  One is that the people I chose to--and--would come in, I selected from the community to want to come and work in the Watts [Los Angeles, California] Compton [California] area were all people who had nursery school training, preschool training.  And the ones who needed to work in the community, that I wanted to make sure they were not neglected.  Had none.  Some of them didn't--hadn't finished school.  They had gone to high school.  But they didn't--they didn't have a background to take this up.  So I made--made arrangements with--to integrate it, and to have people who were at a certain level, would they come and take the second job but lead.  And they did.  They were able to do that.  I had some other upsets about one--one of the white teachers painted one of those rubber dolls black.  And the black teachers had one heck of a time with that.  That this one was insulting.  And she was in tears.  So I had to go out on the site and do--you know, put out the fires so to speak.  But what I'm--what was really important here is that whatever level they came to Head Start with--some had their clothes in the cleaners that I had to go get the clothes out the cleaners for them to be able to make the first spot on the job.  Be able to come to work.  That kind of thing.  That's how below the average functioning level were some of the--there were three.  There was the neighborhood aid, there was the assistant teacher and then there was the master teacher.  So there were three adults that were gonna benefit from this.  By the end of the program, by the end of the first year, we had many of them enrolling in school.  Because there was a grant that we could have that they could get to go to go to school and be paid to attend.  Others sought higher levels.  Wherever their education was.  We have one who came out with a Masters [degree].  One became a head teacher.  The other one became a, a supervisor.  So the people who came in at one level, when they as a group were able to move up in the whole program.  Not necessarily at Kedren [Community Mental Health Center].  Wherever the program existed and they wanted to--some went back to public school to teach.  So their education was improved.  Their functioning in terms of earning a living was totally improved.
Story_ID: 9422
Speaker 1: And the children who entered school from Head Start were very ready to learn.  They had that learning readiness that was--that always took so long in the public schools for them to get motivated to want to.  See one of the--the hardest task was consistency.  They did not have a background in procedure and consistency.  In other words there was no consistency in their lives.  They didn't have a consistency with mother.  They didn't have a--see, consistency is what gives one the impetus to contain the exposure that they're receiving.  'Containing', meaning that if, whatever you're doing, if you can't stay with it long enough to tolerate the discomfort of learning, you can't really stay with the task.  And if you're uncomfortable in your very being with yourself, learning can be almost impossible.  Because to be able to gather information--see we taught rote things .  If you could have a good memory in public schools, you could pass any test.  But could you function in a society where there's competitiveness?  Could you work in--could you create something other than to paint or to sing or to make music?  I'm talking about like what's-his-name who did the computer thing.  He went out and developed a whole situation.  Now his ambition and his exposure was not limited.  We start out limited.  Just by our color.  We know that we can't do such and such a thing.  Because immediately that's a barrier.  But then when you get the tools by which you can transcend that barrier and say, "I am somebody." Remember when during the--during the time that, that one of the ministers [Rev. Jesse Jackson] brought out "I am somebody."  You know, to feel 'less-than' doesn't make you able to go out and do stuff.  That's one of the differences between blacks in the South and blacks in, in cities initially.  Whatever we did, it was our doing and we owned it.  [Laughing] You know, whatever it was, it was ours.  So we had the pride of working and owning.  Here they could be fronting.  They were part of something that they--that they didn't build from the ground up.  In other words, what one does is what gives them, this is something different that you're doing.  What you're doing here--when you--as you're doing this, you're getting a kind of power.  You're getting a kind of satisfaction from your own being.  No one has to praise you.  The, the accomplishment of it, the significance of it and all of that is rewarding.  So we've got to learn how to be rewarded by our own gratification.  So that you don't need to become a people pleaser--the, the entertainment world, the sports world.  The foundation of that human being is so uncertain that unless they--each--they're no better than the next job.  They're no better than the next play.  Because the security of being who they are is not there.
Story_ID: 9423
Speaker 1: When you look--you know you went back and you've gotten your doctorate.  You know, and you're still committed to working with youth.  You know, and you've done, you know, this other, you know, training.  What is your belief system about what is necessary?  Your concentration still is early childhood education right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is--what, as you sit here today, what is your belief system about what is necessary to be done in the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say I do believe that educating children with a kind of freedom.  Bringing them up with a kind of freedom.  I don't mean not discipline them.  The foundation is laid so early.  We've got to really help adults grow to where they have that nurturing to give to a child.  That nurturing is what holds you together when everything else fails.  Because you feel secure.  You get--your foundation is pretty good.  But if you've been raised in a family where even your daddy doesn't love you, your mama doesn't have time for you no--where do you get your identity for security?  It isn't there.  And then the outside world doesn't have room for you.  Because you don't have the behavior necessary to even be tolerated.  And you don't have the ability to stay with a thing, as a rule.  But generally--I'm talking about generally now what I see in--see, I've been back teaching, substituting, from a--from time to time.  As well as--so I see this new crop of children who have had even less home values than we had.  Much less.  They don't have homes.  You know, there's nobody in the home.  And when they are--see, the--you learn from the adult mind.  In other words--but most of our people never get the full adult level.  By this misdi- --unable to make decisions, unable to provide security, unable to transcend the immediate environment and reach out beyond that--travel someplace and say, "I'm gonna get a job over here."  Educational background hasn't permitted that.  They don't know another language.  And I'm not saying that because mine did.
Story_ID: 9424
Speaker 1: Marne [Jones] wanted to go to France for a year.  Now I didn't have any money to send her.  You know, but I managed to send her to France for a year.  But that's because her general exposure through life, she wanted to do these things.  Who would want to leave the school system and come out and try to work in the movie industry?  In the, in the business part of the movie industry unless they thought that was a possibility.  And she was willing to stay with it until--and she's not, you know, like a superior learner.  She's an average student, like her mom.  (Laughing), you know, I was an average person.  I was not gifted like my older daughter [Shawn Jones Clark].  Now she was Who's Who in, in America, in the top IQ thing.  Whatever that meant.  But all of us are not fortunate that way.  But we can learn to do something very important in our being, in ourselves.  We--and that gives us--that's where the worth comes from.  It's not the dollars and the cents.  The worth actually comes from one's own ability to produce.
Story_ID: 9425
Speaker 1: Now when you--when you look back over the forty years that you've been really working with youth, what do you--I mean have you seen any successes that you would like to--you know, or has it been that you know, there's been an attempt to sort of play at things but hasn't been perfected.  I'm just--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It's not perfected.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's not--it's not where it needs to be.  It needs to be--this type of thing we're talking about right now, the educational system needs to refocus.  Because they are not giving chi--that's why they don't go to school.  They're not getting what they need in the school system.  Because when they leave there, they can't get a job.  Have you noticed that the average child from graduation, high school kids?  The young high school kids are coming out now and they don't have a place in the world.  They have gangs.  I'm talking about the multitude of them.  I'm not talking about the few select ones now.  If they--if we're gonna educate then we gotta have enough education to go around.  In other words, we gotta put it where children and people can do something with it.  But the kind of education we give now, we give 'em history.  And they--they're anxious now to be in the adult world after a teenager.  They gotta find a place in the adult world.  They gotta earn a living.  And what we're giving them now in the system of education generally speaking, they can't get a job.  They got to go out and take computer lessons.  They gotta go out and take whatever the new age is demanding that they know.  Why don't we have that as part of the system?  We have a few computers.  But I mean people who can teach it.  Not to always work the computer, but what is it that we--they need to do to be able to make a computer?  To be able to work on a computer?  They gotta go outside.  And that's just a--one little segment.  We're going mechanized.  And unless we have some way of being able to make a living from that thing--other than finishing school and then going out there and, and looking for a job.  There must be something that they can do with the--with the raw material.  [Bill] Gates did it.  Wasn't that Gates?  Was that the guy I'm talking about?  I mean and he cornered the field.  They had to sue him to, to split it [Microsoft].  And they may still not do it.  So that's, that's not an isolated case.  That's going to be what we're gonna be doing.  People who can create like the painters go out and put their signature on something.  That nobody paints that way.  Nobody makes this machine.  Nobody makes that situation.  That creativity is not a--it's an ignored gift.  But every person has something that they can do and do well.  But we never have a space for it to develop.  We never had permission.  And that's the early part of learning.  That's the beginning.  That's the time when the mother is slapping the kid's hand when they reach out to do something.  "Don't touch that."  One woman told me that she raised her child in her house and they never touched a thing.  She had all her best crystal and whatever else was out there.  And the kid knew that they couldn't touch it.  Well, what does that mean?  That means that the curiosity that they had for learning was already cut off.  Because that's how they get to know the environment.  To be able to touch, taste.  They only got five senses, and another one, perception.  That makes them be able to take all the things that they're exposed to and come out with a conclusion of some kind.  So the environmental learning situation is what I'm hoping that will come into fruition.  Because the successes drop off.  When you don't have people who've been steeped in that stuff to continue it--example: the way Kedren [Mental Health Center] is being run now has lost its momentum.  They're securing the dollar and putting in their pockets.  They're not building out in the community where you can see that kind of thing.  That kind of million dollars could do so much for that community.  You could have all kinds of things going up in that community that they're a part of.  That they have brought in.  And that's the disheartening part about it for me.
Story_ID: 9426
Speaker 1: Now who's running Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California] now?
Speaker 2: Another selected board.
Speaker 1: Another selected board.  Okay.  So even though it's something your, your husband [Dr. James L. Jones] and you founded--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --it's being run, okay, by another organization.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk about--go to the time that your husband died.  Because that must have been a very trying time in your life.
Speaker 2: It was.  It was devastating.
Speaker 1: It was--so here you are--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And at that time I'm in debt.  Because we carried--we had investments.  We had built some, [pause].  What do you call those things?  We had three or four of them and my husband was enterprising, and they were built up and down the--these little hospitals that you have--
Speaker 1: Clinics?
Speaker 2: Not clinics.  Where you keep general peo--the aged, the...
Speaker 1: Halfway houses?
Speaker 2: Halfway houses.  And, and what they are, are for indigent people.  Where you--they call 'em, [pause].  They're too old.  The senior citizen homes.
Speaker 1: Senior citizen homes.
Speaker 2: Senior citizen homes.  But we built one, you know, with the, with the fashion.  The brick and the--all that kind of stuff.  And the beauty parlor and stuff.  That one is-- where is it now?  On, on Pico [Boulevard, Los Angeles].  So he and his brother [Isaac 'Ike' Jones] put all those in there together.  To go into-- I, I lost my thought here.  Where were we?
Speaker 1: No we were talking about--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh--
Speaker 1: The state things were in--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well we had--we drew from our investments to carry that.  Because, until we got full funding and he kept his practice.  So whatever was needed, we were able to work out it--get that from our own pockets.  Buying the land.  We didn't have a board of directors who was interested in this.  They came 'cause James was doing it and then they were gonna--as soon as he--as soon as he died, that board left.  And I had a $95,000 debt for the land alone.  To find a way to cure the foreclosure.  And fortunately we knew some millionaires--Albee Lennick (?).  My children used to play with his kids.  And Isaac--he was a closer friend to Isaac than he was to, to us.  But he said, "Ike, we gotta help her."  He put the whole amount of money down.  When we sold the land to the city, I was able to get my money out of it.  But that--so at that time, I was taking a class in San Francisco [California] in psychodrama.  And I began to enter into therapy.  Because I could not go back to the [Kedren Mental Health] Center.  It was just--I couldn't.  But I had done what I needed to do to make sure that it would go on.  And a lot of other things happened that were just not possible for me to work at Kedren.  But that's the situation that it left me in.  It cost me everything that I had invested to see to it that it went on.  So when the new board came about, they had full funding.  They had a new facility and they had Central City that had lost their grant to put the hospital up.  So now there's a community mental health center, there's a hospital and it's the largest Head Start in the city.  The Head Start alone brings over fourteen million dollars.  So.
Story_ID: 9427
Speaker 1: Now how did you make it through this time?  Because here you have three young girls.  And it's 1971.  You know it's ear--So, so how do you happen to make it?  And this is, you know--
Speaker 2: I went out and developed a childcare food service.  And got a grant and set up another corporation called the James L. Jones Memorial Foundation.  And I secured six hundred meals a day that--I opened an office and got my food from Larry's Food Service and rode shotgun with the truck driver in the mornings.  I was up at three [a.m.].  The kids were in school.  I had to have five thousand dollars a month and I was told that they didn't have enough to pay me five thousand dollars a month at the end of this--whatever happened to that ten year evolving grant we will find out later, someday.  But I started a new project and did that making five thousand dollars a month.  And I also had a boys' home.  With my training I was able to get a license for a boys' home called Gramercy House [Los Angeles, California].  So I had six boys that I took one of my homes and took care of them--with the therapeutic intervention that I knew how to do and would bring in a specialist.  The food service brought me enough to be able to sustain my children in school.  And then I went back to teaching.  But that five hundred meals was delivered all over the county.  I had just started in San Francisco [California] when that program folded.  Because what people were doing were putting names on the list.  Bringing the food to the parks and throwing it away.  So they didn't have a service.  But I had a school that I did all the preschool meals.  So that's how I did it.
Speaker 1: So you, you were pretty--you're pretty inventive huh?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's--so you didn't really miss a beat.  You were--it's because of necessity.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Absolutely.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Necessity is the mother of invention.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I didn't know what I was gonna do.  But that's what I did.
Speaker 1: And what about the parenting role?  Because you have three girls.  Were--was anyone helping you?  Your, your gran--I mean no one.
Speaker 2: No one.  We helped each other.  We're close [laughing].  We're close.
Story_ID: 9428
Speaker 1: Let me--you have three daughters that you've raised to be very productive, you know,  members of society.  And I'd like you to maybe just address why you think you were successful.
Speaker 2: Because of the way my mother [Beatrice Newman] raised me.  We didn't know that it couldn't be done so we did it.  In other words I saw that as what we did.  That was just a way of life.  And she was a person who didn't stay in the nine rooms--the four month school.  She went out and made sure it was ten months or nine months.  Whatever it was that she wanted to do.  She wanted me to come to California for an education, she moved.  So my, my, my--it's had to have been.  That's all I had.  You know, it wasn't that my mother says, "Well I've got a cute little girl here.  I'm gonna dress her up and she can go to be, be an actress."  My foundation came from, how, how they did things.  I had a grandmother [Alice Carter White Newman] who couldn't read or write.  But she had the initiative.  The strength to send children to school in the time she sent them, [chuckle].  You know so all I knew was working it out.
Story_ID: 9429
Speaker 1: And as an educator, what do you think has been one of the most devastating developments, you know that has happened in the African American community?  And what is--what gives you hope?  Those two.
Speaker 2: What's devastating is, is, is the way--back to the way children have to go in gangs to be recognized.  We haven't taken care of our children as a community.  We haven't taken care of our children as a nation.  We haven't prepared them for the job that's ahead.  Because we haven't given the--we haven't taken them in.  You know we go to foreign countries and make sure they all have food, the best we can.  We have children on the street here.  Our community should not have people out in the street.  We should not have children--women and children living out of garbage cans.  So what is--what is with this, with this, with this land we have?  What about this, this, this government, this procedure?  Welfare is not the answer.  You know--now we're ta--that's what I'd like to see.  I would like to see us demand that we get a proper entrance into the level of business, of community work.  But we have to be prepared for it.  We've got to get ourselves ready to challenge it.  The education we give us--get now, we're not able to enter the challenge.  We got to take something to get there.  It takes something to do that.  Don't misunderstand me, besides just freedom.  But we don't have the freedom to pursue it.  So we gotta make those things.  So that's one of the things I'd like to see.  I'd like to see us take an interest in our future generation.  Our children.  Blacks particularly.  Because no matter where we rise to now, we are generations behind being first.  First doing what?  Community mental health.  This is rare.  But I shouldn't be first and only-- that shouldn't be.  There isn't another Kedren [Community Mental Health Center, Los Angeles, California] anywhere.  It's one of a kind.  It should be everywhere.  With the kind of forethought to build this community.  Not just because it's Kedren.  But what I'm saying is something that we could do to put people out of poverty in their thinking.  Initially, so that they don't have to drug their minds to be able to exist in their own skin. That's the--that's one of the things I'd like to see.  And little by little I would hope that we don't take just handouts.  You know we wait 'til somebody gets rich and they come back and they do something.  That wasn't the case with us.  I didn't go back to my community to do something.  I took what I had and made what I could out of it.  I'm not saying that that is so special.  But my commitment was so deep, I didn't see any other way to do it.  Just like raising my children.  I didn't see--So I didn't try to hold on to homes.  I didn't try to hold on to the superfluous stuff except the education, except the exposure.  They traveled.  They went to the best school, and I kept 'em there.  So that was my priority.  I didn't even walk into a store to buy clothes for myself for the first three years of my children's schooling.  I didn't know what buildings looked like inside.  It wasn't until much, much later.  Because I had to do that.  I wanted that done.  So the second thing is in terms of the educational component.
Story_ID: 9430
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: [pause] Tell me a little bit more about a legacy.  What--I think I would really hope that I be understood as a person who wanted the best for our families.  I think family is the most important business in the world.  And if there was any--my contributions are toward making a healthy family, a whole family.  And that's what I would to, to make known that my contributions are hopefully that we have good families.
Story_ID: 9431
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: [pause] That they under--that they, that they--that we look at ourselves for what we need to do to make a better world.  To make a better self.  To not be so easily caught up into the fact that we don't count.  There's some shaping up that we need to do.  There's some caring for ourselves that we need to learn.  And my future hope is that we will come to a point in time where we can compete with ourselves to be a better human being.  That's my hope.
