Story_ID: 186230
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to get started.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And by stating that my name is Sasha Dalton, and I'm your interviewer for today, and Scott [Stearns] is the videographer.  And I would like for you to state and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: I was born Vincent Sherman Chandler.
Speaker 1: And the date of birth and location?
Speaker 2: 6/9/53 [June 9, 1953], Doddsville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 13, 2007.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview is at The HistoryMakers office.
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers office, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician, author, storyteller; and I guess that's enough for now.
Story_ID: 186231
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna start by me asking you five kind of magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Go right ahead.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I like seafood.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I guess the holidays.  November, December.  That time of year.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The South.  Anywhere in the--on the Gulf Coast.  Anywhere in the South on the coast.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes.  How do you know your love be true unless your love be tried.
Story_ID: 186232
Speaker 1: We're going to start talking about your early years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and your family background.  So can you please tell me about your mother; what was her name, where was she born, where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Her name--her maiden name was Ida Collins.  And she married my father, who was a Chandler [John Chandler].  And she was born in Doddsville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Doddsville?
Speaker 2: D-O-D-D-S-V-I-L-L-E, which is a very small town in Mississippi in the Mississippi Delta.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What is that near?
Speaker 2: It's near Ruleville [Mississippi].  Let's see.  Let's see.  It's near-Indianola [Mississippi] is the next biggest town, and then from Indianola is Leland [Mississippi] and Greenville [Mississippi].  Going back the other way, it would be Doddsville, then Ruleville, then Drew [Mississippi], then Rome [Mississippi], then Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Mississippi], then Tutwiler [Mississippi], then Clarksdale [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about your mother's background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: That she was an only child.  She was considered drop dead gorgeous by everybody.  Her father was half-Indian, and my grandmother [Anna Bradley] was extremely fair skinned.  She was a biracial child.  They lived on the white folks' side of town.  My mother--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Which was called what?
Speaker 2: Doddsville.
Speaker 1: Did it have a--did that community have a name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You either lived on the--if you're traveling south, you either lived on the west side of the railroad tracks, which was mostly sharecroppers; or you lived on the east side of the railroad tracks.  Okay.  And my grandmother took full advantage of all of the social amenities that was afforded women at that time, who were very, very fair skinned.  And so she married well, she was able to live on that side of town--my grandmother--and my mother was born there, and she went to school there; she went to the Delta High School [North Delta High School, Batesville, Mississippi] there, which was sort of--you go in and you stay on campus, they did for a while.  And she went to Alcorn College [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].  Okay.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Would you know the year of her birth?
Speaker 2: 1926.  February 18.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she went to Alcorn College, and a lot of her schoolmates went to World War II [WWII].  My father included.  But a lot of her schoolmates and people she grew up with.  She grew with the Collins boys, who had Harvey Collins Restaurant, and Cecil and all of them.  All those were schoolmates of hers.  They used to have a club called the Mississippi Club, and all of them would get together every now and then and just, you know, talk about old stuff.  And she became a nurse.  She worked at Cook County Hospital [later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago state.  And before she passed away, she was at Madden Hospital [John J. Madden Mental Health Center, Hines, Illinois].  She liked psychiatric nursing, and she said that was her ultimate goal.  And so she said she got a lot of practice from us, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did she major in nursing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at college and she graduated?
Speaker 2: She went to a nursing school.  She went to several schools.  I'm not sure of the names of them.  But she--I remember she worked and couldn't go to her graduation.  So she--I was little, but she took me to an office and they gave her her diploma and the hat that they wore, 'cause each hat symbolized the school you went to.  They don't wear nursing hats anymore.  But she had the nursing hat, and she took me to get that.  I don't remember the name.  And then she did private duty for a while.  So she, you know--
Story_ID: 186233
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Ida Collins] as far as her personality?
Speaker 2: She was very bright.  She was self-educated.  She would read word power books.  She did crossword puzzles.  She had a mind for that.
Speaker 1: Why do you say she was self-educated?
Speaker 2: Because a lot of her education came after she left school, 'cause she believed in keeping books in bookcases.  I have one of her original books on George Washington Carver that was signed.  And so she believed in books, and she would read not just for entertainment, but she would have textbooks; you know, books that would take you someplace.  I remember once, we were little and we got a hold of her obstetrics books.  And we thought we had something we wasn't supposed to have, you know.  And she had lots of nursing books and things around the house.  And so she continued--she believed in--she continued to educate herself and learn things and read things.  She held a lot of facts in her head.  And she was always finishing a word power book and getting another one.  She would just never stop feeding her brain.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you of her growing up and, if so, what were they?
Speaker 2: Probably so.  If we asked about something or she was talking about something, she would talk about the old culture down there and how people would do things.
Speaker 1: For example?
Speaker 2: For example, we would talk about boys and girls.  And she said her mother [Anna Bradley] told her that if a boy would so much as touch you, that you could become pregnant.  And so she said if a boy would so much as put his hand on her shoulder, she would turn around and swing and go into the windmill, you know.  But that was their way of trying to protect you.  And she said that if a girl accidently became pregnant before her time, it was embarrassing; they had to sit in the back of the church.  A lot of times they would just move out of the town, because that was just not what you were supposed to do.  There was still social peer pressure that meant something in--as far as your behavior and your last name was all important, and you could not do things to bring embarrassment to your folks.  My grandmother had several husbands.  But back then they didn't get divorces, they just went to the store for some hamburger meat or a pack of cigarettes, and that was it.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: And one of her--my grandmother's choices was a man who owned the house that she lived in.  He did not stay on the other side of the railroad tracks, and he was smart.  He was self-employed, he owned his own land.  What was a garage all my life used to be a grist mill and a blacksmith shop for him.  And he was a Mason, and that worked in his favor.  And my mother told me, no matter how prejudiced people were back then, if he had a flat tire and he stood a certain way on the highway, cars would stop and they would lend him support and lend him help.  And she said back then if you were a Mason, you had to be upstanding.  You just couldn't join.  Somebody had to bring you in.  And even my grandmother, 'til she died, was in some branch of an Order.
Speaker 1: Eastern Stars?
Speaker 2: No.  Hers was called the Heroines of Jericho.
Speaker 1: Heroines.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I had never heard that.  And so I have her books, but I don't know what they mean, 'cause she was real secretive.  And--but when she passed away, my grandmother at ninety--there were three very senior ladies who are a member of her order, and they had a special little ritual that they did when she passed away that we just watched, you know.  But I know she would attend those kinds of things.  And my mom--I'm trying to think--there were lots of stories, 'cause I collect these stories that she would tell about the town and the things, 'cause if--she was an excellent cook; my mother was an excellent cook.  And my grandmother and--but they're escaping me, but they will come in now.  They'll come back to me, and I'll try to share them with you--
Story_ID: 186234
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your mother's [Ida Collins] family tree?
Speaker 2: 1857.
Speaker 1: For your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother, my grandmother [Anna Bradley] and her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was born--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's on your mother's side?  That's what I meant.
Speaker 2: My mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you can trace it back to your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Great--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: --grandmother.
Speaker 1: And were they all from Doddsville [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No.  They were from Florence, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have the Bible, and I have all of the entries coming from 1857 to 1977 when my mother died.  She was fifty-one when she passed away.  And so all of the aunts and uncles that I never knew.  Because my great-grandmother had to leave Florence, Mississippi in a hurry.  In fact, there was almost like a lynch mob in hot pursuit.  And they left Florence, which is forty miles about--just outside--it's just south of Jackson [Mississippi]--and moved all the way up to Doddsville, Mississippi, to get away from the trouble that was brewing at that time.
Speaker 1: And you don't know what that was?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My grandmother--my great-grandmother liked white men.  Okay.  And she had a husband, a very dark man; but she liked white men.  And she had a relationship with a prominent white citizen in Florence, Mississippi.  And that--here comes my grandmother, okay, who was--she passed for white.  You would not know she was black until she opened her mouth or you watched her eat.  Okay.  And she told--my grandmother told me that the white folks came at night and snatched my great-grandmother out of bed and her husband and whipped them in the front yard.  And they tried to take her, 'cause they said, "You don't need--what you don't have no business with this baby."  But they escaped.  They got away and they moved up to Doddsville, Mississippi.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, what was your great-grandmother's name and your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: I have it written down--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: --in the information that I sent back in here.  I have it.  It's in some--I have it written down--
Speaker 1: We'll get to it.
Speaker 2: --to tell you.  It's in my--her name was Humphries.  I'll tell you, it's in--I have some obituary where it's written.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her name.  And--
Speaker 1: So she was having a relationship with a white man?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the white people came.
Speaker 2: When they found out about it and they came--when they saw my grandmother and how she passed for white, they wanted to take her, and they were not able to get her, and they whipped them both pretty good.  And they escaped that night.  They took off that night and headed up to Ruleville, Mississippi, which is five miles from Doddsville.  That's sort of a bigger town than Doddsville, which is a cotton gin town basically.  But it was a special cotton gin town, 'cause Senator [John] Stennis lived there, and he didn't want the town to grow.  They didn't get a sewer system and stuff 'til many years later.  And my grandmother qualified, even though she said she had to take a physical, to work in his house.  And it was because of that relationship with the senator and his family, my mother was able to go to school.  And my grandmother received extra protection where she lived.  Now, when they got up there, my grandmother told me that her grandfather came to visit them.  Now that would be my great-great-grandfather.  And it was the first time that I heard anything about him.  I don't have--I have his name somewhere, but I didn't think about this.  And she said he came up there on a mule to visit them, and it was the last time that she had saw him.  Now, when my grandmother passed away in 1998, we kept looking in the back of the church.  She founded a church, her and my grandpa.  And we kept looking in the back of the church, because a lot of times if there were whites in your family, if they came to the funeral, they would come and sit in the back.  And I remember when I would have to go and visit her from Chicago [Illinois].  I didn't have a choice in the matter.  A lot of times whites would come, and she'd go out and sit on the front porch and they would talk.  And I never knew who they were; were they relatives or whatever, 'cause they never talked about it.  And she--my grandmother didn't reveal a lot of this for many, many years.  Southerners, they don't tell you nothing.  They take it with them, you know.  My grandmother said, "As long as you know who your mama is, don't worry about nothing else."  And she'd cut off any other thing you think you want to ask about, and that would be that.  But she started providing information and I would just turn on a tape recorder, and I got many hours of conversation, 'cause I'm kind of a history person like you all are, and I collect stuff.  And that's why when my grandmother passed, everybody, "I want her ring," "I want a coat," and I look for history.  And you know, and back then, people would get locks of hair, you know.  I wanted the deeds.  I wanted old pictures.  And that's what I was able to get.  And then I saw the Bible, which was the crown jewel, and I offered it to my grandmother's first cousin who's still alive.  She--I guess she would be a grand-cousin to me, my cousin Flora.  She's ninety-six.  And she said, "I don't need it.  You keep it."  And so that's how I wind up with the document before the rest--for those family members.
Story_ID: 186235
Speaker 1: Tell me about--a little bit about your father.
Speaker 2: My father lived in Inverness, Mississippi, which is--
Speaker 1: And his name was?
Speaker 2: John Chandler.  Inverness, I guess, is about thirty miles away.  Him and my mother [Ida Collins] went to the same high school.
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: Delta High School [North Delta High School, Batesville, Mississippi].  All I can get--remember is something with a--Delta Community High School, 'cause buses took them and they stayed.  They came home for the summer.  And that's where they met.  My father was an athlete and he was captain of the basketball team.  And my mother was just a cutie pie.  So she say people just sort of thought that they would be good together.  And that's how they met in high school.  My father's father, R.L. Chandler, was a prominent minister in Inverness, Mississippi.  He preached for seventy years.  There's a park named after the family called Chandler Park in Inverness.  There's a street named after my grandfather in Indianola, Mississippi, which is also [HM] B.B. King's hometown, and it's called Chandler Street.  And my aunt Lee, who wind up raising my father and his sisters 'cause his mother died early, my aunt Lee taught for forty-four years in the Inverness school system; so she was probably B.B. King's school teacher, if he can remember.  And so Inverness and Indianola were important cities in the family.  My father grew up with nine brothers and sisters.  My grandfather was never at home.  He was a straw boss.  He rode on a horse and told other people what to do.
Speaker 1: Rev. Chandler?
Speaker 2: Rev. Chandler.  He was very prominent.  He preached for seventy years.  He had three churches; one in Belzoni [Mississippi], one in Inverness--you know, in the South, they preach on circuits; the first Sunday, second Sunday--you don't have a preacher every weekend; so he would travel around.  And one of his churches had been there for sixty-three years and still had five of its original members when he passed away at ninety-four--born in eighteen-something.  I have that information.  And he was prominent, and as time went on, he became the go-to guy.  If you wanted to run for office in Inverness, you had to go talk to my grandpa.  And he was also the person where if you was acting up, the white folks would come to him and say, "You gonna have to get that boy out of town or we gonna kill him."  They went to talk to him about my Uncle Frank, okay.  And as time went, my cousins referred to him as--they say, "Well, he was really an Uncle Tom," is what they said.  Well, to me, he was a smart man who knew how to survive.  He had a big house.  He changed cars often.  He had money, okay.  And he had prominence.  He was also head of the Sunflower County Baptist Convention.  I brought his business card, his old turning-brown business card.  And he was a very important minister down there, and, that spun off other ministers and things.  When they dedicated the park to my grandfather in 1976, all of the children of the men that he worked for came out, and our family came--well, everybody came there, and he was an old man then.  And he wore a suit every single day.  He could quote the Bible backwards and forwards.  And he just died because he just was old.  He was talking to my aunt Lee, who was ironing his shirt, and she said he was talking and he just took a deep breath and that was it.  So I consider that's a blessing in that he passed away, but--
Speaker 1: And that was in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: That was in Mississippi.  He was living with my aunt Lee in Indianola, and I took some of the last pictures of him, 'cause I went to visit him, and you had to tell him who you were 'cause he had nine grandkids--I mean nine children, and they all had tons of grandchildren.  And after--they say after four you quit--you don't remember names.  So I had to say, "Well, I'm Uncle John's so and so."  "Oh, oh, oh."  Then he can kind of get you.  And I was talking to him, and he was sitting in his car that he couldn't drive, and he was angry because he couldn't drive and they wouldn't let him.  And he says, "I just want to do things, but my body just won't let me."  So he just would go and sit in his car with his suit on and just sit there.  And as he got older, they would let him preach at church out of respect, but he had younger ministers who would really take it.  But at one time he was really fiery.  And someone told me that when he was young--my aunt told me that he used to play a guitar.  And I said, "Oh.  I didn't know that," because my Uncle Woodrow played the guitar and gave me one when I was twelve.  So that tradition seemed as it looks like came through that way.
Story_ID: 186236
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe your father [John Chandler]?
Speaker 2: He was--he had a strong personality.  He was a leader of men.  Staff sergeant in the [U.S.] military, World War II [WWII].  He was a--
Speaker 1: In what branch of the service?
Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Army.  He was a staff manager at North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company].  He was an insurance man for over thirty years.  He started off with Unity [Insurance] back when Unity owned Unity Funeral Parlors over on Michigan [Avenue].  And then North Carolina Mutual bought out Unity Insurance and it became part of them, and he was with them for thirty--some thirty-three years until he died.  And he--
Speaker 1: And that was in what year?
Speaker 2: He passed away in 1985.
Speaker 1: And he was born in what year?
Speaker 2: 1923.  March 29.  So he should have been sixty-two or sixty-three.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you something.  You were born in 1953.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Ida Collins] was born in 1957-I mean, she passed in '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Oh, '77 [1977].  Okay.  I thought you said '57 [1957].  I'm glad we cleared that up.
Speaker 2: I understand.  And on one hand he was--he--to me he had a lot of potential.  He didn't know how to use his power.  And then he eventually succumbed to alcoholism.  And I never really knew him.  I knew he was my father, and I saw him every day, but I never really knew him.  He never allowed himself to really get close to too many of us.  We kind of knew him, but we didn't.  I remember asking my uncle, when he passed away, questions about him.
Speaker 1: Now, did he live with you and your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  They divorced when I was fifteen years old.  It was on my birthday that my mother left, and they divorced.  And she came back home when he had to leave the house.  And then--and he was around--that was when I was fifteen, that was 1967 or thereabouts.  And that's, that's--
Speaker 1: What you remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so he was--he had a tough personality.  He was not easy to get along with.  He was very temperamental, had anger management issues, and he was not afraid to fight, okay.  When people would bother us, I didn't go get my big brothers.  I went and got my daddy.  They called him Big John.  And nobody bothered him.  So when somebody would mess with me, I'd say, "I'll go get my daddy," and they didn't know what they were in for if they kept bothering me.
Story_ID: 186237
Speaker 1: Did he [Jackson's father, John Chandler] ever share any stories with you about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you share one or two of them with us?
Speaker 2: When he came out of the [military] service--I come from a family of entrepreneurs.  My Aunt Lee owned the first black cleaners back when they had them big old heavy irons that you could use for a doorstop now.  And self-employment was the thing, so my mother [Ida Collins] and father opened up a store.  I have a picture of my daddy at nineteen or twenty after the service standing behind the counter in the store.  And--but my father had went to World War II [WWII] along with other men from the South.  And then when they went to the war, they saw the world was a different place.  They saw that a lot of the fears that they had in the South were unfounded.  They found out that blacks and whites bleed the same way.  And when a lot of them came back home, they had a different attitude.  They weren't as timid as--and a lot of them were angry now, because they had a chance to go to Italy and Hawaii and Europe and see things differently.  So when they came back home, they bought a store.  Okay.  Him and my mother.  She--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Your father and your mother--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother bought a store.
Speaker 1: --they quit, she started having children, and she quit Alcorn College [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] and they opened up a store.
Speaker 2: This was in Mississippi?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And what kind of store was it?
Speaker 1: It was a grocery store.  And so then--back then, they had credit where if you went to the store, they'd want to pull a book out from behind the counter and write your stuff down.  That was all the MasterCard and Visa they had back then.  And so when my father went to get some gas at a white station, these boys was saying, "You don't have to pay.  Let us take the book out."  'Cause a lot of times, when you start writing stuff in the book, they kept the record.  A lot of people back then couldn't count and you just never got out of debt.  And my father said, "I don't want any credit.  I'll pay you.  Here's--I'll give you your money."  And they got into an argument over this here.  So my father threatened him, something he probably would have never done had he not went to the service.  So he went by and was having a conversation with his daddy [R.L. Chandler] and just happened to mention in passing what had happened.  My father said, "What's their names?"  And when they gave the last name, my grandfather got really upset and nervous.  He said, "Boy, we got trouble."  So he took my father with him, and he went to the mayor of the town and told the mayor what happened.  The mayor's eyes got big and says, "Uh oh.  Let's see if we can smooth this out."  So they went to the father who owned the station whose boys worked there, and they all went in the room and they were trying to calm things down.  My father didn't see where the big deal was.  He just told them.  But my grandfather knew who these people were.
Speaker 2: Who were they?
Speaker 1: They were--I don't know if it was Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], but it was people who will get you, who don't like you being uppity and saying things that you weren't supposed to say.  So they tried to smooth it out, but my father spoke in the meeting and he says, "I tell you what.  Why don't you lock me in a closet with your two sons, and if they win, it's over with.  And if I come out and win, it's over with."  They didn't like that.  That night they cut the power on the grocery store.  All the meat spoiled, and they threatened to burn the place down.  My mother got scared.  And the next week, we was in Chicago [Illinois].  I wasn't here yet, but they moved to Chicago.  And because of that event, and because--and my grandfather told him, "You can't stay here now.  I can't help you, son.  They gonna burn you out, and if they catch you, you're in some trouble."  So that's how that--it was a forced migration for my parents.  They didn't come up here just looking for thrills.  They came up here because they had to.
Speaker 2: And that was in what year?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of us were born in the South.  Some of us were born up here.  Charles--1947.  Right in there.
Story_ID: 186238
Speaker 1: You said some of you were born in the South.
Speaker 2: My mother [Ida Collins]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give me their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  John.  Rochelle.
Speaker 1: Now, if you can, the year that they were born.
Speaker 2: John, 1948; Rochelle, 1950; Michael, '52 [1952]; Vincent, '53 [1953], we're eighteen months apart.  Anna, '58 [1958]; Dwayne, '60 [1960]; and my last brother Woodrow, I would say '62 [1962].  Whew.
Speaker 1: So when they came to Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nobody was here.
Speaker 1: --they didn't have children?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So all of you were born in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 186239
Speaker 1: So you have nine siblings?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven.  Seven siblings.  And all of you were born in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother [Ida Collins], sometimes she would go home, especially in the early parts of their marriage, just to have her child.  So much to be with her mother.  Okay.  And she was more comfortable that way.  And as she got--it became routine, you know.  Cook County Hospital [later John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] was just as good.  But she started off--so some of us were born--like my brother, who was born--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Let's start with June.  June was born.
Speaker 2: John.
Speaker 1: John.  Okay.
Speaker 2: John was born in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Chicago.
Speaker 2: My sister --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Rochelle.
Speaker 2: --was born in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother, Michael, was born in the South.  Me too.  And everybody else, the other three, were born in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So did all the children go, like, John and Rochelle--did you--did they go to Mississippi with your mother when she had her children?
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: When she had the other two?
Speaker 2: Did they travel with her?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You wouldn't know?
Speaker 2: --I wouldn't know.  But I would assume that she couldn't leave them with anybody else.  Okay.  My mother and father [John Chandler], when they were a young couple, and they fought a lot and so there was a lot of early separations, because my aunt [Lee Chandler] raised me for some years.  And then there was a time we all got back together.  My oldest brother [John] caught polio back when polio was all around.  And he happened to be in the South with my grandmother [Anna Bradley].  He was sleeping in the same bed with my sister, and he got up to go someplace and just fell over.  And then she rushed him to some hosp--well, she couldn't rush him, but she drove all the way to Alabama from Mississippi to get him to a hospital, and they said that he had polio.  And most of our early years growing up, he was always in the hospital.  He was one of those March of Dime [March of Dimes] children on the poster with the little crutches.  He was in an iron lung.  You don't see those things anymore.  And when you look in the mirror and see who's standing at them.  And so, he had some challenges, but he beat it all.  He pulled through all of that stuff.  He's an attorney now.  But he's been on crutches all of his life, and now he's got all kinds of electronic wheelchairs and gadgets to get him from here to there.  And he happened to be --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And where does he live?
Speaker 2: He lives in Kenosha, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He has a law practice out there.
Story_ID: 186240
Speaker 1: Now you were telling me about your step-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Right.  His name is Sonny Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother had five husbands and he was one of them, and he went to the store for a pack of cigarettes and came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: This was your grandmother--your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother's [Ida Collins] father.
Speaker 1: This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Her--my mother's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --on your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: --I'm--my--on my mother's side of the family, this is my mother's biological father.
Speaker 1: Sonny.
Speaker 2: Sonny Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came to Chicago [Illinois] and he stayed up here.  He used to work at a place called Drexel Chevrolet until he retired on Cottage Grove [Avenue].  He--and my mother then--my grandmother [Anna Bradley] then married Willie Bradley, and I assume they were married for fifty years, 'cause he was all the grandpapa I ever knew.  I mean, her with--to be with--to stay with my grandmother.  I met my mother's father.  He would come by the house and take us places and do little things.  And he was very helpful in my oldest brother going to college and being a lawyer, because my mother and my grandfather did not want him shaking a cup on the 'L.' And he went to Christopher [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], he went to Spaulding High School [Jesse Spaulding High School, Chicago, Illinois] and stuff like that.  But they really pushed so he would be a--even though he had polio--that he wouldn't be at anybody's doorstep.  And my grandfather, Sonny Collins, he--wonderful man--he eventually succumbed to cancer.  Now, my grandfather, that I call him my grandfather, 'cause he was really my grandfather--my mother, we referred to him as Mr. Willie.  Okay.  And we couldn't say grandpa 'cause--my mother went home every time him and my--her and my father [John Chandler] got into a fight or something she'd run home.  And he said something about that one day and it kind of turned her off.  And so we were to call him Mr. Willie.  And we called--you know, as I got older, I called him Grandpa when I became a man.  But he was Mr. Willie.  And he gave me one of the greatest gifts a grandfather could give any grandson.  He loved and he cherished my grandmother.  He was one of the few honorable men that I have ever met, Mr. Willie Bradley.  He told my grandmother he would never leave her.  When she got where she couldn't take care of herself and went into a nursing home, he didn't have to go; he signed himself into this.  It was like an expensive hotel.  And he hated every minute of it.  He stayed there about six or seven months with her.  And he would joke and say, "Whatever you do, don't drink the orange juice."  He would just sit and stare out the window for hours.  And, you know, a lot of people were having problems, and they'd come walk in his room and he'd have to get up and make them leave.  And he would just sit there with my grandmother.  And the day she passed, the very next day, he signed himself out and went and got him an apartment.  And --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that was in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Mississippi.  And so he was one of the few honorable men I've ever met.  He was a hardworking man.  He worked hard all his life, okay, in the South, and my grandmother.  So I had--actually I had two grandpas on my--off my mother's side, but my bio-grandpa, which I was crazy about, Sonny Collins; and then Mr. Willie.  That's what we called him until, you know, until we got older we would just say Grandpa, 'cause--but my mother put that in motion.  And she didn't know she was gonna pass away at such a young age.
Story_ID: 186241
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your life here in Chicago [Illinois] as a young boy.  Where did you all live?
Speaker 2: I was born 1050--not born.  I remember 39th Street and Wells [Street] is the first place that I was old enough to remember where I was at; 39th and Wells, a block past--a block west of Wentworth Avenue.
Speaker 1: Was that the projects now?
Speaker 2: No.  The projects were to the south of us, and we stayed in--we had an apartment there.  Far back as I can remember, there used to be a--I remember police cars were black with white writing.  I remember horses and--'cause they would plop all in the middle of the street and there would be hay and stuff in this stuff.  And I remember old guys with horses in Chicago.  And a man with one arm would come in a horse drawn wagon and look in the garbage cans and take things out of there.  And I remember, two or three years old, it was my first visit to a Catholic church and it scared the living daylights out of me.  We had a babysitter, an older man named Mr. Peters, and he was Catholic.  I never heard of that.  It was Baptist churches all my life.  And he took me and my brother [Michael Chandler], we went on 39th--today it would be 39th and Wentworth, and we stood there and it was a big hole where they were digging out the Dan Ryan [Expressway, Chicago, Illinois].  At the time, I didn't know none of that.  I just saw a big--like a cut in there and men was down there working.  And the old guy said, "They're building some kind of expressway."  And he took us in this church.  It was an old Catholic Church.  At the time, they still spoke Latin, 'cause we didn't know what they were saying, me and my little brother--I mean, my older brother.  And normally when we go to church, we go to sleep.  That's what we did.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: We walked down there, and there were cut-outs as you went to your seat in the wall with little bitty statues of people--looked like toys to me--and candles.  And so I'm looking at all this.  I never saw this stuff.  So then we sat, and we were in a pew.  Normally we'd have a chair to ourselves.  And one thing I noticed, you couldn't whisper.  It was loud.  So we had to be quiet.  We normally talk and play and go to sleep.  That's what we did in church.  And then the man started speaking Latin and we looked at each other.  Didn't make any sense out of this.  Then he said something about drinking the blood.  We didn't understand this.  Then people started walking up there, and he had these gold cups, and they were drinking blood and stuff.  And he was giving a little cracker.  And so Mr. Peters went up there and he said--we said we don't want to go.  Then I sat back and I looked up and I saw some toes.  And my head went all the way back like this.  And I looked up there, and it was a giant, tall statue of Jesus like this, and he was bleeding.  And I said, "Mike.  Mike.  Look what they done to him.  Look what they done to him."   And I said, "And they drinking his blood."  We were so nervous.  We just sat there.  We--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Where was this?
Speaker 2: This was on 39th and Wentworth.  It used to be a Catholic church there.  We were so quiet.  And when we went home, first thing we say is, "Mama [Ida Collins], we don't want to ever go back to that church again."  And we told her what happened.  She just smiled like you're doing now.  But goes to show you when you're little and then people don't tell you nothing, it frightened us.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, when you went back--when you would go back and forth to Mississippi, that would be throughout the year?
Speaker 2: Throughout the year.  Summers I didn't have a choice.  And then my mother went back to visit her mother a lot.  She was an only child.
Speaker 1: So did you spend time in your grandfather's church there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Old Jericho Missionary Baptist Church [Doddsville, Mississippi].  And one year--I think I was twelve--I went every year, and I would say, "I don't wanna go, Ma.  I want to stay and play with my friends."  She says, "Naw.  You gonna go down there."  I cherish every time I went down there now, but at the time I hated it.  And then all my grandmother [Anna Bradley] and grand--Mr. Willie [Bradley] did was go to church every day.  BTU [Baptist Training Union].  Tarry.  Just every day we had to go to church.  And this was before air conditioners.  So you had the little fan with the little two-family, black family and the praying hands, and the church funeral parlor is mentioned on the other side, big mosquitos, and a fan blowing hot air.  And I went one day--one time every day to where I got so excited I joined up and got baptized.  There was a woman preacher, and they took me out and put on these white clothes and head stuff.  I remember the mud--soft mud in the river.  It was a river they nicknamed the duck pond.  And it was tadpoles flying around in there, and I had never seen a live tadpole.  I saw them in books.  And they took me out there and I got baptized.  And then they wrote me a letter--the secretary of the church couldn't hardly write, 'cause they couldn't read it when I got it back, and they sent me back my letter to my mother's church when I got back to the city.  But I was young.  I was good for two weeks.  And I backslid, and I started cursing and doing what I was doing.  But I did officially get baptized in Mississippi at my grandmother's church.  Eventually, Old Jericho Church sort of melted into the ground.  And one of the lasting legacies of my grandparents, my grandmother and Mr. Willie, was they founded a church for which I have pictures.  And their names are in the cornerstone of the church.  And they founded New Jericho Missionary Baptist Church, which is still in Doddsville, Mississippi today.
Story_ID: 186242
Speaker 1: So growing up on 39th [Street] and Wells [Street, Chicago, Illinois], what was that like?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot.  We moved a lot, and we moved a lot at night, 'cause they [Jackson's parents, John Chandler and Ida Collins] had problems paying their bills when we were young.  We grew up when our parents were growing up.  So whatever rough spots they hit, we felt them.  We stayed over there--I remember we had a Schwinn bicycle that had knee action in it.  I remember 'Howdy Doody' on television.  "It's Howdy Doody time."  And I remember an iceman would come with a big tong and a hunk of ice with a cloth on it.  And there were some people who still had iceboxes.  Okay.  And then we moved from there, and we lived--we moved to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I went to --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And what--do you remember what year that was?
Speaker 2: I was in kindergarten, so '55 [1955],'56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955] is when you went to the West Side.
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], '54 [1954], '55 [1955] and all; born '53 [1953], '54 [1954], '55 [1955], '56 [1956]; had to be '57 [1957].  That would put me around five, 'cause I went to Bryant School [William Cullen Bryant School, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side.  That was the first time I went to kindergarten.  And it was 2112 Karlov [Avenue], is where we were--where we lived, and a movie theater was the Arena Theater [ph.], 'cause my grandmother came up and took us to see 'Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs' for the first time.  We had never been to the movies.
Speaker 1: And how long did you live there?
Speaker 2: I don't know how long we stayed there, but we left there and we moved to another place on the West Side.  Let's see, Flournoy--not--that's the--not that part of the West Side.  We lived on Polk Street.
Speaker 1: But you still attended Bryant School?
Speaker 2: Nope.  After we moved, I left Bryant from kindergarten.  We only stayed there a year.  Because I was in first grade and went to Holland School [Holland Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side.
Speaker 1: And how long did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Stayed there about a year, now that I recall, because we moved from there, and moved to another place on Flournoy [Street] in Lawndale [North Lawndale Chicago, Illinois], where we seemed to stay for a little while.   And I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Milton Gregory [John Milton Gregory Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  And I went there 'til second grade.  They had 2A, 2B, 2C back then; 1A, 1B.  And Puff and Sally and 'Fun with Dick and Jane.'  And we were there--I was there for about three years, then they built Ericson School [Leif Ericson Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  It was a brand-new school, had come under Ben Willis [Benjamin Willis].  And had Ericson School, and I was there fourth, fifth, sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then sixth through eighth, do you remember where you went?
Speaker 2: After sixth grade, my parents moved again, and we moved on Christiana; 1400--1447 South Christiana [Avenue].  We were across the street from a school called Lathrop [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], that I didn't go there.  But I went--I was going to Manley [Hugh Manley Junior High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I started going to Manley while we still lived on Flournoy, but it was becoming too much after we moved over on Christiana, so I transferred to Hess School [Julius Hess School, Chicago, Illinois] on Douglas [Boulevard]. And that is where I graduated from eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about those elementary school years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for a minute.  What was it like going to so many different schools?
Speaker 2: I didn't feel any differences.  I didn't quite--I remember kindergarten.  I remember getting lost the first day of school.  My mama told me to stand right in front of the school, and I didn't.  I went walking around and they found me around five or six o'clock.  I didn't know where I was.  I didn't remember that.  I remembered going to Gregory School, 'cause I was growing up.  I remember patrol boys.  I remember understanding and learning about the pecking order, that if you can't beat somebody, you don't bother them, you don't tell the teacher on them, you don't do things, because if he's bigger than you, he'll beat you up.  So I was beginning to learn that you might have freedom of speech and freedom of expression, but you have to learn caution with that.  And that's the first time I heard 'Hit the Road, Jack' by Ray Charles during those years.  And I just remember growing up like everybody else; playing, making my toys, top shooters, slingshots--
Story_ID: 186243
Speaker 1: In any of these schools, did you have any teachers that made a special impression on you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I have always been blessed with unique and unusual teachers.  I had a teacher by the name of Ms. Trueblood [ph.], and she taught us Spanish.  For the first time in my love for Spanish, I never became fluent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And that was at what school?
Speaker 2: This was in third grade at Gregory School [John Milton Gregory Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She taught Spanish, and I thought she was an unusual teacher and taught us all kinds of Spanish songs.  And then every other teacher--there was a teacher named Mr. Jordan in fourth grade, and he really helped me expand on my abilities to write.  Okay.  And I was always artistic.  I could always draw.  When I was in fifth grade I had an unusual teacher named Mr. Ogletree [ph.].  And one day, he went and took some corrugated paper and he flipped it on its backside and he covered the whole back wall with it.  Then he had a book of a Spanish galleon and he gave me a piece of charcoal and said, "Draw this up there."  He saw something in me, but I didn't see it.  And I says, "I can't do that."  He said, "Just try it."  He said, "You see this?  Draw what you see."  And I drew a Spanish galleon in a war scene on the whole back of the board.  I did science fairs and art fairs up under this particular teacher, and he was always pushing me.  He could always see stuff that I couldn't see.  I had a teacher named Mr. Shirley [ph.] at Hess School [Julius Hess School, Chicago, Illinois].  He drove me out to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] when I didn't know nothing about the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], me and a handful of students; took us to the University, took us to a museum over there, and starting trying to set me up to go to college, okay, because I was always the smartest boy in my classroom after third grade.  My father [John Chandler] was primitive.  He said, "If you bring another U and F in the house, I'm goin' to skin you alive." That's all it needed.  Wasn't no psychological talking and "brother, what's wrong" and all that.
Speaker 1: And did that positively affect your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I--well, I was at--for me, I was always smart after that.  If you got all Es, you got a dollar, which was big money at the time.  But I came home with a bad report card in third grade--my first part of third grade, and he let me have it, and said, "You come in here with more Fs and Us, it's me and you."  That frightened me, so I never had--I was afraid of my old man.  And I was smart after that.  It would be the fifteen girls on the honor roll and me.  And I was the smartest boy all up to eighth grade.  My mother didn't want me to go to Harrison [Carter Harrison Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois], and wouldn't want me to go to Farragut [Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] because she said most of those kids up there don't amount to much.  So she wanted me to go to Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] from the West Side.  It was Lindblom and Lane [Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] were two technical high schools in Chicago--smart kids.  That's when I learned about quality education, 'cause even though I was the smartest boy at the school, at Hess School, and went to all the little things they had, when I went to the school with other smart boys from where they came from, I found that I didn't know anything.  I didn't know what x equaled.  There were things that they just hadn't gotten around to us yet.  I knocked off everything they handed me, but they should've handed me more.  Because so many other students weren't that bright, they--I was held back.  I didn't know it at the time until I had to compete with other students.
Speaker 1: So how would you describe yourself as a student?
Speaker 2: I was the smartest; very inquisitive, and I could hold facts, I had an extremely excellent memory.  I--when Mrs. Jones, my history teacher, Dinah Washington's sister, gave us a--we had to take the Constitution test, I got an A, I aced it.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: That was at Hess [Julius Hess School, Chicago, Illinois].  She taught at Hess School.  She lived somewhere around--I don't know what street that was.  It's Lawndale [Avenue], Ridgeway [Avenue]--somewhere out there--somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Would you say that you were well mannered?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was always well mannered, because of my father.  I was in a gang for two days; the day I joined and the next day when he told me to get out.  I was a little boy, and I joined this gang called the Jets.  And we would tie our jackets around our neck like capes, and we would run around and push--pick on little kids and take their candy.  And my brother told I was in a gang.  And my father said, "I heard you was in a gang."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "What's the name of your gang?"  I said, "We call ourselves the Jets."  He said, "Well, let me tell you something.  You get out that gang.  I'm the gang."  So I went to them and I said, "My daddy said I can't be with y'all no more."  And they said, "Well, you can't leave.  If you try to get out, we're goin' beat you up."  I said, "Well, y'all goin' have to come on, 'cause I'm more scared of him than I am y'all."
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: And that was the end of my gang days.  He kept us--we stayed out of trouble because we were intimidated by what he would do.  Okay.  Not that it was good sense--well, yeah--no.  We just didn't want to have to face him.
Story_ID: 186244
Speaker 1: What would you--how would you describe your relationship with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Some of them we do quite well, and some of us--some of my brothers and sisters we don't--we had same--we had similar, we had dysfunctions in our family, and we're always civil with each other, but we don't have tea every Sunday.  We can stand each other once a year when we have a family reunion.  Where we can be civil and all that stuff.  Most of the time we're into our nieces and nephews that we don't get to see, 'cause if you don't get along with your brother, you're not going over his house and you sort of miss out on your nieces and nephews until they get a little older and they can call you on their own.  So we, you know, we have some issues in the family.
Speaker 1: When you were young, what were your dreams and aspirations for the future?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a fireman when I was in kindergarten.  When I was in seventh grade, I wanted to be a policeman.  Then as I got older, I had a thing for foreign languages.  When I got in the--I was--I wanted to be a political scientist or an interpreter.  I wanted to be a foreign service worker.  I started learning to speak Arabic, and I, I pushed Spanish to the side.  And I had a head for it.  I can remember it.  And that was sort of a direction I was heading in until I had a chance to take a look at the foreign service test, and that cooled my heels, because it meant that I would have had to have a deep background.  You had to talk about economics, and what was the economics in 1947 and all this stuff.  And I knew there's no way I could get all of that.  So I began to change.  And I went to Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and I was a theatre major and a music minor.
Story_ID: 186245
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: High school, I went to Lindblom [Robert Lindblom Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois].  After my second year--when my third year came, I had--my mother [Ida Collins] and father [John Chandler] divorced at fifteen.
Speaker 1: When you were fifteen.
Speaker 2: When I was fifteen years old on the--when I was fifteen years old, and I was still going to Lindblom.
Speaker 1: So that would have put you in your sophomore or junior year.
Speaker 2: My sophomore year.  At the time, I didn't feel the impact.  I just was so glad he was out the house and the tension was gone I didn't know what to do.  I was just happy for that.  But it had an adverse impact on all of us and in some shape, form or fashion, 'because I had wind up--so they were separated for about a year.  I had to do my little sisters' hair and cook.  I'm an excellent cook to this day.  And I had to take care of the things--I had to do the job.  My oldest brother [John Chandler] was in college.  My sister [Rochelle Chandler] was married and away.  My brother Michael couldn't do anything, and so--he played basketball, so it was me taking care of my little brothers and sisters while they worked out this divorce thing.  And when he left my mother came back home--but it left a vacuum in my life, and I knew that I didn't have enough to make it.  And somehow around fifteen, sixteen, seventeen I had this strong urge and need to be around my father or some kind of male authority, 'cause I was trying to--I needed some help into manhood, but he wasn't that kind of person.  So I got attracted to the Nation of Islam.  And I joined them when I was like sixteen against my mother's wishes.  Okay.  And she was very upset that I joined up.  Well, I was--did it.  So fine.  I wore suits every day.  I was very respectful, and it didn't seem like I was no bad boy, it didn't seem like no gang, and we weren't breaking in nobody's houses.  So with a guarded attitude, she let me go, but she had a problem with the people of extreme religious beliefs.  And that's one of the things that they fostered there.  So anyway, without her permission, I signed myself and transferred to the University of Islam [Muhammad University of Islam, Chicago, Illinois] and finished my high school there.  She didn't like--oh, she was so upset.  I told her what I did.  She hit the ceiling.  And I told her, I said, "Mama, I wanna go there."  I graduated from there in 1971 [sic, 1970].  I graduated in 1971 from the University of Islam.  It was one of the best experiences I've had, as far as education is concerned, as far as maturing is concerned; and the type and quality of education, it was concentrated; no study periods, they took all that stuff out; no gym; all them games and all that stuff.  And so you had a morning with--no girls, nothing as you're in high school; nothing to stimulate your hormones; it was education.  And I got one of the best educations.  My graduation class was about nine young men.  Grand total, it was fifteen, but there were other boys.  It was nine of us.  And I had what I considered to be a wonderful high school education that more than prepared me for college.  However, the school had problems with its accreditation.  I never actually got my diploma in my hand.  And it was in a court case.  And the controversies that were swirling around the Nation of Islam, it kind of worked to my disadvantage, and so I had to go and get a GED [General Educational Development] all over again.  They discounted everything that I had knew and told me, as far as they were concerned, I dropped out of school as a sophomore.
Speaker 1: So that was the University of Islam, on 71st [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: At the time, it was 5335 South Greenwood [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after I graduated and they got a few more bucks, they moved to 73rd [Street] and Stony Island.  But before they got there, it used to be in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And that's the school that I knew.
Story_ID: 186246
Speaker 1: Do you have any association with anyone that you went to school with; high school or grammar school?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't see them anymore, and I don't know of any of them.  Everybody was scattered to the four winds, especially from the high school at the University of Islam.  I don't see any of those people.  I no longer--I think I was twenty years old when I broke my affiliation with them; I'm fifty-three now.  And so after the--Elijah Muhammad died, a lot of truth came out about what was really going on.  It was just enough to make me say, "That's it for me."
Speaker 1: Was that what made you leave?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I discovered I had been religiously abused and taken advantage of, and I promised myself, it'll never happen to me again.  And, when I left out of there, that was it for me.  And when I read about the Jim Jones thing [the Peoples Temple cult], I understood those people.  People say, "How could you do--" I understood why.  In fact, I spent time trying to figure out what it was about myself that needed what they were offering.  I understand the fellowship, the brother and the sister thing, okay, and looking for surrogate mothers and fathers, 'cause I had plenty of older brothers and sisters who would help me--were trying to help me to grow up, which is what I seemed like I needed at the time.  But then there was other stuff in there where they just wouldn't--I was being used as a foot soldier to help support a lot of people's lifestyles that I didn't even know anything about--
Story_ID: 186247
Speaker 1: Okay, Frute--Mr. Jackson [HM Fruteland Jackson].
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: I didn't want to call you Fruteland (laughs).
Speaker 2: It's all right.
Speaker 1: How did you get that name anyway?
Speaker 2: That--it was a stage name.  When I was in the--I had my seafood business and I would drive up and down the highways.  And just to kill time, I would always look at the signs, you know, and they--and I thought they would make interesting names.  Like I would see--when I'm in Missouri, I would see a sign that says "Twist Turner."  Twist--this way for Twist, Arkansas, and Turner [Arkansas], this way.  And when I be around 55th Street, it would be--and I would use these street names as markers to tell me how far I had to go.  It was a town called Fruteland going this way, and a town called Jackson going this way.  I never put nothing together.  But when I started to perform, I started off in a duo act.  And we were writing ten names that we wanted to call ourselves, and then we was going to pick one of the best.  One of the names that I had chosen was Fruteland Jackson, because Vincent Chandler was boring.  It sounded like I was a clerk or an accountant or worked for the state. And Fruteland Jackson would be something that people would remember, and they would--first, they go what, like that.  And so I changed--altered the spelling a little bit, and I created a character, is what I did, and I breathed life into it.  And so on or about 1990, Fruteland Jackson was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 186248
Speaker 1: Which brings me back to your graduation from high school [University of Islam School, Chicago, Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which was in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: And when you graduated high school, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Right after I graduated, I got a job.  I used to work--I got a job at a--it was a--called Steak-n-Take Restaurant, and it was over on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I wanted to work for a while.  There was seven of us, and my mother [Ida Collins] said that if you want to go to college, you got to go when it's your turn.  You can't hem and haw and say, "Well, give me some time," or you got to do it on your own.  So I have to go to the next person.  And so I said, "Well, Mama, I need to work a little bit, and I want to do some things," plus I wanted to leave home.  I tried to leave home before I graduated, my mother told me to wait.  I was excited to get out into the world and make my way.  And she said, "Well, just at least graduate from high school, then you can go."  And so the moment I graduated, shortly there afterwards, I hooked up with a couple of roommates, and I was just happy to be out on my own and make my life.  So I'm out here now, and I had me a nice little job.  And I did that for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Let me just back up one--a little bit and ask you, before we start talking about your artistic side, did you play any instruments in school?
Speaker 2: I played the bugle and I also played the trombone.  My brother [Michael Chandler] played the bugle and the trombone, and I followed him.  And so I played a bugle and a trombone.  After I left high school, I worked around--I worked in restaurants for a little bit.  My mother had some--a lot of political friends in the city, and she got me a really decent job as a food--assistant food service director in a hospital called Mary Thompson Hospital [for Women and Children, Chicago, Illinois].  It used to be a women and a children's hospital.  And then I went to a private investigation school.  I went to the United States School of Law Enforcement, and I became a private investigator, because after I left Mary Thompson Hospital, I worked for two years as a manager for Howard Johnson's restaurant out by the airport.  So I got this half-million dollar restaurant out by the airport, and I'm starting to get tired of being in other people--it worked you to death.  When you work in a restaurant, you can hardly--you almost have to sleep there.  So after two years, I said it's time for me to do somethin' else; wasn't quite sure, you know.  But at the time, I'm marrying and stuff and having a family and needed to take care of myself.  And so I start going to the United States School of Law Enforcement until--and graduated from there.  And I became a private investigator.  This was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I want to talk--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'76 [1976].
Speaker 1: --about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is seven--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --very interesting.
Speaker 2: --this is '75 [1975].  This is '76 [1976], '75 [1975]; around that time (unclear); '75 [1975] and '76 [1976].  This was before Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you graduated high school in 1970.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then after high school, you had a couple of jobs.
Speaker 2: Worked around.  And then I started--then I started trying to go back to school.
Speaker 1: And then you went back to Columbia.
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't go to Columbia 'til '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to the United States School of Law Enforcement.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And was that to be a police officer?
Speaker 2: It was to be a private investigator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: And what made you want to do that?
Speaker 2: Because I thought it was--I was watching television and I thought it was exciting.  I always had a deductive mind.  I could reason very well.  I could kind of look at a person and start drawing accurate conclusions and things like that, you know.  And so I thought it would be interesting and they offered it.  And then they placed me right away at a firm in Westchester, Illinois.  And so they started giving me assignments.  I worked undercover at a factory.  I did undercover--it was a ghost payroll scheme at a major university here, and they had me and another friend out there running around and collecting information.  And sometimes they would just give you a part and say find out where this part is from.  And you may be on the phone--this is before the Internet.  You may be on the phone and you might wind up in Germany trying to find out what some little part--and where it comes from and can you get any more.
Speaker 1: And what company was this?
Speaker 2: It was Westchester, Illinois.  E.V. Allen and Associates was the name of the firm.  And you take Roosevelt Road to Westchester.  And I don't know.  It was two ex-FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents who ran the firm.  And, and so then I--eventually I wanted my own private investigation firm, but the laws in Illinois were different.  You got to work at a firm for, like, five years, unless you're a police sergeant.  Then you can go take the big test.  And Illinois has a test for you to test like a bar exam.  Okay.  And so--but you got to do a apprenticeship.  So I was starting that by--you know, after about three or four years doing this, then I can take the test, and then I'd be able to be my own private investigator.  But I soon got tired of doing the work, because they had me in a factory, and I was doing blue collar.  I was lifting heavy stuff.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: Driving a forklift truck; give me a can of paint, and I would never finish.  I just quit for the day.  Then the day they had me unload--now, I was there to catch thieves, and I caught them.  They were stealing from the company, stealing stuff all out the doors.  They were stealing on every level in the plant.  I had to keep reports.  I got paid per report.  I'd meet with the people who hired me, my boss, and the people who owned the company once a month to give them my--you know, what's going on.  They paid me per report, plus I kept whatever money I made off the job.  Then they backed in a freight--a train car--freight train with fifty pound sacks, and I had to unload that, me and somebody else.  And after that, I says, "It's time for me to hurry up with this assignment and I'm out of here."
Story_ID: 186249
Speaker 1: Then my mother [Ida Collins] passed away in 1977 in September, and I didn't want to do nothing.
Speaker 2: Had she been sick?
Speaker 1: Yes.  She had colon cancer at forty-five.  And she wind up having to have a colostomy, and she beat it out.  Nothing ever came back.  Doctor said, if you can pull it five years, you're home free.  She was home free, but the worry and frustration, and then she had hardening of the arteries, 'cause back then, they didn't have good blood pressure medicine.  They just told you, "Don't eat no salt."  You know.  And so she wind up having--weakened her heart.  She wind up just passing away very young.
Speaker 2: At what age?
Speaker 1: Fifty-one.
Speaker 2: Did you then decide to get married?  Was that one of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  Then--my mother wanted me to go to school and finish, and I said--now, let me--then all of a sudden, here I go.  Then almost without any sense, I went to school, just rapidly, without a good plan and everything, and I went to--start going--I went to Columbia [College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. It was only two buildings then, right--11th Street Theater and the building over on Harrison Street.  That's all they had.  They had just moved off of Lake Shore Drive.  And so I went to that, and I was majoring in theatre and minoring in music.  And I think I gave them a couple of years and, bang, that's when I got--messed around, married again and had to work.  And so I did not finish Columbia.
Story_ID: 186250
Speaker 1: We didn't talk about your first marriage.
Speaker 2: The first marriage didn't last a long--it lasted about a year, okay.  My grandmother [Anna Bradley] told me not to do it.  She said, "You're young, boy.  Why don't you wait?"  I wish to this day that I had listened and did what my grandmother told me to do.
Speaker 1: Now who was your first wife?
Speaker 2: Her name was Sydaka [ph.] Chandler.  And she was just beautiful when I saw her, and I just tripped out over her.  I was younger than she was.  My daddy [John Chandler]--my mother [Ida Collins] refused--my daddy had to sign, 'cause I was a year too young for me to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: And she was how old?
Speaker 2: Eighteen, or eighteen going on nineteen.  But she was--she was a mother.  She had a child.  And I was just taken by her.  And they said, "But what about--," you know.  My plans and everything, well all of that just went awry.  You couldn't tell me nothing.
Speaker 1: How did you meet?
Speaker 2: I was--I had hooked up with two brothers--two guys, and we opened up a Steak-n-Take restaurant ourselves on Maxwell Street.  We were the only blacks in what we called Jew Town at the time.  And we opened up, we sold hamburgers, cheeseburgers, and this steak was basically a Philly steak that we had brought down there.  And that was our jobs.  And one day she come walking up in there, 'cause she lived on 14th [Street] and Union [Avenue], okay.  And she come walking up in there.  And I was out of high school [University of Islam School, Chicago, Illinois].  And the next thing you know we got to talking.  And she was smarter and wiser and more craftier than I.  I was innocent, young and tender, and she took full advantage of it.  My parents--my mother was just sick about this.  She wouldn't even let my little sister come to the wedding and all this stuff.  She warned me and she was right as rain.  And so it lasted long enough to have a child basically, you know.  And the only reason it lasted--if it had lasted over a year, it was because we was waiting for paperwork.  But it was--it was not the thing for me, and I had a child.  And so it was not--it was being young and foolish.
Speaker 1: And after that marriage, you married again?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I had a breathing room of a couple years.  And at the time, I was in the Nation of Islam.  And they were very strict in their rules.  And you had to have a wife.  Well, I had already bitten off the apple from the tree.
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: And it's very difficult for me to walk around, and I'm trying to sell newspapers and you look kinda halfway decent with a sharp tie, you're getting plenty of rhythm.  There's a lot of people that, you know, they kinda like you.  And so I just felt like, I got--hey, it was--wouldn't--it was very easy for me to fall in love again, okay, being driven by my youth, and not necessarily my good senses.  So here I go again.  Can't--you know, and I have a--I admit that I had a problem with picking people--my selection process.  Anyway, we were married long enough to have a child.  It would've--the only reason it lasted that long, we had to wait for the paperwork.  I found out really soon this is not for me.  And then, you learn--I learned about life, that everybody grew up different from the way I grew up in my house.  And all the women were not like my mother.  And everybody's sense of goals and how they want to go in life is different.  And then there're questions that you don't know how to ask when you're young.  And there're things that--you meet people with different issues that you can't help them with.  You can't fix that.  Somebody far smarter than you have to work with that.  But you don't see that at the time.  So, bingo, number two.  Well, after that, I kinda learned my lesson.  And I said, I'm gonna become a dater.  And so I--here I have two children, and I wasn't there to raise them like I wanted to, and I'm here to tell anybody, if you're not there, if you want your children to have your values, you got to be there to raise them; not on the weekend, and not during the summer, if you want them to truly have your value system.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 186251
Speaker 1: So then, time went on and I didn't marry again until 1983.  Let's see.  Eighty-four [1984].  I married in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: And your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Jennice [Chandler].
Speaker 2: And you have children?
Speaker 1: We have an adopted child.  She's in her thirties now.  And she was--her mother had her, so she became a stepchild, but I don't even use those terms when it comes to her, you know, only on paper if it's necessary.  And she's a shining star.  She just got her master's.  She's a mathematics--see, she was an adopted child.  I told her, I don't know what x equals.  I don't know how you did that.  I don't have a brain for math.  That's side of my brain is dull, it's numb.  And she had a head for math.  She would do geometric proofs like crossword puzzles.  And her hustle money was being a tutor for students in math.  And so, now, she's an associate professor at the University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi] in mathematics.  Math.  And so she says she's tired of school.  She wants to hang out for a couple of years.  She'll get her doctorate, but they are calling--they looking for her--they're paying for everything.  They want her everywhere, you know.  She's a double minority, and then she--mathematics.  She gets letters from the East Coast, "Please come to our school.  Please, please."  'Cause she's got a way of explaining math, and helps people who don't really like math understand.  A lot of people that have to take some math courses, they're not there for math, but they need to have some.  And so they hate it, but they gotta do this to get the degree.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she works with them.  So they're no, they're not as intimidated and--'cause she says, "Math is your friend."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She's got a really way about her.  I say, "You need to learn how to put that in a software."
Speaker 2: (Laughter.)
Speaker 1: Okay.  "And see if you can come up with your own system."
Story_ID: 186252
Speaker 1: I'd like to know how you got your love for guitar.
Speaker 2: I came from a blues household.  My mother [Ida Collins] and father [John Chandler] listened to lots of blues.  Muddy Waters.  Howlin' Wolf.  I hated the music.  It was old folks' music.  I'm a child of Motown sound.  I know who The Supremes are and The Temptations.  [The] Main Ingredient.  That's what I liked.  But I heard it in the house.  My uncle Woodrow was a self-taught musician.  He played a piano in church, and he also played guitar.  When I was a little bitty kid, four, five years old, I heard my uncle in the front room.  He was screaming and yelling.  I ran in the kitchen and said, "Mama, something is wrong with Uncle Woodrow.  He's hollering in the kitchen."  She smiled and said, "He's having fun."
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: I ran up there and peeped behind the couch and I watched him.  He had him drinking a half a pint of whatever he liked.  He had on, what they call today, wife beater T-shirt on.  And he was stomping his foot, and an old electric guitar and an old amp.  You had to wait two minutes for the red light to come on.  And he was in there singing the blues.  And I just sat back and watched him.  Had--nobody could've told me that I'd be sitting on the stump singing about my woman left me early in the morning.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: And I just saw it.  Threw it off my mind.  When I was twelve years old, he handed me a guitar.  He say, "Here, boy, you need to learn this."  And my family was always giving me artistic stuff; paint-by-numbers--'cause they saw that in me.  I broke the neck on my guitar.  And I tried to fix it with nails.  I had carpenter's nails sticking out the back, didn't work; so, fine.  But he planted a seed.  And then I went to high school, played other instruments and stuff.  And then when I left home, I roommated with two brothers.  They were twins but they didn't look alike.  And one of them had a guitar.  One of the brothers was extremely neat, and one was extremely junky.  The one that was neat, his toothbrush sat straight and it was aimed to the right.  All of his hangers hung to this way, none this way.  He was one of those types.  And I would pick up his guitar.  He had an acoustic classical guitar.  When he'd leave, I'd pick up the guitar, and I'd just fool around with it, and I'd put it back.  One day, he must have had it two inches to the window, he said, "You know, they sell them at the store."  He made some remark to like, get your own.  And I went and bought another guitar.  I was a fan of Jose Feliciano --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and was fascinated that a guy could sit in a chair with a stool and a dog and play at the London Palladium [London, England].  Then I got into listening to Carlos Montoya doing Spanish flamenco, and then Andres Segovia.  He had these big sausage fingers, and he put them on--I said, "How can he hold those strings.  Those fingers are so fat."  And, and then I start just playing around.  I started out playing folk music; Elton John--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you were basically self-taught?
Speaker 2: Self-taught.  I went and got formal education in the guitar when I started leaning toward jazz, to learn my modal scales.  But then, the guy, he couldn't teach me.  When I went to Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I did bad.  I got bad grades in music, because I had what they call big ears, and I had a teacher who couldn't do what I could do.  He would play something and I'd listen, and I says, "Oh, you mean this?"  And I'd pick up my guitar and do it.  He says, "How do you know what's next?"  I said, "I don't know how I know, but I know it just sounds right."  He would say, "Well, how did you build the chord?"  I says, "I don't know."  He wanted me to draw it out.  I didn't know how to do that.  I was an ear player.  I found out later that there are teachers who know how to deal with students like me.  But he was frustrating me.  He was making me think I couldn't get the job done.  And he--it was affected my self-esteem.
Speaker 1: It wasn't you.  It was him.
Speaker 2: Right.  He couldn't do that.  He would play somethin' and I'd hear it one time and say, "Okay."  I'd say, "Why we add this to it again?"  And he would be fascinated, but he'd say, "Well, how'd you do that?"  "I don't know.  But I know it sounds right."  So anyway, he told me I would never be able to do much in music.  And when I, when Alfred Publishing [Alfred Music] published my music book for students, I sure wish I knew where he was.  He was a classical drummer and taught us all kinds of stuff that we really didn't need.  Well, anyway, I went for two weeks and I had some formal lessons trying to learn to play modal scales.  And so I learned how to just keep teaching myself, 'cause I know how to ask myself the right question so I can come up with the answer after reading a little bit.  And then I can make--then it begins to make sense.  So I had to learn backwards.  I learned to play first, and then I had to learn why later.  And that's how it worked for me.
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: Now I play banjo, I play a little mandolin.  I play a rack harp, a kazoo, and I just recently bought a steel string lap top [guitar].  I saw the movie 'O Brother, Where Art Thou?'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --and it ruined my life.  And so now I have all--I even have a dulcimer, I have all those instruments, and I like to fidget with them, but the acoustic guitar is my primary instrument.
Speaker 1: What about the bugle and the tambourine [sic, trombone]? Have you picked those back up?
Speaker 2: The bugle, no.  And I never played the trombone again.  I never played them again, but they were sort of a start for me.  And on the West Side they had what they called Drum and Bugle Corps [The Cavaliers Drum and Bugle Corps, Chicago, Illinois], where you played drums and blew the bugle, and it kept you out of trouble in the summertime, and you learn--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --quasi-military, how to line up --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and march and follow orders.  In the end--at the schools at that time before they became so broke, I went to Manley [Hugh Manley Junior High School, Chicago, Illinois] and they had a Drum and Bugle Corps there.  So I learned how to work my lip, and play the trumpet, and give you something to do, and you learn regimentation.  And then I was third trombone, and I knew I was gonna never be first trombone, 'cause that guy was really, really good.  And the trombone was not romantic, and I couldn't see myself at the beach with my girlfriend (mimes playing the trombone) blowing a trombone.  So I--the guitar was kind of natural for me.  And then my uncle handed me one, he certainly planted a seed.  So I went back and picked up the guitar.  And I always kept one in the house.  Never was--the passion didn't come 'til later, when I moved back to Mississippi in 1981.
Story_ID: 186253
Speaker 1: That's something I'd like to talk to you about.  That passion and your relationship with Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because you, I understand, have a love-hate relationship with Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Can you explain that a little?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because Mississippi, at the time, wouldn't give you anything back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to bring your own atmosphere.  You had to bring your own way of life with you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very clannish.  If you didn't go to high school down there and people don't know you--and they go by last names.  Up here you say what's your name, you give them your first name.  In the South, they want to hear your last name, and they gonna think a minute, "Do I know your father?  Do I know your grandfather?"
Speaker 1: "Who are your people?"
Speaker 2: "Who was your people?"  You know.  They trying to figure out your pedigree and your zip code.  And so, I had always went to see my grandmother [Anna Bradley].  And then I was--when I got tired of working in the restaurants, then I became a private investigator.  After my mother died, I got kind of tired of that.  So then around 1979, I went and got a job with the State of Illinois, the Department of Human Rights.  And I was a human rights investigator.  I knew how to investigate, now I'll just sit a desk and do report writing.  And I did that until '83 [1983] or '84 [1984] when I decided--I was getting close to thirty--and I decided to leave Chicago [Illinois], move to Mississippi and make my success.  I'm gonna go down there, and I'm gonna do somethin'.  I'm gonna open up my own business.  So I saved my money.  Saved about ten or fifteen grand.  I was able to get unemployment compensation, and I moved down South.  So for a whole year I had unemployment, plus I had me a little lump sum.  And I went down there to open up a business.  I wanted to be out of--it was cold and around '79 [1979] and '80 [1980] we had some of the coldest winters ever in Chicago.  And I was tired of it.  I was looking for a fresh start.  So I moved down to Biloxi [Mississippi].  I had kin--cousins down there.  I liked it when I visited.  So I went down there to make my mark.  And I went down there, and I was going to open up a wine chalet.  They one here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I kinda liked the way they did it.  There was an [U.S.] Air Force base in Biloxi, so they had people of diverse backgrounds from all over.  I wouldn't just have to just sell Jim Beam.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They had wine and stuff like that.  But I didn't do enough homework, even though I was studying books on how to do it.  When I got down there, it was a different world.
Story_ID: 186254
Speaker 1: Mississippi was anti-yuppie.  The only people who did well were the people who always did well.  It was socialistic in a lot of its policies.  The government sold all the liquor, you know.  So you could never--and if you didn't live there for five years--I didn't find this out 'til I got there--if you didn't live there for five years, you couldn't get a liquor license.  You couldn't even go behind your counter.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: So they didn't want people coming in there with fresh ideas doing things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You had to be a son.  They almost ruined their state doing that.  Years later they made a call to former Mississippians to come back home, that they would do things differently, because they were running their youth away.  Their youth would graduate and go to other places, and they would not stay in Mississippi.  So after a year--and I start spending my money--I couldn't--I knew that wasn't gonna work, and I was looking for other things that I thought I had a head for, and I couldn't come up with anything.  Then one time--I didn't want to come back home [to Chicago, Illinois] with my tail between my legs, so to speak, because I had some "I told you so's" waiting on me.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: While I was walking the beach early in the morning kicking cans, feeling sorry for myself, and I saw a shrimp on the ground fighting for his life, my light bulb went off.  "If I can get shrimps to Chicago [Illinois] and St. Louis [Missouri], them people'll pay a lot," because down there you pay three or four dollars a pound.  Up here, eight, ten, twelve dollars.  So I got busy.  I found a guy who knew the ropes on the coast.  And I worked out a deal where I was buying shrimp and seafood from boat captains while they were in the water, I'm talking on a walkie-talkie cuttin' my deals.  And I would have worked out a way to have a trucker who was coming to Chicago anyway, drop off a load of cold storage.  I did not have to deal with interstate commerce in that way.  And so for the next three or four years, Camel Seafood business is in full swing.  And so I didn't think I was ever gonna have to work again.  Kiki, my daughter; my step--my adopted child, she was in private school; we're living in a townhouse, a beach, a block from the Mississippi Gulf Coast; life is good.  I come to Chicago one week out of a month and work; pockets were fat, life was good.  Hurricane Elena came three years later [in 1985].  Blew over my warehouse, and I could not recover.  Even the shrimpers couldn't find the shrimp beds because the water was so stirred up.  I was in my first hurricane, and I understood Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  And I would tell people when they say leave, leave.  I'll be the first one.
Speaker 2: That must have been frightening.
Speaker 1: It was because I didn't--I had no idea of the power of the wind.  I remember sending my family up to Jackson [Mississippi], and I was gonna stay, which was a mistake.  And I was frightened out of my life.  I've never seen so much havoc.  Well, anyway, I couldn't keep the seafood business going, and eventually I had to leave.  We went to--I left and went to Atlanta, Georgia, to see if I could get a grip there, and then turn around and come back and try to continue, but it didn't work.  I went to Atlanta for a year, and I brought the family from Biloxi to Atlanta.  We hung around a year, we didn't really like the place; my daughter was in school there.  Then a relative said, "Why don't you come to St. Louis?  I can at least get you work."  At the time, I needed work.  I was with two girls.  My wife [Jennice Chandler] and my daughter.  They needed medicines.  We were kinda ailing and we really were going out the door backwards.  We stayed too long and we should have left.  So when I went to St. Louis, I got a job making missiles for McDonnell Douglas.  I was making harpoon missiles.  I hated it.  I was a blue-collar worker.  My life was ruled by bells.  They told me when to wake up, when to start work, when to take a break, when it's time to take lunch, when I can go home.  Somebody was standing over me all the time telling me what to do.  There was no creativity in the job.  I had to follow a blueprint.  And I worked that job.  And then when the wall fell in Russia [sic, Germany], the industry--the war industry went belly up, and they didn't need so many missiles.  And things then had a major layoff.  And there I was, sitting again.  My daughter was in school.  She went to graduate trying to get--her first degree, she was going to Monmouth College [St. Louis, Missouri], and now here I am unemployed.  And I had to come up with something.
Story_ID: 186255
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, '81 [1981], '82 [1982], '83 [1983], I go to Biloxi [Mississippi] to make my mark.  I was courting at the time when I left the city [Chicago, Illinois], and I told my girlfriend, "I'm goin' make my mark and send for you."  Famous last words.
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)
Speaker 1: So after about a year, I did send for her, and we made a family down there: me, her, and my stepdaughter.
Speaker 2: Now how many children do you have?
Speaker 1: Two biological children.
Speaker 2: And their names?
Speaker 1: Shakir [ph.], Vincent Shakir; and Sadika Khadija [ph.].  Sadika was named after her mother.
Speaker 2: And their ages?
Speaker 1: Thirty.
Speaker 2: Vincent.  Is that--would that be Vincent?
Speaker 1: Yes, thirty; thirty-three would be Sadika; and Kiki is thirty-five.  And she's the oldest, and Dee [Sadika Khadija] is the oldest biological child.  And so we--I moved to--left Biloxi and went to Atlanta [Georgia] trying to get a grip and it didn't work.  I spent a year there.  And then '88 [1988], I pulled into St. Louis [Missouri] by myself to see if I could make it work, and eventually they joined me.  I was paying rent in two places.  And they joined me from Atlanta, and that's when I worked for McDonnell Douglas.  And I was there from 1988 'til about 1990.
Speaker 2: And what did you do for them?
Speaker 1: I started off pushing a broom.  And then I became a SMAR [sheet metal assembler riveter] and I built missiles with--out of blueprints for the harpoon program.  And these are--they were SLAM [Supersonic Low Altitude Missile] missiles and harpoon missiles, and they sold them for, like, a million dollars apiece to whoever wanted to buy them.
Speaker 2: Did they train you to read the blueprints?
Speaker 1: Yes.  They showed me how to do all the stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You just had to have the aptitude.  I had never taken a test where you had to drop little peas and little things, you know.  I felt so silly doing it.  I said, "Who couldn't do this?"  But there are people who can't.  We had to put pegs in squares.  I just said, "There's nothin' to it."  But anyway, and so, after that, they had a giant layoff in the defense industry worldwide.  And they had a layoff and laid me off.  And that's when I had to figure out what I wanted to do.  My daughter, she was at school; here I go again.  I had been through all these bumps.  And I had been an astrologer, and I used to do astrology charts.  This is before software would do it for you.  And I was pending taking my--with the bar exam for astrologers in Tempe, Arizona.  I didn't want to do that anymore, 'cause that was just somethin'.  I don't know where that came from.
Speaker 2: Now, was this astrology according to the stars or numerology?
Speaker 1: Not numerology.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was serious astrology, where I had to do logarithms and do the math by hand.  They have it all it all done by software now.  It was the real deal where I took your--the latitude and longitude of your birth time and with the planets at the exact moment that you were born.  I studied serious books.  Not that little Linda Goodman [Mary Alice Kemery] stuff.  I studied serious books on how to prognosticate astrology.  And I was starting to do morning programs around Chicago.  People would just call in, and you just give them a little "You're gonna have a good day today" stuff.  Little basic stuff.  But I really was into the serious stuff.  I didn't want to do that anymore.  I was a photographer.  I had equipment, and I was doing photography in my home.  I couldn't afford models, so I would give them free before and after shots.  And then I had a guy who was teaching me.  I took a picture of everything; cracked teeth, before and after for a dentist; I did medium format photography for a guy.  I did anything that I could take a picture of.  I slept with a camera, and I took all kinds of pictures.  I had tons of equipment.  I didn't want to do that anymore.  And I kept saying, "I done done everything that I thought I wanted to do." I wanted to be a private investigator--anything I pointed in.  And finally I sat up there and I looked at that guitar.  And I said, "Hmmm.  My kid's about to graduate, her life's on the way, everything taken--maybe I can do something for myself."  And I picked up the guitar and I said, "But I am no--."  I said, "I'm too old to be pipe dreaming."  I'm about thirty-eight now.  I said, "I'm too old to be pipe dreaming.  I can't go out here playing no games.  I need to--can I learn to play this well," you know.  And I liked blues, and I liked all the early styles.  So for a whole year while I was on unemployment, I practiced and played every single day.  And then I hooked up with a guy, and we formed a duo.  And then I got my first festival, and I started working.
Story_ID: 186256
Speaker 1: Why blues?
Speaker 2: The blues found me.  I didn't ask for the blues.  It hit me like a ton of bricks.  When I lived in Mississippi, I start--I listened to a lot of public radio, and I was listening to the blues programs, and somehow, someway, I just became overwhelmed by this music.  It just totally took me over.  And I--when people ask me today, why blues, I say, "The blues found me."  I was walking down the street minding my own business, and all of a sudden, this music started speaking to me.  My soul started--.  And I didn't know why, you know.  That's my parents' music.  What am I doing?  You know.  I didn't pick no cotton.  I didn't split no rails.  I traded in my hammer for a hundred emails.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: That's a song I wrote.  And so I didn't know why.  But I said I was gonna learn how to do it.  And it was something happening at that point in time in history, because others around my age were doing the same thing and we didn't know each other.  Just like with Stonehenge [Wiltshire, England] and the Pyramids [Giza, Egypt] were taking place, they didn't know each other, but they were building these giant monuments, okay.  And so there were lots in my age group, and they're like a --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: For example?
Speaker 2: There are people like Corey Harris, Guy Davis; these are people who do the exact same thing.  Robert Jones [Reverend Robert B. Jones], Rory Block [Aurora 'Rory' Block].  We're all in the same age group.  And there's almost a forty-year difference between us and the real old guys who used to do it.  I had the pleasure of touring with David 'Honeyboy' Edwards; he's ninety-one.  So nobody was picking up this stuff.  Everybody wanted to play bands and electric guitars and all this noise.  But I had, something was asking me to learn these old styles, listen to cracked-up 78 records: Big Bill Broonzy, Robert Johnson, early Muddy Waters; and learn how to play these styles, Piedmont style, ragtime blues.  And so, I started learning how to play'em.  But you can't keep singing about cotton and corn and make a living.  So what I would do was use my personal blues, my life.  I can talk about things, like, I was there during Vietnam.  I know this.  I can talk about my life, and I can use those old rhythms, but I can use them to express more modern concepts.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular incident that happened in your life that made you gravitate to the blues quickly?
Speaker 2: I don't have anything to compare with.  And I never had the kind of life--bad things never happened to me, you know.  I never got--was seriously hurt or anything, like, really bad stuff ever happened to me.  But I did have struggles, but to me I had the same amount of struggles as anybody else; not as bad as some.  So I don't know.  I wasn't driven there, you know, I got hit by a bus or something--
Story_ID: 186257
Speaker 1: Tell me about your canned seafood business.
Speaker 2: Camel Seafood.
Speaker 1: Camel Seafood.  Wasn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that demolished by--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The hurricane [Hurricane Elena] blew that over.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I lost a great deal--all of the stuff; my warehouse--most of my money was in the store, the stuff that I--warehoused, because I would have a restaurant up here in Chicago [Illinois], and they want the same size shrimp all year long.  So when the shrimp is growing in the water and it reaches this size, I have to buy as much of that as I can, so when he calls I have what he wants.  Next month that shrimp is this big, and he don't want them that big, okay.  So I had to have a lot of stuff stacked up, and this was only for the guy when he makes the phone call.  And so when they took my warehouse out, I must have had two or three tons of shrimp, it really hurt me.  And then after the hurricane, the shrimpers were shrimping for the larger people.  There were people buying 30,000 tons, selling to grocery store chains.  I wasn't that big.  I was moving a ton a month, maybe two tons; that's nothing.  And so they would have to get around to me.  And I have to wait four weeks, five weeks; I still have bills, and I hadn't stabilized as a company yet.  I wasn't hauling it up there in a U-Haul with hot ice.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I did that when I first did it.  I was to a point where I had a trucker taking it, putting it into a cold storage.  I had just started looking for a location in Chicago.  There's a wedge building at Anthony [Avenue] and Stony Island [Avenue], right there, shaped like a wedge.  And I said, "That'll make a nice location for me to have instead of paying a cold storage fee, I'll have my own refrigerators, you know."  Then I was learning and understanding ways to work out unemployment compensation.  So when I was out of shrimp season, I could technically lay off my wife and child.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they could earn from it.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: I'm figuring out how to do this, but the hurricane killed everything.  And now I had less than I had when I started.  And that's when the party started, and I had to go and get a job, which I thought I would never do.  And it was culture shock in St. Louis [Missouri], 'cause I weren't used to those people.  I weren't used to the blue-collar set and that whole life and how those people lived, and I felt I was different.  I never gave up my Chicago citizenship, and I was quick to tell people "I'm out of Chicago."  You know.  "I ain't from around here."  So and, and eventually I had to come back to Chicago, because this is where the blues was.  And so I started off there, and eventually I was able to get a booking agent, and eventually I was able to get a record deal.  And then I got book deals to write books.  And then I put together school programs for colleges and middle school kids.  And I started doing Blues in the Schools [BITS] programs all over the world and traveling--
Story_ID: 186258
Speaker 1: Who are some of the blues artists that you identify with?
Speaker 2: I identify with all of those early blues men upon whose shoulders I stand, who didn't get the fame and fortune; people like Charley Patton and Willie Brown [Willie Lee Brown].  And there are names that you may not know.  People like Johnny Childs, Robert Junior Lockwood [HM Robert Lockwood Jr.]  These are people who play acoustic blues, because I believe that in that format, that's the last vestige to where you'll find the real blues, the kind of blues that'll heal ya, is in that style of playing.  The other, electric blues, where most people are used to hearing, too, is exciting, okay, but I think a lot of the healing powers are lost from it.  But that's a philosophical thing.  I like those old early guys--Memphis Minnie [Lizzie Douglas], one of the few women who played acoustic guitar--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --a friend of mine named Jimmie Lee Robinson [Lonesome Lee].  I've played with 'Honeyboy.' [David 'Honeyboy' Edwards]  There's Henry Thompson [Henry Ford Thompson], lived to be ninety.  There's 'Homesick' James [Williamson].  And I remember I took my nephew to see 'Homesick' James, and they introduced him at the Chicago Blues Fest, "Ladies and gentlemen, 'Homesick' James."  And he was so cute.  He pulled on my shirt, he said, "Why don't he just go home?"  I thought that was so cute.  "Why don't he just go home?"  Then he'll be all right.  Right?
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: And those old guys are the ones I really treasure.  I love [HM] B.B. King and John Lee Hooker like everybody else.  And one of the persons who inspired me was Robert Cray when he came out with 'Strong Persuader.'  But the earlier stuff is where my--I'm a history buff.  I like old things, you know.  I've always been attracted to older women.  You know, I'm just a--I'm into antiques.  What do I--what can I say?
Speaker 1: What is your definition of the blues?
Speaker 2: The facts of life expressed musically, the affirmation of the spirit; a howl of pain; an ode to a homestead; a tale of life lived along the highway; an open letter to God or Satan; a junkie's lament; a portrait of love; a young man trying to figure out where all his money went, and an old man experiencing the disadvantages of his age.  Blues is a lot of things.
Story_ID: 186259
Speaker 1: Give me examples of some of the blues people here in Chicago [Illinois] that you think of as--
Speaker 2: I admire Buddy Guy [George 'Buddy' Guy] because he is an entrepreneur, he's a businessman.  And he was able to, from where he come from, driving a forklift truck, to becoming a millionaire; to have a club that's been there for seventeen years; to have won every award, even the holy grail, the crossover; the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio].  Okay.  He's won Grammys [Grammy Awards], certainly; he's won Handy Awards [W.C. Handy Awards, later, Blues Music Awards].  Now, I've been nominated for a Handy, and I've won a KBA Award [Keeping the Blues Alive Awards], you know; but I have never--it's still--it's out of my reach.  Once you rise as high as you can go in blues, then the Grammy people will pay attention to you.  But if there's so many people, they have to wait until you make recognition in your own little neighborhood first.  I admire him for that ability.  He also gives--hundreds of people work for him that he don't even know.  He has a--provides a venue for us to make a living.  I admire Koko Taylor, because, more--I like her music, but her business instincts, from where she come from to being able to travel all over the world and use her name and her image, I think that's pretty cool to me.  And there're a lot of blues musicians in Chicago who have--[HM] Lonnie Brooks is another one.  He has made his mark.  And there was a guy who passed away, his name was Willie Kent, and I really enjoyed Willie Kent.  He played the bass.  And a lot of people, they come--a lot of musicians who didn't have the big name, but they were fine human beings, and I liked them for that.  There was Jimmie Lee Robinson from Chicago.  He passed away.  He called himself the lonely traveler.  And even him and I toured together.  And he was a good friend of mine.  I cried like a baby when he passed away, and I dedicated a song to him.  And I learned a lot from him about traveling and playing the blues and being out there on the road.  And so some of them--I met Brownie McGhee [Walter Brown 'Brownie' McGhee].  He was--he died about three months after we met, but I felt like he stayed alive just so he could meet me.  And in a--in some way, they sort of passed the gavel on to me, you know.  And I look at everlasting life as living through your seed.  And so if I, in mentioning their names and they're no longer here, then that is a testimony to their everlasting life.
Speaker 1: Where do you see blues music going in the next five years?
Speaker 2: Blues music is dying, no matter who--even though they say it's not.  It's going--it's becoming a folk music, and it's diminishing.  The face of blues is changing.  No longer do you have to be the grandson of a sharecropper or have Southern prequalifications to play the blues.  All you gotta do is practice and be able to perform.  You can close your eyes today and you don't know who playing the music, okay, 'cause they're people out there who are just that good.  When you go to the Handy Awards, there're very few blacks anymore.  Most of them have abandoned the blues, because they didn't want to be reminded of cotton and corn and mules and hard times.  And so they ran off from the music.  The blues spawned children:  rock and roll, and rhythm and blues.  And most of them went to rock and roll and rhythm and blues.  They wanted to sing happy songs about '57 [1957] Chevys and dancing and partying and having a good time, and being in love, and this kind of thing, and not getting kicked in the behind and having a difficult time; or being able to sing as a matter of expression so I can heal.  Blues is a poor man's psychologist.  It just lets you express yourself and talk about it out loud.  So it changed and it's diminishing.  The Buddy Guy generation, those blues men in their 70s, it's becoming a little more watered down, unless you run into an acoustic player like me.  We hold those old rhythms together.  We might put new lyrics on them, but we hold those old rhythms together.  And now when you hear an electric player, it's too many notes, it's loud, they make facial contortions, doing triple pull-offs, and they're playing almost what we call rock music.  It's some blues in there.  It's blues influenced, but it's beginning to get far away from the fountain.  And when you get so far away from the blues, it's not the blues anymore.
Story_ID: 186260
Speaker 1: You mentioned Blues in the Schools [BITS]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --program and how you--how and why you started it?
Speaker 2: I got involved in that.  There was a blues legend who lived in Chicago [Illinois].  His name was Willie Dixon.  He's responsible for the Blues Heaven Foundation, which is down the street from here.  And the purpose--the Blues Heaven Foundation was put there to help artists and their heirs recover their royalties and learn something about the business, 'cause so many bluesmen were poorly educated, and they didn't know anything about BMI [Broadcast Music, Inc.] and copyright.  And Willie Dixon is called the spiritual godfather of Blues in the Schools.  He used to take people like--there's a performer by the name of Lucky Peterson who can play every instrument under the sun.  When he was a kid, he appeared on Johnny Carson's show ['The Tonight Show'], and Willie Dixon would take him to grammar schools and expose younger people to blues music.  Well, when I came into the blues, it was very difficult as an acoustic player.  Most people played electric, and there weren't that many venues.  And then one day I was watching Billy Branch, who is also a harmonica player here in Chicago, and he was being interviewed by Charles Kuralt, and he was doing Blues in the Schools programs.  And I said, "I like that.  That's kinda neat.  That's something I can do," but I didn't want to be fooling with little kids.  I really didn't think I liked children unless they were real smart or they had to go home.  One of my first gigs was in Charleston, South Carolina, where there was a woman down there who was heading up Blues in Schools down there.  And she walked up to me and says, "Would you like to do--go see some little kids and talk about blues?"  And I bristled. I said, "Ma'am, I'm a bluesman.  I sing whiskey drinkin' and cheatin' songs.  Them little kids don't have the wherewithal to understand the blues.  Let them study their lesson."  She said, "Well, all you had to do was play a couple of songs and talk about a few old guys.  It pays a hundred dollars a half an hour."  Ding.  That did it.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: I said, "Well, maybe I can come up with something."  But I was intimidated.  When I went back to my room, I called a friend in Detroit [Michigan].  I said, "Robert Jones [Reverend Robert B. Jones], this woman want me to go before some kids with blues.  What do I do?"  He said, "Fruteland, stick with Lead Belly [Huddie Ledbetter], and you can't go wrong.  No double-entendres, no hoochie coochie man; just straight up songs for children."  So the next day I went in there.  And I knew Lead Belly, I played Lead Belly, and she was so excited.  She says, "Can you do three more?"  "Yeah."  And I came home, I says, "I like the notion, but I didn't like kids."  So I went to the library, this is before the Internet, and I sat down and I put together a real heady lecture for college students:  From skunk weed to skyscraper, the emergence and evolvement of blues music in American culture.  Oh, boy.  I had 120 slides, and this whole--all these chapters on blues.  I got my first gig through Dr. Royster's [Dr. Phillip Royster] office at the U of I Circle Campus [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Did my first lecture.  And I told the booking agent, "Get me in schools."  I must have been in every major university here in the Midwest and everywhere else I go now.  But then that woman told somebody who told somebody, and I kept getting calls to go back to schools.  So I sat down and I put together some programs; K [kindergarten] through third, I have a program called "Singing the Blues with Stories," with creatures and characters overcome obstacles, like the little frog who wanted to be a singer or Stewbah (ph.), the blind racehorse, who was matched against two of the fastest thoroughbred racehorses in Europe.  And then, like Walt Disney taught us classical music with cartoons, I slipped rhythms in on 'em, 'cause K through third don't care when W.C. Handy was born; they just want to hear some music.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Then I had middle school programs.  And then the toughest crowd, the high schoolers; those who have--are commercially bombarded with the Hit of the Week.  That thirty-second hook.  And I was able to get them.  And then I've always enjoyed lecturing for college students, 'cause I can speak as freely and openly as I want to about the history.  Well, I started doing this simply to fill up the schedule, but I didn't know people were watching me.  And then 1997, I was a recipient of the Keeping the Blues Alive Award [KBA Award] from the Blues Foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation].  And I went down to Memphis [Tennessee], met W.C. Handy's granddaughter, and I got this award.  And then my phone jumped off the hook. I see about 50,000 students a year now and adults.  And it keeps me busy, and it fills up my schedule.  And I'm one of the top presenters in the country, and whenever I travel to Europe or anyplace, if they find out I'm there, they'll invite me to a college or a school to do the program.  I have, I get invited to do programs for artists so that they can learn how to do what I'm doing, okay.  And one of my missions is that Blues in Schools programs are in all the schools.  The purpose of Blues in Schools programs is to create a deeper appreciation and a greater awareness of what we consider one of America's great gifts to world culture.
Story_ID: 186261
Speaker 1: I talk about blues as entertainment, and I also go to the holistic values [with Blues in the Schools (BITS) programs].  After the Columbine incident [the shooting at Columbine High School, Littleton, Colorado], and that incident in Jonesboro [the shooting at West Side Middle School, Jonesboro, Arkansas], my phone jumped off the hook again.  I had principals and administrators calling me, and they refer to blues as an alternative.  "Could you bring some Blues in Schools to our school?  All these kids listen to is mosh pit music.  And they building bombs, they wanna fight, and it's angry music."  And so, I went to Jonesboro [Arkansas] where a student had killed his teacher.  I went to Fort Worth in Florida [sic, Lake Worth Middle School, Lake Worth, Florida], where they had another incident.
Speaker 2: Were you at the same school?
Speaker 1: I went to the same schools specifically for that, because of that.  They wanted me to come and just talk--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And what was the name of that school?
Speaker 1: The one in Fort Worth [sic. Lake Worth], Florida, I'm not sure.  And I'm not sure of the title of the schools in Jonesboro, Arkansas; but it's not hard to find.  And I was in Jonesboro, Arkansas, at a blues symposium.  And that's when they told me, "We have a school where they had that incident where the student had shot up some students, and we'd like you to go there."  I don't know the name offhand or the name of the school, 'cause I go to so many.  And so I start using--I try to use some of the techniques of Les Brown to be motivating when I talk blues music.  And I also try to use the music, as I tell them, as a, as a, as a holistic purpose.  I say, "If you got a hundred CDs, let two be blues."  And then I believe music should serve us.  If you want to march, certain kind of music you listen to.  If you want to feel romantic, certain kind of music.  Even when we grieve, we listen to certain kind of music.  What does blues music do?  It lets you know that you are not alone, someone has been where you're going, and that everything is gonna be all right.  And so sometimes when you have a difficult day, don't build a bomb and don't fight anybody.  Just go home and put on some music and sit back.  And it allows you to vent your frustrations, and discuss and talk out where your issues are.  And so I promote it that way.  There's a wonderful, rich history that goes with the blues.  And then there's so many styles of playing the music.  And it just doesn't really turn off anybody.  It's just no longer considered mainstream, and you can't turn on an AM/FM radio unless it's public radio and get to hear the music.  But thank God for the Internet and cable radio, 'cause they have quite a few blues stations.  There are over four hundred blues festivals in the country.  They have blues--they have several blues cruises in the country you can go to and sit up and listen, and go to workshops and listen to blues all while you're traveling the Caribbean.  There're more blues authors out now than ever before.  My friend Fernando Jones is teaching a course at Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] with blues students, where they are learning about the music, and they bring--Buddy Guy [George 'Buddy' Guy] has been to his classroom, Koko Taylor has been to his classroom.  So we're exposing another generation, because we're fighting for our life.  And the only--most people's musical habits have been shaped by the time they get to college.  So middle school is prime.  And we, at least, wanted to be in their choices when they get ready to, say, select their--some choices, that they will consider blues music.  But it is on its way, we know that.  It's a slow death, but it's going to go.
Story_ID: 186262
Speaker 1: You are--you have a curriculum--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --set up with your Blues in the Schools [BITS] program.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And one of the things that I understand that you teach is the difference in Delta blues and Piedmont blues.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I would like for you to tell us what that difference is, and if you can, give us a little demonstration.  Would you mind?
Speaker 2: I could do that.  I'd just like to switch chairs.
Speaker 1: (continuing) considered to be my mission.  When I started playing the blues, I felt for the first time in my life.......
Speaker 2: (continuing) that little bit of Delta blues (unclear).
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: So that we can have it all on one tape.
Speaker 1: I got you.  (Playing guitar.)  Tell me when you want them on.
Speaker 2: I can hold off.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: If you divide the Southern states in thirds, you'll get regions.  There's the Piedmont region, which is the Carolinas, Virginia, Atlanta in Georgia.  And this part of our country was settled early, so the music is a little bit more sophisticated and has more harmonic inventiveness.  And Piedmont style blues also was strongly impacted by Anglo-American folk music.  And so when they say the Piedmont style, it's the use of an alternating bass line (playing guitar).  And it's really sophisticated to play, because once you get the alternating bass line going, now you have to put a melody on top of this.  And this is the Piedmont style.  It's playing your bass, your rhythm and your lead.  And this is also country blues.  (Playing guitar and singing.)  It's a little bit more sophisticated.  And it's a lot of harmonic inventiveness.  There's a lot of things that's going on in that, in the Piedmont style.  But now the Mississippi [River] Delta was isolated.  People didn't go in, and the people who lived there didn't leave.  And when strangers came, they wanted to know who you looking for; state your business and get out.  They were poorly educated.  You got the concentration of rural, uneducated blacks separated from the white citizenry, and it provided the mesh for Delta blues to take root and grow in a pure form; not a lot of fancy-styled finger picking and all this kind of stuff, but it got the job done.  Sometimes it would be a one-chord song.  There were people like Charley Patton, and he played twelve bars like this (playing guitar).  Wait a minute.  Pardon me.  Like this.  (Playing guitar and singing).
Speaker 2: And I understand that you write your own --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.
Story_ID: 186263
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the Piedmont blues.  Is that a very popular style?
Speaker 2: Well, it's popular for people who are really into the blues and listen to acoustic blues.  Some of the people that played Piedmont blues was the Rev. Gary Davis, there was Blind Boy Fuller.  And Gary Davis was blind.  And there was Josh White.  It was Sonny Terry [Saunders Terrell] and Brownie McGhee.  These--a lot of these are East Coast players.
Speaker 1: Is what you're playing authentic Piedmont?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.  And the only thing unauthentic about it is that I'm not from there, you know.  And there was John Jackson, who recently passed away, and he was one of the last of the remaining of the real--what we call the real deal of Piedmont style players.  It was very difficult for blind people to make a living back then.  They didn't have a lot of things that they have right now.  So they either were wrestlers, worked at a carnival or they became musicians and street musicians.  And a lot of them had very, very unique styles with Piedmont.  Even when I write my own songs, sometimes I'll use a Piedmont styling to float my lyrics on.
Speaker 1: Now do you have recordings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I have six recordings in my discography.  I'm on the Electro-Fi [Electro-Fi Records] label now, and I just completed my third recording with them.  My current CD is entitled 'Blues 2.0.'  It was nominated for best acoustic album by the Blues Foundation [Blues Heaven Foundation] for a Handy Award [W. C. Handy Awards], but I didn't win, but I had a chance to wear a tuxedo and eat finger sandwiches.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: And I met Bonnie Raitt.  So that's six in one hand, half a dozen in the other.
Speaker 1: Can we just get a little sample of something from your latest project?
Speaker 2: Here we go.  All right.  One of the places I play it at is on the casino.  And I see gamblers come in the door all the time.  And they come in wheelchairs, they have oxygen tanks, at fifty-five and (unclear); they love to gamble.  So I decided to write a song from a gambler's point of view, okay.  And I did it in a Piedmont ragtime style.  (Playing guitar and singing 'A Gambler's View.')
Story_ID: 186264
Speaker 1: Mr. Jackson [HM Fruteland Jackson], before we close, is there anything else you'd like to add to what we've talked about?  Maybe something we didn't ask?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I mean, I love to talk, but I think basically, I was happy to talk about my grandparents, my grandmother, Anna Bradley, and Mr. Willie [Bradley]; and my grandpa [R.L. Chandler], and my mother [Ida Collins] and my father [John Chandler].  And I think I've covered it.  I preached on the blues, what I do, how I make my living, and some of the challenges that I've had in life.  I basically believe I've sort of given a fairly decent snapshot of my effort here on this planet.
Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story?
Speaker 2: Because you asked, and because I've done a lot of interesting things, I believe, while I was here.  And so maybe somebody can hear it and get somethin' from it.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life, and at the same time, what is important to you?
Speaker 2: I have some regrets.  If I can call back twenty years, I'd go to places never named.
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: No.  There's some things that I would do differently in my life had I known, like anybody else, had I known now what I know then.  But all I've ever wanted in life is my portion.  I've seen people come behind me and zip right past.  I never have been jealous.  If I was envious, then I know I can work hard and get the same thing, too.  If you got a nice car and I want one, I know how to work and get one.  And so I've always--all I want is my portion, but I want it all, but I just want what is for me.  And I'm still excited about life.  And the race is not over.  It is still being written as we speak.  Every day I get a phone call or something to let me know that what I'm doing is important and that people are still interested in it.  That's what keeps me going.  And I like that.  And that's what--I like the challenge of it all.  And when all is said and done, I've traveled the world; I've been to Russia, to Europe several times.  I may not make a whole lot of money, but I want my legacy to my children to be that you can come up with an idea that you write on a piece of paper, and you can build on it and you can take care of yourself and there's no stopping.  You can do just about anything you want.  If I don't have a lot of bucks, when all is said and done, I can sit in my rocking chair and say I've met some wonderful people, people I would have not met otherwise.  If I wasn't in Italy, I would have never met them.  If I wasn't in Yekaterinburg [Russia], or Ufa [Russia] or St. Petersburg [Russia], I would have never met them.  And in some way, I may have left an impact on them and they left one on me.
Story_ID: 186265
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for people, maybe a young person, who wants to go into blues music?
Speaker 2: Well, if you pick blues--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: --first of all, I'm happy, because my--I--we want--I believe it's a wonderful music.  And learn your craft.  There's an aesthetic in the blues that you can't be--can't be taught.  It comes from being around blues people and life experience, you know.  The reason young--a lot of the young players have a tough time in blues is because someone twenty-two or twenty-three can't talk to you about your woman.  He can play--he'd be able to play his heart out and play good, but when he starts singing about life experiences, how you gonna sing to me?  You're nineteen.  You don't know enough.  So you do have to have life experience.  In fact, to me, in blues you don't vintage until you turn fifty; then people will, "You kinda--maybe you know somethin' about some of what you're saying."  Okay.  And so, for anybody who want to get into the blues, come on.  I believe it's a wonderful doorway to carry you to other areas of music.  Blues teaches you how to transmit emotion.  I have run into players who can play ninety miles an hour, but you don't feel a thing.  (Makes sounds.)  All up and down the fretway, you don't feel a thing.  Then you hear an old guy who can hardly play, and he'll play one note (plays guitar), and it'll just go right through you.  And so they're able to transmit emotions and tell stories through blues.  And it's one form that allows for that.  And jazz--and blues and jazz are the same in that they're improvisational.  Most of the early jazzmen and bluesmen could not read, so they were improvisational by default.  Okay.  And they learned to play what they felt and were able to transmit it for the audience.  And that's what makes blues music work.
Story_ID: 186266
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I wanna write a soundtrack for a major motion picture.  I believe I'm qualified to do it, and I've got a group of people that I can call on if I need a little more technical assistance.  And that's one of the things I want to do.  I'd like to certainly get recognized with a blues music award for my playing and my songwriting, you know.  But if it don't happen, you know, those nominees are important, only one person can win.  And a lot of times, you're judged on your body of work.  So that means the person who may have a CD out, they may have had--they may have twenty CDs against your two or three, and they have to be judged that way.  But I'd like to do a soundtrack for a major motion picture, and that's about the only thing that's out there that I'd like to try my hand at with some music, and then keep doing what I'm doing.  Keep arts education programs alive, and keep recording and writing my songs about my life experience and the things that happened to me, and my observations, 'cause a lot of times it's not autobiographical.  I remember I saw a guy's wife left him, and he was about to lose it.  He was hittin' the golf club, he hittin' his golf balls in the little hole in the sewer.  He was playing the saxophone all up on the roof.  He was about to lose it.  He was doing strange things.  Then she came back home.  And when he walked up to me, he said, "My wife left me, but that's all right.  She'll be back."  Well, she finally came back, but I felt his blues.  And then I wrote a song, and I entitled it 'Pearlie's Blues,' 'cause that was her name.  Sometimes I can feel somebody else's blues, and I can write about that.  So.  That's the way as a songwriter I get a kick out of that.  And then I write songs that are not blues songs.  I just like to write.  And I'm going to write a novel about my grandparents and the generation before theirs.  And it will be entitled 'Mister and Mississippi, a Tale of Two Generations.'
Story_ID: 186267
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What I'm doing right now:  traveling, visiting schools and performing and playing.  This is the best part of everything that I have done.
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That Old Fruteland [HM Fruteland Jackson] gave it his best shot.  Okay.  That I like to have fun, and I went down standing up.
Speaker 1: And just a couple more.  What message or lesson do you have for your children or your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: To--if they need to, take something from my life and use it to get whatever they want out of life; to keep moving forward; keep your eye on the sparrow, okay; and try to focus on the thing that's most important, and always be aware of the people that you have in your surroundings.
Story_ID: 186268
Speaker 1: Mr. Jackson [HM Fruteland Jackson], why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Because it gives us something to grow from.  It gives us a place to grow from, to come from, to read about, and helps us develop better futures for ourselves as global community, a small community, a neighborhood, or just as a family member.  Okay.  But history is important to document who was here and what they did while they was here, because it--I believe in ancestors or that an ancestor to me is anybody who just died; you in the club, and that we have--I believe that we have a responsibility to make things better after them, you know.  So if someone says, what have you done, you know, to improve your lot or the family as in general, that's one of the things that we should do.  And I wish that more people would be considerate of that, you know.  Most of the time, they know their grandmama and it stops right there.  But we stand on the shoulders of generations of people, you know.  And my grandfather [R.L. Chandler] on my father's [John Chandler] side, who preached in a church and tried to help people through religion save their life, he reached a certain level of prominence that they named a park after him, and he got a street sign named after him; he did something with his life, you know.  And I tell my nieces and nephews, "You want to be regular or do you wanna do something with your life?"  You know.
Story_ID: 186269
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 1: Oh, my work.  I heard Bette Davis say, "It's not relationships, 'cause they come and go."  And she said, "Your work will live longer than you do."  And they were having Bette Davis Week showing all of her old movies, and that kinda hit home with me.
Story_ID: 186270
Speaker 1: That's my uncle Woodrow.  He played the blues and he played piano.  He--Woodrow Chandler, he succumbed to cancer in around 1978.  He gave me my first guitar.
Speaker 2: Keep them in the same--keep them centered on the stand, if you could. Okay.  Is that centered?  Yeah.  Where those two silver rivets are in the center.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my aunt Lee [Chandler] on the right.  That's my father's [John Chandler] oldest sister, and she was sort of a matriarch for the family; and my cousin, we're about the same age, that's in the middle; her name is Yvonne, and that's her father.  He had passed away when I came around, so I don't really know his name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.  That's going to have to be flat somehow.  This is your granddad?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That is one of the last pictures of my grandfather, Dr. R.L. Chandler.  He's a minister who preached for over seventy years.  He had three churches down there, and one church had five of its original members.
Speaker 2: Did you get it, Scott?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I got it.
Speaker 2: Before it fell?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he passed away in 1982.  That's my father right after the service around 1946, I guess, or 1945.  My mother [Ida Collins] and father owned a store in Mississippi, and that's my father behind the counter in the store.
Speaker 1: Hold on a second.  Hold it.  And they rotate it later in Photoshop.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Is that better?
Speaker 1: That is perfect.  Thank you.  Go ahead, sir.
Speaker 2: That is my grandfather on the left, Sonny Collins; and my mother in the middle, Ida Collins or her maiden name at that age; and my grandmother Anna, who later became Anna Bradley after she married again.
Speaker 1: Which way?  This way?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then center it for me on the stand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a current promo photo of me and my guitar as I look today, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's gonna curl.
Speaker 1: Hold that just for a second.  I'll try to do it as quick as possible.  Okay.  Go ahead, Mr. Jackson.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me.  I was in college at Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and I was in a play entitled 'Six Characters in Search of an Author.'  So I was growing up, and I was doing a little acting there.  That's--I don't recall the name of the lady in the photograph with me, but we played--I was the leading man and she was the leading lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Got it.  Great.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my father on the left.  He was a staff manager for North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company.  He sold insurance for thirty-three years.  He was a salesman.  He said he didn't sell insurance, he sold needs.  And that's a picture of his staff.  The year, probably 1967.
Speaker 1: The man who was here this morning was in the insurance business. Yeah. The guy who was leaving as you were arriving.
Speaker 2: That one finger, can you pull that back.  Yeah, there.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: The man in that picture with the hammer was one of my grandmother's husbands.  His name was Atwood.  And I do not know the year of that picture, but it's over fifty years old; probably the late 1930s.
Speaker 2: Got it.  You can be just kind of brief.
Speaker 1: Briefer than that?
Speaker 2: Who, what and where basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Fine.
Speaker 2: Do you want it this way?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Thanks.  Whichever is the greatest dimension to make it horizontal.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me practicing my tap dance at the Chicago Park District, and the year was 1976.
Speaker 1: Sasha, I'm sorry.  I need you to do that one.  Rotate it 180.  Yeah.  Put the (unclear) on that.  Thank you.  Okay.  Great.  Got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead, Mr. Jackson.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of--a current promo picture of me taken by the Memphis Arts Council in their magazine Living Arts.  I did a program a year ago in January 2006.
Speaker 1: Great.  Next (unclear).  Go ahead, sir.
Speaker 2: That's a current picture of me in the current issue of Blues Revue magazine, which came out in January, February for 2007.
