Story_ID: 640221
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, and observing is Lauren [ph.] from your office.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson.  E-D-D-I-E, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  My maiden name was Johnson; my married name is Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And is there a story behind your first name, Eddie?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My parents [Lillie Mae White Johnson and Edward Johnson] told me that I had, I had an Uncle Eddie who had a son a year or two before I was born who died of pneumonia.  And so they asked him if, if they could name me Eddie.  And, 'cause you know, at that time, they didn't know before you were born what gender you were, and Bernice is an aunt.  So Eddie was from my maternal side, Bernice was from my paternal side.  So Eddie Bernice, made up the name.  All of us have family names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 3rd, 1935, Waco, Texas, McLennan County.  I don't know if I was born, it was a small town, but I think I was born kind of outside of town, so that's why I'm saying, Waco, McLennan County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this may seem strange, what is your occupation?  We always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Well, I started off, I'm a professional nurse.  I currently now serve in [U.S.] Congress, and this is my twentieth year to serve in Congress.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March the 7th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Oh.  You are in my office in the Rayburn House Office Building on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at 2468 Rayburn.
Story_ID: 640222
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask some warm up questions to get us started.  There are five of them, so they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: You know, I was thinking about a favorite food.  I just love food.  I love to eat.  But I, I guess, a good crisp salad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It is one of my most favorite desires for food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is pink.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Early fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: In the Caribbean, somewhere on one of the islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I'm just not aware of one.  I guess I would say, hey.  I normally greet my family with, hey instead of hello or hi.  And maybe, gotcha.
Story_ID: 640223
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Edward Johnson] side.  But I'm gonna ask separately so we can keep the two lines--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll bring them together at a certain point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Lillie Mae White.  Married name, Johnson [Lillie Mae White Johnson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That L-I-L-L-Y M-A-E?
Speaker 2: L-I-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: I-E?  Okay.  M-A?
Speaker 2: E.
Speaker 1: E?
Speaker 2: M-A-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  White, W-H-I-T-E.  All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was January the 9th, 1911.
Speaker 1: And was she born in Waco [Texas] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Same county?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: McLennan County [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew her mother [Sarah Burks White] and father [Thomas White].  She was the youngest of seven.  She had (pause) one, one of her siblings I did not know, he died early.  But she had three sisters and two brothers, and she was the youngest child.  She was, she was almost the age of her oldest sibling's children.  So, and, and a couple of them lived to be way in their eighties, so after she became an older woman, that was her commit to the family, her niece and nephew who were within ten years of her age.  She had a little over a year of college.
Speaker 1: Where did she go?
Speaker 2: She went to a little school in Waco called the Waco business school, I think was the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she, did she start a business?
Speaker 2: No.  As a matter of fact, she didn't work outside the home, but she had ultimately four children.  My older sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] and I were close together, and then I have a sister [Lee Johnson Willis] that's eight years younger than I am.  And my only brother [Carl Johnson] is eight years younger than she is, so I'm sixteen years older than my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the same mother and father.  They were married, my father died a little over a month and a half before their fiftieth anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm gonna get to him in a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to get the mother's side first.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: They were sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived on a farm.  They, you know they, I guess they had their own house because it always belonged to them, but they lived adjacent to a farm where they worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had their own little plot, but they worked the land of somebody that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was adjacent?  Okay.  Well, what kind of food did they grow?  Or what did they grow?
Speaker 2: I mainly know what I've been told.  But I think they just grew vegetables and food and they had pigs.  I do remember, I was old enough to remember when my grandfather had gone to the grocery store and was on his way home, and was attacked by several Anglo teenagers.  And he ultimately died from the injuries.
Speaker 1: Now was he, was he an older man at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He was, yeah, my mother was, was the youngest and she was grown.  And her, her siblings were as widespread as almost twenty years older than she is.  So he was, he was not a young man, I don't really know exactly what his age was, but her mother lived to be a hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's the story.  So your grandfather was attacked and died from the injuries he sustained in a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, it wasn't, he didn't die right away.  But the lingering injuries ultimately caused his death.
Speaker 1: And what do you think?  Would that have been in the 1930s, or?
Speaker 2: No, that was in the '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 640224
Speaker 1: Now does your family on your mother's side have a history of alre- as far back as you know, being in Texas, or is there another place that the family migrated to Texas from?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as I know, they were always in Texas now.  When we would talk about family history, my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] had a lot of Indian [Native American] blood, and her mother [Sarah Burks White] came from Kansas.  I don't remember it, but that's what I was told.  When, you know, she was in Texas as long as I was aware of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her mother's mother had Indian blood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what, what Indian group it was?
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard Cherokee.  We've never really traced it that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're a mix of some of everything.  My great-grandmother was Scotch-Irish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now there, are there any other stories from that side of the family that were passed down on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My, my mama, well, that was kind of true on both sides.  But my mother's side of the family were very caring people.  They looked after each other and I can remember the way my mother made sure that her older sister, who had four or five children, made sure that she was able to get food if it ran short.  We were somewhat fortunate in that we never really had to worry too much about food.  That part of it came from my father's [Edward Johnson] side of the family.  But my, they were all workers, they all held education as a priority for their children.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was your mother the only one in the family to go to college?
Speaker 2: Only one of her siblings to, but not their offsprings.  She was the youngest. She had two sisters to move to California in the late '30s [1930's]. One moved to Northern California, to San Mateo; and the other one moved to Los Angeles [California].
Story_ID: 640225
Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Edward Johnson.
Speaker 1: And no middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, I think Edward was his middle name 'cause I would sometimes see his name written as Lee Edward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was September the 27th, 1909.
Speaker 1: And was he born in McLennan County [Texas] too?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He finished high school in Waco [Texas], but his parents had come from around Brenham [Texas].  I don't know at what point in his young life that he came into Waco, but I do know that his roots ran deeply in Brenham and Texas City [Texas], Galveston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Brenham, Texas City and Galveston.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Brenham.  B-R-E-N-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Brenham, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right.  But he graduated from high school in Waco?
Speaker 2: In Waco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: No.  I've heard him, I don't know if it was A.J. Moore [A.J. Moore High School, Waco, Texas] or not, but ultimately, the high school that I attended was named for one of his teachers.  So I don't know what the name of the school was before then, because as long as I can remember, it was named A.J. Moore.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: But I don't know if that's the same school he finished or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when he did finish, he left home and he told his parents that he didn't want to teach nor preach.  He wanted to be a businessman, so he took off and went to, I think Houston [Texas] to try to go into business.  He later came back and married my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] when she graduated.  And then I think that's when he actually stayed in Waco.  They had met in, in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They didn't tell me.  I knew they were in school together and I would see them playing and teasing each other periodically and he would be telling us what attracted her or him, about her and that sort of thing.  It was when we were younger and, I don't know what the circumstances might have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what did your father end up doing for a living primarily?
Speaker 2: Well actually--he did go into business.  He had a little tailor shop and he had a trucking business.  But when he didn't have much to do in that, I heard him say that he helped to lay the highway between Temple [Texas] and Waco at a dollar a day.  And that had to be maybe just before I was born, or right around the time I was born.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So this is--
Speaker 2: But that highway became I-35.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is the time of WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] projects and that sort of thing?  Do you--you think it was maybe one of those kinds of projects?  'Cause so many people were out of work and in the country during the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I don't know.  He never mentioned that.  But he, but we would drive that highway together, and you know, we'd be--.  And he'd say, "I had to lay this highway for a dollar a day."
Speaker 1: So it's route 35 you said?
Speaker 2: It's now Interstate 35.
Speaker 1: Interstate 35, okay.
Story_ID: 640226
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, and their dispositions, and their interests and their temperaments, and their habits, and their looks.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of them.  My father [Edward Johnson] was a very straightforward, leave no stone unturned person who carried his weight.  My mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] was a very nurturing person, who she let us know that it was very important that her kids had what they needed.  And they made for a good pairing.  They never argued, my father would get to ranting and raving sometimes, and the only thing she'd say is, "That's enough."  And he'd shut up.  So no fights, no, none of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had an understanding, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he treated her kind of like she was one of us, as we grew old.  It was like he had another daughter.
Speaker 1: Except this is one that can make him stop, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When she, when she got ready, she could.  And she, she would sometimes, in my judgment, act kind of like his daughter until she got tired of it.  And because she had been very obviously pitied and babied with her older siblings.  And, and they just thought she was precious, and she was.  And she, she became the matriarch of the family when they passed.  They had families.  Her two brothers [George White and Arthur White] each had ten children.  And I don't have--know one brother's kids from the other's now, but we still keep in touch and, and that value of education being a priority (background noise) is very apparent.  They made sure all of them have gone on to school.
Story_ID: 640227
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest, a first childhood memory?  The earliest one you have?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think one of my earliest traumatic childhood memories is when my [maternal] grandfather was attacked.  I don't, I don't even remember how we kept in touch.  But we didn't live with, that close to my grandparents [Sarah Burks White and Thomas White].  But someone got the word to us, and we all gathered, and that was a very painful experience for me.  And you know, I never really forgot it.  But it, and always wondered, always wondered by what motivated that strong type racism, unprovoked.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was probably about, maybe, maybe five or six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, all right.  So did the, did the community have a big funeral for him, or did they--
Speaker 2: We just had our, you know, regular services.  Back during that time, I remember that they brought the bodies to the house for the wake, and that was the first time I'd seen a body in a casket.  When, when they brought his body out for it to be in the house overnight before the funeral.  And he actually took it to my, my mother's older sister's house, and she lived in the City of Waco [Texas].  Her husband was a barber.  And she had a very nice house.  And I remember that she had a house that had all the bathrooms and all that in the house, and my grandmother's bathroom was outside so I think that was one reason why they decided to have the wake at her house.  And I remember all the family coming and that sort of thing.  But it was also a very sad time.
Story_ID: 640228
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood and the house you lived in for us?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. The first house I remember is, was a little rural setting.  And my father [Edward Johnson] bought, he, I don't remember that he built it.  But everybody talked about him building his own little house.  And it was probably what would be between maybe here and over to the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.].  The distance of between where we lived and where my [maternal] grandparents [Sarah Burks White and Thomas White] lived at the time.  And we didn't live too far from each other.  And, and these were all my mother's [Lillie Mae White Johnson] side of the family there in Waco [Texas], 'cause my father's parents were in Brenham by the time I realized, you know, who they were.  And although I knew that they had to live in Waco for a while, 'cause my father finished high school there [at A.J. Moore High School].  And my grandmother got a job as a home demonstration agent.  My father's mother.  And so they moved to Brenham, Texas.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: Now what is a home demonstration agent?  I haven't heard--
Speaker 2: That's where she had gone to (unclear) to college and she was, she could teach how to can, how to quilt, and they would, she would go to various homes and make sure that they had canning and stuff like that was done appropriately so it wouldn't spoil.  And I remember them gathering women at the church to make quilts, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I had never heard of that before.  That's, okay.  All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And she was hired by the state.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was your--
Speaker 2: That was my father's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, your grandmother, okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I'm thinking that might be how they got back to Brenham, because she had a lot of roots in Brenham, but my father spent his formative days in Waco, 'cause that's where he finished high school.  But when I was old enough, three, or four, or five years old, I remember we used to drive to visit them in Brenham where she was working.  And my, and we have a lot of family land down in there, and my grandfather farmed it.  He had his regular little retail operation out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  This is, this is your father's side?
Speaker 2: My father's side.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  So where you grew up then in Waco, was there a name for that community?  Did they have a name, was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: Just East Waco [Waco, Texas].
Story_ID: 640229
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the sights is that bridge right there that's on that picture.  That is a, that's an old historic swinging bridge [Waco Suspension Bridge, Waco, Texas].  And we lived on one side of the bridge and the downtown was on the other side.  And the school that I attended once I get to high, got to high school [A.J. Moore High School, Waco, Texas] was also on the other side of that bridge.  So we walked that bridge a lot.
Speaker 1: So is this a bridge across the Brazos River?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, the person who sent me that picture was present the night when, when, when Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was running for president.  I was traveling with him and we went to Waco [Texas] and we took pictures standing on that bridge.  And so that's, and he then took, got a picture of that bridge, blew it up and sent it here framed.  That's why it's there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that, that stands out with me is that my, my father [Edward Johnson] had gone to work in Portland, Oregon.  And we were getting ready to move there, and he was called to the [U.S.] military.  And so that's why we did move.  He had to bring his things back home and then he had to go into, he went into the [U.S.] Navy.  And practically every other man on that street, and some men and their sons went to the [U.S.] Army or Navy during that time.  And so what I remember most about that time, is that the mothers and the children would gather up and sit and talk with each other at night.  And we'd, they'd read stories, or they'd share letters, and a lot of times we'd be sitting in the dark.  That was the one thing I remembered about the war [World War II, WWII], was they had periods which they'd tell you to turn your lights off.  And so frequently, we'd be sitting on the porch, and sometimes with chairs out in the yard sharing with each family and their children about the fathers and the brothers, and uncles being away in the military.  That was pretty vivid to me as a young girl.  And then, the second or third year that my father was in the military, my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] went and joined him.  And I went to join my [paternal] grandparents in Brenham [Texas], and my sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] joined my [maternal] grandparents [Sarah Burks White and Thomas White] in Waco [Texas].  And so we were apart for a period of time, I don't know, for a whole semester, as a matter fact.  I stayed with my grandparents in Brenham and went to school there.  I think that was in the, maybe the second, the first or second week.  Because it was a one room school that had eight grades in it and one teacher.  And it was just about, I'd say, two blocks from where we lived.
Story_ID: 640230
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I could probably look it up, I don't remember it now.
Speaker 1: But this is in Brenham though, right?
Speaker 2: Brenham, Texas.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you attend that?  You said you attended, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I was there, I was there a whole semester.
Speaker 1: Was this where you started school?
Speaker 2: I don't think that's where I started.  I think I had started school and was interrupted to go down--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to move once my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] went to stay with my dad [Edward Johnson].
Speaker 1: Did, so did you start at A.J. Moore [A.J. Moore High School] in Waco [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No.  I started at a little elementary school.  I think it was called East Waco Elementary [East Waco Elementary School, Waco, Texas], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is where my--I remember that my sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] had started school.  My mother used to sit up at night and, and teach her, and I'd be sitting there and I was always interrupting.  And so my mother changed my birth date so I could go to school.  So you had to be six then to start to school and my birthday came in December.  So she changed my birth date to 1934, and on some things it's still there.  But that was so I could go on and go to school.  So I remember, I, I didn't remember that much about that until they told me later.  But I did, I, I think, I did start to that school and I think I might have gone, maybe from September to that December.  And then from that December to the end of the school year, I stayed with my paternal grandparents.  And my, I was--my grandmother's mother was also in that area.  And well, quite a few of my father's relatives were in the--that Brenham area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this would have been about 1940, '41 [1941]?  'Cause the war [World War II, WWII] started in '41 [1941], I guess, right?  So--
Speaker 2: So it had to be '42 [1942] or '3 [1943].  I remember that my father came out of the [U.S.] military in 1945.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I r- I do, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember him also coming, coming home for visits.
Story_ID: 640231
Speaker 1: How did you like school?  We were talking about school now.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed school.  It was fascinating to me.  And my older sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] was just two years older, so we, we went together, studied together.  A lot of people thought we were twins because my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] dressed us alike a lot.  And, but school was always fascinating to me.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was geometry.  And, and I, and the reason I think I loved geometry, because it, you had the theorems, and then you had to prove it.  And I enjoyed working out puzzle type things.  And it was also something that, that kept my attention.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had, had several favorite teachers, actually.  I still visit some of my older teachers.  But my math teacher was not necessarily one of my favorite teachers, but the classes were fascinating.  You know, I was basically a little shy, so I didn't really take too much to being around teachers that much.  I, I was closer to my, my parents.  And so, and in class, I only spoke when, when it was the appropriate time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I kept very good grades.  I, I didn't find school being difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't mind studying.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 640232
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My parents were always available to help.  And you know what I mean, in my household, you just did not do anything but well.  That was just one of the things that was expected.  And so, I enjoyed sharing my learnings with my father [Edward Johnson] and my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson].  I was kind of a daddy's girl, so often I would wait for him to come home in the evening or whatever, so I could tell him about my excitement or something.  And then as I got a little, see, I'm not sure what, about middle school [East Waco Elementary School, Waco, Texas] I guess, about sixth or seventh grade, maybe seventh.  My, my grandmother, my father's mother wrote him and said that she was waiting for him to come home from the [U.S.] military.  And then she wanted to come to Waco [Texas] and go to the doctor, because she had discovered two little knots under her arm.  And so he headed to come right away.  And we took her to the doctor and she had breast cancer, and she went to the Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio].  And had spent most of her ill days in our home, in our home there in Waco.  And she and her mother had been somewhat estranged because her mother was Anglo.  She was Scotch-Irish and married a dark man.  Her parents had come over as indentured servants from Ireland, at Galveston, Ireland [sic.].  And, and even though they lived on adjoining properties, I would say, like, we would say?  Across the field?  You could see the house, it was all our property in between.  But they never really visited that much when I was a little girl.  We'd visit, but the two of them didn't.  But when she heard about my grandmother being sick, she came to Waco to visit her and they had this tearful reunion.  And, and my grandmother later explained to us as children that this relationship had gotten a little tension filled because my, my grandmother's older brother, her father was Anglo, and his kids, I'm not sure was Anglo, but very, very fair.  He, he didn't have, he didn't pass for black.  But he was very close to us.
Speaker 1: He was considered white?  He was a white man?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, something had come up related to that, anyway.  They were still close, and we visited with each other.  But she did not have a whole lot to do with her own mother until she realized she was ill, and they had this tearful reunion and all of us kind of came together again.  She died in 1947 and, and she was like fifty-four or fifty-five years old.  And that, I remember that happening.  We became, I think, closer to my great-grandmother.  But even as we were growing up and spent summers with them, my grandmother would send us over to visit with her mother, but she wouldn't go.
Story_ID: 640233
Speaker 1: So this is, so in, in the community where your [paternal] great-grandmother lived, they considered her white.  She was white, right?  Or--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  But she was married to a black man.
Speaker 1: But she didn't leave, did she?  I mean, well Texas, I imagine would have been hostile to that kind of life?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was, it was very interesting because what would happen, she would take a little carriage that was horse driven and put us on it with her and she'd go uptown.  And she would park it and buy us some, some ice cream, whatever.  She'd go into a movie that we couldn't even go into.  And she'd watch a movie and come out, we'd be just there playing until she came out and never thought anything about it until much later in life.  And she would take us next to the movie and get us little ice cream cones, and now it's called Blue Bell [Blue Bell Creameries].  It was a little creamery in Brenham.  And now it's, you know, a big one.
Speaker 1: Right.  It's Blue Bell ice cream, you get in the store, that's down in the South?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: There was the first little creamery they call it, in Brenham, Texas.  And, and you know, that didn't really mean anything that much to me at that time.  As a matter of fact, as I got older, I remember her saying, I remember my great-grandmother saying, "Please don't marry a black man, because they will not treat your children right."  And she never really understood what it was, other than she knew if you had a darker skin, they didn't treat you the same.  And, but she never spoke as if she was different, although she could sit on her blonde hair.  And, and I thought about that a lot because, but I didn't really think about it that much as a kid.  Because we, our family had every color, every shade, you know.  And, and it was never an issue.  But I remember when I was, this was after my grandmother had passed, I had finished college [Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana] and we went down to visit.  And she said, "Are you thinking about getting married?"  So I said, "Yeah, I'm engaged now."  She said, "Please don't let him be too dark, 'cause he will not treat your children right if they're dark."  And that's the only thing, the only difference she made between the color thing.  So I don't know if she ever got into a conversation or not.  I remember one Christmas, we gave them a television, it was black and white.  And she'd sit there with a, a blanket on the front of her skirt.  She didn't want anybody to see her in her clothes.  She thought the people on television could see, just like she could see them.  Well, she and my, my paternal great-grandmother, and my maternal grandmother [Sarah Burks White] were the same age.  And so she died in 1967.  And my, let me see, my, they really died pretty close together.  That's the reason, that's why I remember, they were about the same age because my, my grandmother was younger.  When, and my, and my father [Edward Johnson] was her second child, and my, my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] was the youngest of six or seven kids.  And so they, they got to know each other as friends and they were in the same age group.  Although, one was my grandmother and one was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Well, that's an interesting story then.  You know, but you say your great-grandmother, your great-great-grandmother really didn't, she still had kind of a naive concept about race and America?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did.  Because I think when they, when her parents, I don't know whether she was born in this country or not, but I, but she, but she remembers Ireland.  And when they came over, they were treated just like they were black.  And so there are a lot of African Americans in Texas that are mixed with Irish, because the Irish, I guess those boats or ships or whatever they brought them in, they came together.  So Ireland was sold into servitude just like blacks from Africa were.  And, but her family accumulated a lot of land and, and we, where NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is down there, and University of Texas medical school [John P. and Kathrine G. McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas]?  That was all my grand--great-grandparents' property.  And we still have mineral rights, but they just about took that land, you know, by what they--but you know, along the way we would go to school and that sort of thing.  But, obviously, they didn't get what it was worth out of it. But we have mineral rights for the Houston Ship Channel [Houston, Texas] and all that now, still in the family, been in the family way over a hundred year.
Story_ID: 640234
Speaker 1: Tell me about, I think it's Bridge Street?  Is that the place where the black businesses were?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Before the--
Speaker 2: In Waco [Texas], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was the Bridge Street.
Speaker 1: Now that was thriving at one time, I hear.  It was like a lot of black businesses and was doing, they were doing fairly well?
Speaker 2: As, as, as much as I can remember, yes.  I remember that we used to go over there to, what?  The drugstore and fish market.  There was a square, they used to call it going to the square.  But there was a, the city, the city hall, and, and the streets kind of ran into it, kind of like the Capitol here [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.].  And on one, on the east side of the, of the courthouse and all that was the black part, was the black street Bridge Street.  I'm assuming that's where it was.  'Cause I don't remember going to the other side, except going downtown to the department store.  But I remember that we used to go there to go to grocery stores, go to the pharmacy, it's called a drugstore.
Speaker 1: So these were being, being (background noise)--
Speaker 2: That's just them finishing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't remember, I don't remember that we bought clothes on Bridge Street, or shoes, anything like that.  But food, there were restaurants, and the thing that I remember most was the little drugstore on the corner.  And I can't remember any other particular business, but I know that just about every weekend, that's where you go to get your groceries and, along there.
Speaker 1: Now these are all black businesses on the east side?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think they were all black.  I know that the persons who owned the drugstore were friends of the family, and I, we knew them, Clements [ph.].
Story_ID: 640235
Speaker 1: And I heard that a, that a tornado or something in 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a tornado hit.  I was already, I was a freshman in college [Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was in 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: May 11th.  Anybody in Waco [Texas] can give you that date.  I went home on a, on a school break shortly after that, and it, the city has never been the same.  It really devastated.
Speaker 1: So not just the black section of town?
Speaker 2: Oh, all over.
Speaker 1: The whole city?
Speaker 2: All over.  As a matter of fact, in my family we used to have a family meeting every Monday.  I grew up thinking everybody had a family meeting 'til I got grown and found out they didn't.  But we had a family meeting every Monday, usually around dinner, and then we'd go to a movie.  And that particular night, I wasn't there, this is what they told me.  They finished their meeting, my younger sister [Lee Johnson Willis] and, and brother [Carl Johnson] was still at home then.  And they drove, they, they, it had been a heavy rain.  And they got in the car to go to the movie, and they drove over there and the movie was not there.  I mean the whole town had been torn, torn down and they didn't realize that much destruction had come.  Didn't hurt where we lived, and we didn't live that far away.  But we were very fortunate, and as we drove around, we could see, you know, houses torn down that, that still had refrigerators plugged into the wall and stuff like.  It was, it was really just devastating to the place.  They never rebuilt all of it back.
Speaker 1: So is Waco today, you think--I mean, would it be, would it be greater today had the tornado not hit it?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's, it's hard to tell because during the period of, you know, it was, it was an [U.S.] Air Force base that was built there during the time of the war [World War II, WWII], I guess.  I don't know at what point that Air Force base was built.  But all of a sudden, I knew it was there.  And it was also an air TAF what they call training--aviation area.  So we brought in a lot of people because of the [U.S.] military base.  And of course, Baylor University [Waco, Texas] and Paul Quinn College and, and so it was a lot of activity then.  It, it, it just, it was very bubbly, busy, it seemed like when I was growing up.  When I go there now, you don't see--well, first of all, the military base closed, the air, aviation training closed.  They, where the Air Force base was, they've got a technical college [Texas State Technical College-Waco, Waco, Texas] and it seems to be very successful.  Of course, Baylor has tremendously grown.  But it, the viability, Waco does not seem the same. Now maybe when I was small it just seemed big.  Now, you know, it's not--a lot of the human activity is gone.  But they, but you know, they have, I belong to a couple of groups that have members that live in Waco that drive to Dallas [Texas] and go to things, and, and we go, we, we have what we call school reunions, each year.  I go now and then.  I don't get a chance to go that often because of working, but, here.  But a lot of the students come back.
Story_ID: 640236
Speaker 1: Public schools in Waco [Texas], back during the time--they were segregated when I was, up until I graduated.  As a matter of fact, when I graduated, I couldn't go to Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas].  But my younger sister [Lee Johnson Willis] graduated from Baylor.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So now, you said you went to middle school there?  Or was that the same as A.J. Moore [A.J. Moore High School, Waco, Texas], or was that a different school?
Speaker 1: No.  I went to East Waco [East Waco Elementary School, Waco, Texas] from, I, I think from the time I started school up until high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went to high school at A.J. Moore.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I graduated there.
Speaker 2: And A.J. Moore [Alexander James Moore] was a teacher right?  Who was a famous--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A.J. Moore was a principal of that school at one time, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know that the principal that was at the school when I went was A.J. Moore's son, who had been my father's [Edward Johnson] classmate.  That was the only thing about Waco.  Everybody in Waco knew you.
Speaker 2: Now in, in high school, now were you, what kind of a student were you in high school?
Speaker 1: I was a good student.  I was always an honor student.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: I was a very disciplined child.  I, you know, my parents checked on me and my father always made sure he got me lessons and at that time, you had stuff assigned to you when you left for school to take care of.  And my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] would help us, and it was just a foregone conclusion that you were gonna do your lessons.  If not, your neighbor who was your teacher was gonna tell on you.  So, you know, that, when, when I, when I grew up, it was truly a village.  You know, the principal lived around, the college teachers lived down the street, and we were laughing about that not long ago.  On my block, we had a concrete person who makes cement to help build foundations, a beautician, college professors, teachers, a man across the street that collected scrap iron.  You know, it was a variety of the way people made their living.  But everybody, it was a neighborhood.  We, my mother was little organizer, so she, we had a little neighborhood group; and, and everybody kind of looked out at, looked out for everybody else.
Story_ID: 640237
Speaker 1: Now your, your mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson], you said, she was kind of an organizer?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And so, she organized the neighborhood group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She organized the neighborhood group.  About two blocks there, we had a little neighborhood group.
Speaker 1: Was that like a block club or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Kind of.  Um-hm.  And she would love to entertain.  As a matter of fact, our house was the gathering place for kids.  And my father [Edward Johnson] used to drive his truck to take us on hayrides.  And the boys, the girls didn't do it, but you had to cross the Brazos [Brazos River] just to go to school.  Remember, I told you about that bridge [Waco Suspension Bridge, Waco, Texas]?  Well, the boys would come across the railroad track, the trestle and, and many times, they would--we lived about maybe three and a half blocks or so from that bridge.  And they would come by the house, my mother would pop popcorn and cook tea cakes and, and they would make it there before we could get home from school.  And so, we were kind of the house beside the road.  As a matter of fact, my, because of that railroad track, people used to come by and ask for food.  And I remember one day a man came by, and he had this little boy that was about three years old.  And my father asked him, where was the mother.  And he said that his, the mother had died.  And so he said, "Well, you're gonna leave that child here.  You're not gonna be carrying that."  So we kept that little boy until he was about twelve or thirteen years old before his father came back.  He was, and we did that to about three or four children in our home.  And, and some of them would go home periodically, he said, "This child needs to be here with us so they can get some upbringing."  That's the way my father would describe it.  And so I, at least three children that had no relationship to us, we just, we might have known a parent or something.  And that was pretty common when the father was gone to the [U.S.] military and the mother was by herself, he said, "Bring the child on over to us."  And so, but that's the kind of home I grew up in, where, you know, classmates were welcome.  There were classmates that knew my parents, schoolmates, I said classmates.  They knew my parents very well, and I didn't know the kids that well, because they'd stand, they'd stop there and talk to my mother and father, get something to eat or whatever.  And so it was, our house was always a welcome house.
Story_ID: 640238
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your family church?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. My, my grandmother was Catholic, my [paternal] great-grandmother.  And so I wanted to be like her, so I joined the Catholic church.  And it was okay with my father [Edward Johnson].  They were Baptist, and so he'd take me to Catholic church, and they'd go on to the Baptist church and when I left the Catholic church, I'd go on to the Baptist church too.  That was my recreation.  But I really was afraid that he would object, but he didn't.  He said, "That it was good enough for my--," his grandmother, "it was good enough for me."  So I, I was the only one in the family that grew up in the Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did they have activities, so this was a Catholic church with primarily a black population, or was it--
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was predominantly black.  And that, on the, we had one, well, then they called them Mexican family.  We had one Mexican family and one white family that lived on the block.  And they were just like the rest of us.  And, but other than that, it was predominantly black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Waco [Texas] itself then, now what percentage would the black population be in Waco when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: It couldn't have been too great, but I really don't know the population.  I'd say, maybe 10 percent.  There were, there was an East Waco neighborhood [Waco, Texas].  The oldest college for blacks was located in East Waco, right on Elm Street, Paul Quinn College.  Well, on one side of Paul Quinn was a neighborhood, on the other side of Paul Quinn was a neighborhood and then the blacks.  Then you had to go across the river, and across the river they had a little quadrant called South Waco [Waco, Texas], which was near Baylor [Baylor University, Waco, Texas].  And then there was a North Waco [Waco, Texas], which was where my mother's sister and her husband, he was a barber that was--. So, I would say there were four predominantly black neighborhoods in different, in the quadrant of the city.
Story_ID: 640239
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, when you were in high school [A.J. Moore High School, Waco, Texas], were you, were you very popular?  Did you, you were a part of the organ- the clubs and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was part of--
Speaker 1: --and all of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: The Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], Y-Teens, a little group that the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] had together.  Whatever's going on, we, we tended to participate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And did you have a career aspiration in high school?  Did you think, well--
Speaker 2: Yes.  When my [paternal] grandmother was ill, I made up my mind that I was gonna be a doctor.  And, and I told her I wanted to be a doctor so that nobody would have to suffer again.  But when I told my high school counselor, she said, "Oh, you can't be a doctor.  You're a young lady.  You have to be a nurse."  So then I went home and told my father [Edward Johnson] that maybe I should be a nurse rather than a doctor.  And so I would look at these magazines, and they had all these little pictures of a nurse with a cap on, and applications to apply, and you could take a correspondence course.  And I tried to convince my father that if he'd just let me do that he wouldn't have to worry about sending me to college, 'cause I could finish by the time I finished high school.  Once my sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] went to college, I'd hear them talking about what it cost and everything, and so I told, I said, "Listen, you won't have to send me to school if I can just, if you'd give me thirty dollars to take this course.  Then when I finna get out of high school, I can go to work."  And he finally said, "Okay.  Okay.  I'm gonna pay that thirty dollars."  And I took this course, and made straight A's.
Speaker 1: Now what course was this?
Speaker 2: This was a correspondence course in nursing.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And so when I finished that course, I showed him my certificate and everything, and he said, "Okay."  He said, "Now, let me just--okay let me be the hospital administrator.  You'll come into work."  He said, "What is the first thing you're gonna do?"  And I just couldn't think of a thing.  So he said, "Now, if you're gonna be a nurse, you're gonna be one of the best nurses."  He said, "You're not going, you're not going to go to school in no magazine."  And I felt guilty a long time about getting him to pay that thirty dollars for that course.  But when I finished high school, he insisted on me going on to college for nursing and that, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I really thought I found myself a great way to get out of high school and start making money right away (laughter).
Story_ID: 640240
Speaker 1: This is when you enrolled in Saint Mary's College in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at, of Notre Dame in Indiana?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well who, who gave you the, I guess, the connection for that?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes.  I've always had little allergies, or a little sinus like.  And, and the allergist that I was going to was a Notre Dame graduate [from the University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana].  And so when, when my father [Edward Johnson] explained to him that I'd decided I was gonna be a nurse, and he said, "We just gotta find a school she can go to."  So he suggested that I look into that school.  So he gave me the information.  I had to, and I had a classmate that also wanted to be a nurse.  And so we learned that we had to take an entrance exam.  So my father drove us to Dallas [Texas] to take this exam at Baylor University dental school [Baylor University School of Dentistry; Texas A&M College of Dentistry].  And when we took the exam, I was, I was admitted.  But my classmate did not make high enough scores or something.  So I was really worried about her 'cause she didn't get in.  And we couldn't, my father could not find a school anywhere in the state that admitted black students for nursing.  And so he told me, he said, "Well you, you go on.  I'll see what I can do to help her."  So I went on to school, and she later went to Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] in St. Louis [Missouri].  And she graduated and worked there.  And we, we kind of kept in touch.  But I went on, went on up there and--
Speaker 1: Now, had you ever been very far from home before?
Speaker 2: I'd never been away from home by myself.  We had, we would drive on vacations.  My father was a, a Buick driver.  He didn't think any other car was made but a Buick.  But we would drive different locations together on vacation.  But when I got ready to go up there, there was a, the only place we had driven any distance was to California.  That's where our relatives were.  I rode a train to South Bend, Indiana, and, and I tell this story sometimes now.  I got on the train at 4:30 in the evening, and I didn't get to South Bend until the next day at 8:30 P.M.  We went to St. Louis and I changed trains, then to Chicago [Illinois], changed train stations and trains and finally got to South Bend, Indiana.  And I read three books.  And so I tell young people now, you can, I can go now, and get on a plane and get to South Bend in about two hours or less.  But you still have to, that's the speed of knowledge, you must learn now.  Three books of knowledge in that two hours is about the difference between the speed of learning necessity back then and now.  But I did, I did well.  As a matter of fact, I, I guess I did better than I thought because my, at the end of my first year, I just told my father I had to come home. I was just, I just didn't see how I could make it.
Story_ID: 640241
Speaker 1: So 1952, and you went to Saint Mary's College of Notre Dame [Saint Mary's College] in Notre Dame, Indiana.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  And, well, were there any other black students there? Were you the only, were you, you know, besides?
Speaker 2: There was a student two years ahead of me, and there were two behind me.  And, as a matter of fact, the one that was--wait.  One two years and one, one was two years ahead, and then one was one year ahead.  We were roommates for a little while.  And, and two or three behind me.  But I got to be very good friends with those that were ahead of me, 'cause they were my, kind of my mentors.  I still keep in touch with them.  And I go back for class reunions.  I hardly know them anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is your first time in an integrated school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My very first experience.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is, was it run by nuns there?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I got there that night, I will never forget, I was very tired.  So I got a (unclear) and went to bed.  About eleven o'clock, the door opened, and there was this, this person that had all this white on.  And I thought I was seeing a ghost for the first time.  But she was just coming to welcome me to school, and, and told me who she was.  The next day is when the other students came.  I got there, I had to be there a certain day so I had to go early so I could be sure to be there the next morning.  That's when the other students came in for the whole start, for registration, and that sort of thing.  And my roommates were Anglo, and that's the first time I had slept with, in a room with anybody other than black people.  But we, we did well, got accustomed to dormitory life.  The biggest problem came when it was time to date.  There were, you know, in Notre Dame [Indiana] that was the first place I had ever been where there was five men to every woman.  But there were no blacks.  And so, with my, my little gang in class, we'd go out coupled up.  And most of the time, it would be an Anglo man, which I had not been accustomed to.  But it was not so much dating as it was just couples.  And, but that was, I had a, I had a high school sweetheart that had gone into the [U.S.] Air Force, and so I would just kind of kept relationship through writing.
Story_ID: 640242
Speaker 1: Well, was the course work difficult, or was it pretty easy, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to study.  And frequently on weekends, when many of the girls would maybe go out and go home, I would, I'd find, with the help of a nun, I'd find an empty room in the dormitory and go sit and study by myself.  Because I, I just, I never failed, and I was not interested in failing in school.  And so, I, I did, I studied.  And was able to make it.  As a matter of fact, oh it's been now several years.  I was looking through my transcript, I had no idea that my grades had been that good.  Because I just didn't think about it.  All I thought about was getting my lessons so I could go home.  I wanted to graduate and, and go home.  But I had an excellent transcript, but I, I didn't think of it as such when I was there [Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana].  It was a very, it was a pretty, pretty classy environment.  They, they taught you how to set a table, you know, what, what tools to eat with.  All that was a part of a class.  Which, when I mentioned that to other kids, they'd kind of chuckle.  'Cause a lot of schools I guess, didn't have that.  But anyway, we had to wear hose.  And we had, we didn't leave the campus without a hat and glove.  And some of the Kennedy girls went there.
Speaker 1: Were they, were any in the class with you?
Speaker 2: Not in class with me.  The movie star, Helen Hayes had graduated from there.  And I remember the year that I graduated, they had this big anniversary of her fiftieth year of having graduated from there.  That was in the '50s [1950s], something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Was there any particular instructor or teacher that, that helped you?
Speaker 2: Sister, Sister John Francis probably was the one that stood out with me because when I went back the first time, she said, well, it wasn't my first time.  I went back when I was with the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  He had me to come back to speak.  And she was sitting there with a regular dress on.  It was, when nuns start, stop wearing all the garb.   And so I just kept looking at her.  And I said, "Sister John Francis, I never thought I'd see you in, in a, in a regular dress."  And she just chuckled.  She said, she said, "I'm using some of the techniques I taught you."  She said, "Can you see that I'm sitting appropriately?"  You know, she was--and we had a lot of chuckles.  She said, "Do you remember when I had you to make a family tree?"  I said, "You know what?  I don't remember that.  But my father [Edward Johnson] remembered."  He kept saying, "Get that family tree we put together when you were in school."  And I said, "I never remember doing it."  But I said, "Must be true because he kept asking me about it."  And I don't think I ever, unless I turned it in for classwork, I don't think I ever got it back.  But, but my father just kept asking me about it.  And when she brought it up, that's the first time that it became a reality to me, 'cause I didn't remember doing it.  But that was, you know, several years after I graduated that that came up.  But, I still go back and, and when they put our name tags together, they put the maiden name, that's the only way you, you was able, you know, we all look very different now.  And, I've lost quite a few of my, my little roommate has died since I have been here in [U.S.] Congress.  She had seven children.  She was Irish and her husband was Hungarian.  Just a wonderful couple.  I used to go back and stay with them a lot.  But I have a lot of good memories.  And, and periodically, I'll get a letter from someone that said, you know, "My mother was in school with you." And that sort of thing.  Got one not too long ago, and this girl moved to Dallas [Texas] and said that her mother was in school with me.  And she was told to look me up when she moved to Dallas.  And so, it, it's different than my older sister [Sallye Johnson Moore] who went to a historically black college [HBCU].  She has had much closer range of friends around her that she was in college with, that they keep in touch with and mine are all distant.  But, but I've made a number of visits back with my family and alone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have good memories and, and, and no regrets.
Story_ID: 640243
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were, were race relations different in Indiana than they were in Texas?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought so.  Now, the interesting thing that happened, the first time that my parents came to see me.  Of course, they drove almost nonstop from Waco [Texas] to South Bend because there were very few places that they could stop.  And so when they got there, I had been up on the Lake Michigan dunes.  We were celebrating graduating, and I came back into South Bend and they had arrived and they were hungry.  I had gotten a place for them to, to stay.  And we went to a little restaurant that we all would go together.  And we sat there and waited, and waited, and finally I said, "Is something wrong?  They're not waiting on us."  And this lady came over, and she said, "I'm sorry.  We can't wait--."  This is South Bend, Indiana.  She said, "We can't wait on you."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I come here all the time with my classmates."  And she said, "I'm just sorry.  I can't do it."  And I was just shocked.  That's the only time that I had something like that happen to me in Indiana.  But I would go there all the time with my classmates and it was never a question.  But when I went there with my family, they did not serve us.
Speaker 1: There was too many there then?
Speaker 2: It was my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson], father [Edward Johnson] and my younger sister [Lee Johnson Willis] and brother [Carl Johnson].  And they did not serve us.  But I had never experienced it, because that was their first trip there, and I was always with classmates, and you know, when I went out like that.  We didn't, we didn't go off campus [Saint Mary's College] that much because Notre Dame [Indiana] had everything you needed and, you know, you just liked to get away.  And that was, that was a strong reality of the South.
Story_ID: 640244
Speaker 1: So the degree you earned was a practical nursing degree?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was in a degree program [at Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana].  But when I passed the bar, the boards, become a registered nurse, I just didn't finish.  I finished it later at TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas].  I, when I passed the boards, I, when I took the boards, I was, I went ahead and registered.  But I got my notice that I had passed everything, I decided to go home for a visit.  When I went home, I just didn't come back, and I stayed.  And, and I got my degree about ten years later, I guess.  But I went, you know, I went on to work, married [Lacey Kirk Johnson], and went on to work.
Speaker 1: So, so where did you work?  I mean, where did you work?
Speaker 2: I worked at the VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System] in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's--
Speaker 2: I, applied--
Speaker 1: I probably should go back then and say, so, so you planned to get married after graduation?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and this is your high school sweetheart that was in--
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: No. When I graduated and came home, I didn't, I really only stayed like a week or so.  And at that time I, it kind of changed.  We're still friends, but we didn't marry.  And, and I went back and worked up there 'til I got the results and then I moved back to Waco [Texas] and applied to work at the VA Hospital [Waco VA Hospital; Doris Miller Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center].  But my father [Edward Johnson] was working there, and it was only one service, and so it was a rule that two members of the same family couldn't work in the same service.  They only had one service.  So that's when I went to Dallas.  And so I--
Speaker 1: Did you know anybody in Dallas?
Speaker 2: No.  Not really.  I have a relative now and then, but not really.  I didn't, I, but see, in my nursing, my course work was there in South Bend [Indiana].  But your experience was in different places.  I went to Indianapolis [Indiana] for pediatrics.  For medicine, I went to Anderson, Indiana.  For rural public health, I went to Jacksonville, Illinois.  For psychiatric, I went to Louisville, Kentucky.  And we had to get ourselves to these affiliations and back, so I'd gotten accustomed to kind of looking out for myself and travelling.  But my father had a distant relative who had a real estate company.  And we went to, we had applied to live in the dormitory at the VA Hospital.  And when I got there, they discovered I was black, 'cause you couldn't tell it if you didn't have a picture.  Because my transcript didn't indicate it.  And so the--suddenly, the dormitories were full.  And so they went ahead and put me on the payroll and they said, "Now, you know, when you find a place, you can come back."  Well, I knew by then that if they were going to put me on the payroll, and give me time to find a place, that something was strange about it.  But, I went on back to Waco and I did arrange to live with a lady, rented a room that my father's distant cousin knew of.  And I went on back to Waco and worked for two weeks and was on the payroll there.
Story_ID: 640245
Speaker 1: I made the money, I worked at the hospital in Waco [Waco VA Hospital; Doris Miller Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Waco, Texas], and I made the money that they were paying me 'til I found somewhere to live. But I went on to work there, and as a matter of fact, this past, about two weeks ago, they gave me a plaque out there for being the first professional African American nurse they hired.  And, of course, black history month, they were celebrating black women or something.  And so I kind of chuckled because when I started to work there, I was nineteen years old.  I wasn't old enough to vote yet, you had to be twenty-one then.  I was very slim, and I guess looked young.  And I had more patients that wanted to know if I was really a registered nurse and all, but I, I stayed through it.  And I have never been anywhere where I was not among the smartest.  And so that part didn't bother me.  I knew I knew my, my field and my work.  As a matter of fact, I wrote a lot of the regulations and stuff there and then, then did the same thing in the Catholic hospital there.  So, I just, I wasn't really threatened.  Sometimes I'd go into a ward and they'd say, "We gonna move you over to this other ward for the evening."  When some patients would question whether or not I had the right credentials, 'course I looked like a kid to them.  But, and so, I just got tired of it.  So I went out to the chief nurse one day and I said, "You know," I said, "I'm gonna leave."  I said, "I just, I don't know if I can take this."  And she said, "Please, don't."  She said, "You have no idea what kind of road you're paving for your people.  So please stay."
Story_ID: 640246
Speaker 1: So I stayed, and I actually met my husband on a blind date.  I was--one of the men that worked there knew him.  They were fraternity brothers and he introduced me, introduced us.  And so we started to date.  And I guess we dated about, over a year before we got married.  But--
Speaker 2: Now where was he from?  Where was your husband from?
Speaker 1: He was in Dallas [Texas] at the time.  He was teaching, but his father was a minister.  So he was born in Ottawa, Oklahoma [Ottawa County, Oklahoma], had been to school in a little place called (unclear) Texas in Texarkana, Texas, where he finished high school.  And then his family moved to Dallas.  His father was a college professor and a minister.
Speaker 2: What was his name?  What was your husband's name?
Speaker 1: My husband's name?  His name was Lacey Kirk Johnson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And his father was David Edwin, Edwin Johnson [David Johnson].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this was in 1956?  Is that correct?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  All right.  So, so you had, you started, you got married and you had some children, right?
Speaker 1: I had one son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson].
Speaker 2: One son?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Born in 1958, and now he's married and has three sons.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so you weren't, you weren't working during that period of time, I guess?  Or were you?
Speaker 1: Well, I worked, I worked as a nurse until, until I got pregnant.  And then I stopped working until after my son was born.  I guess he was probably eight or ten months old when I went back to work.
Story_ID: 640247
Speaker 1: Were you paying very much attention to the politics in the State of Texas in those days?
Speaker 2: I was a volunteer, but I really, not so much in politics.  I used to get off from work and volunteer to inoculate kids from TB [tuberculosis] and gave out polio vaccines, and helped with glaucoma screening.  I was just kind of a nei- volunteer.  I was kind of like my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson].  Heart association [American Heart Association], that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were very many, in the black community, were black people still primarily Republicans then, or were they Democrats in Texas?
Speaker 2: No, they were Democrats.  Now, when I was in school [Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana], it was a predominantly Republican area.  So I came home telling my family that I was a Republican.  Of course, I wasn't even old enough to vote then.  I remember the first president that I was able to vote for was in 1960.  And my mother-in-law [Ila Walker Johnson] was at my house, and there was a Time magazine with Kennedy's [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] picture on the cover, and I had an Ebony magazine that had Nixon's [Richard Milhous Nixon] picture on the cover dancing with some African people.  So I said, "I'm just trying to make up my mind which one to vote for."  And my mother-in-law looked at me and she said, "Honey," she said, "just take it from me.  In a few years, you'll not even want to see nobody that's named a Republican."  I said, "Oh, I don't know."  I said, "He seems to like blacks."  And I had seen Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] when I was a student and shook his hand.  And I just, you know, he was the president and I just--
Speaker 1: Oh.  Was he at Notre Dame [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He came there and, oh, I just thought that was--so I said, "Yeah, I'm a Republican." So she said, "When you go in there, when you go in there to vote, you better vote for this man."  And I have a picture of her sitting there with that magazine in her hand.   And I think about that and say, "Oh god.  How naive was I?"
Speaker 1: In those days though, from what I remember, there were quite a few black folks that were still Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln].  Now my father's brother was a Republican all the way up until I ran for office.  And that's the only time he switched.  Because I was a Democrat. But yeah, a lot of blacks, I didn't, the party wasn't really discussed that much back then.  And I didn't think that much about it, but my father's brother lived in Oklahoma and he said, "Well, baby," he said, "I'm Republican."  I said, "Republican?"  And so, he said, "Well, I'll switch for you."  But he said, "You know, that's the party of Lincoln."  And then that's, and most of the blacks here that were elected before the 1900s were, were black Republicans right here in [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: Now in the South in those days, and Texas is considered a southern state--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, most of the politicians that were controlled--well it was going on with Democrats, right?  And what they called the Dixiecrats in those days?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 640248
Speaker 1: But you all had a--kind of a different Democratic leader in Texas, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], right?  Who was a little bit different.  Is that the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um--
Speaker 1: Is that true?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well I, I got a chance to know Lyndon Johnson on a personal basis.  His family was very, very supportive of me.  And I'm still very close to his daughters [Lynda Bird Johnson Robb and Luci Baines Johnson].  I was close to Mrs. Johnson [Lady Bird Johnson] as well.  As a matter of fact, I had just seen him the day he had that heart attack.
Speaker 1: Well, I want to go back to when you were, back in the '60s [1960s], you know, just before you--
Speaker 2: The '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Nineteen sixty [1960].  So you, did you, were you aware of them then?  I mean as a politician?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I became aware of Lyndon Johnson.  I worked as a volunteer in his campaign, but I was also working for the government.  So I wouldn't do too much partisan stuff.  But I was still active with school board elections and (unclear) elections.  I was always involved, civically, but during the days of desegregation.  What they call open accommodations.  I always volunteer--  I was always the youngest one of my peers, and my bridge club members used to tease me.  But I always felt an obligation to do volunteer work.  So during the time we were going through desegregation, I worked on a committee that was made up of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], National Council of Jewish Women, National Council of Christian Women [sic.], kind of the leaders of the heads of different organizations.  And we would dialogue around the city on how to approach open accommodations.  And I remember one night, we were in a meeting, and sometimes I started the meeting.  The police would stop wanting to know why I'm in their neighborhood.  But the three people that were killed in Mississippi were found one night that we, while we were in the meeting.  It came over the news that they had been found murdered.
Speaker 1: This is 1964 you're talking about?
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Goodman [Andrew Goodman], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], and Chaney [James Chaney]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and we stopped and held hands and did a little prayer and everything.  But we, we began to try to open and study the venue.  But we, as we would go and visit these restaurant owners and everything, you know, everybody was saying that they were open.  But what we would discover, we discovered once that in one restaurant, they had one menu for whites, and one for blacks.  And the menu for blacks had ten dollars added to every, every price.  And it was that kind of thing that we would try to work out.  Well, frankly, the first downtown store that opened was Neiman Marcus.  And it was the most exclusive store downtown Dallas [Texas].  As a matter of fact, later it was Marcus' that provided me the opportunity to run for office.  But during that time, most of our major stores, Dallas has always been a city with a lot of money.  Most of those downtown stores were family owned.  Vogue [ph.], Sangers [Sanger Brothers; Sanger-Harris], Titche [Titche-Goettinger], A. Harris [A. Harris and Company; Sanger-Harris], very exclusive stores.  And we just didn't seem to be able to get a solid commitment.  So I went, I along with several other women, well we were active in the YWCA and membership drives and all.  We organized a fifty sensitive black women, and we decided that we would test these stores to see if they were open.  When they were not open, we sent the word out that we were boycotting.
Story_ID: 640249
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you had like kind of a de facto segregation in Dallas [Texas] where people claimed that you could--
Speaker 2: They didn't tell you, you couldn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: But you could sense it when you go into a store.  And so, but that cracked it, because we decided that we were going to boycott any store that did not allow you to look at clothing on--you go in these stores, and they would sit you in a fitting room, and they'd bring you what they wanted you to see.  You couldn't go in and go through the racks.
Speaker 1: Browse yourself?
Speaker 2: You couldn't try on shoes in A. Harris [A. Harris and Company; Sanger-Harris].  The reason I knew about this because I decided--I was gonna be in my roommate's wedding back at the University of Notre Dame [Notre Dame, Indiana].  And I went in, remember I was Catholic, so I went in to buy me a little hat and some shoes.  And I've always liked things of quality.  Well, I went in this store, and they sent me to another store.  And so I went on, then I was looking for a little hat.  And then I went put, to try the hat on, and the lady said, "Oh, I'm sorry."  She said, "I'll try it on for you."  I said, "I don't want to see how it looks on you.  I want to see how it looks on me."  So she grabbed a piece of paper and put it up there and so--
Speaker 1: Inside of the hat?  To line the hat?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, but I was in a hurry.  I was gonna leave and fly back to South Bend [Indiana].  And, but when I came back to Dallas [Texas], I said, "Something's wrong here."  I said, "I never--." Even in Waco [Texas] I didn't experience that.  But you know, I might not have been in that category of things.  But you know, I was, I've al- my parents [Lillie Mae White Johnson and Edward Johnson] like quality and I always liked quality.  So I went to the best stores, I grew up going to the best stores.
Story_ID: 640250
Speaker 1: Do you mind if I backtrack a bit to '63 [1963] before we get finished with the story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --of '64 [1964]?  Now what are your recollections of the assassination of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in Dallas [Texas]?  You were there in Dallas, right?  When he was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was working--
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], 1963.
Speaker 2: --as a nurse.  They had just opened a psychiatric unit, which isn't my specialty, at the Dallas VA Hospital [VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas].  And we all knew that the president was coming to the city.  And as a matter of fact, the, my, my secretary on that ward had been married to a congressman.  And they were neighbors with the Kennedys.  So I had met him for the first time when he came down to visit Sam Rayburn, when Sam Rayburn was ill, and he ran over to visit with her.  She was Cole [ph.], and she married a Wallace [ph.].  But she was originally from, she was originally from Texas.  She finished at TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas], but she married a man from Iowa.  And her last name was Cole, he was a congressman.  That's all I remember.  Anyways, they were divorced, she moved to Dallas because that was coming back close to home after the divorce.  And that's how I met Kennedy.  He came to Dallas to visit Sam Rayburn when he was hospitalized.
Speaker 1: Now Sam Rayburn was the speaker of the house, right?
Speaker 2: Speaker of the house.
Speaker 1: In this building [Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, D.C.] that we're in right now, as a matter of fact?
Speaker 2: That's right, it was named for him.  And that's the only time that I had ever been that close to any Democratic president, at that time.  'Cause I had, had met Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] earlier.  But anyway, we knew the president was coming to the city and it was a Friday.  And our patient, we had patients to go out on weekend leaves.  And so we were very, very careful about who we were letting go out that weekend because we knew the president was gonna be in town.  When we had let some of the people go, and I was walking down the hall and someone came and said, "Come into the day room."  The day room was a big, open recreation center area that had a big television.  So I went in and they said, "Look, there's the president."  And then, "Oh, something's happened."  "The president got shot."  And that's the first, the only time in my life I remember fainting.  And the only thing I could remember is that I just started sliding down the wall.  And, and then the next thing I knew, they were giving me--and so I said, "Oh God."  I said, "It can't be a patient who did it.  It just cannot be one of our patients."  And that's all I could think about, because a psychiatric patient.  And then that night, we weren't sure what to do.  I went home, my, I had, my son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson] was born, he was in daycare.  My husband [Lacey Kirk Johnson] picked him up and we went downtown and stood right across from that old red jail where they were supposed to be bringing Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald] down.  We stood there most of the night, but he never came.  And so they called me back to work, because what they did is called all the people who had been working that Friday.  Just worked through the weekend.  And so I had to work through that weekend, so I went to work.  And the next, the next day as soon as I got off from work, we went downtown again.  Just didn't know what to do with ourselves.  And I had to go to work that Sunday morning, so my son and husband went on down again.  And then I was the one who saw Oswald get shot before--they were standing down there and didn't see it.
Speaker 1: So you were actually in the--?
Speaker 2: I was living, you know, right there.  It was just the most devastating experience.
Story_ID: 640251
Speaker 1: So you weren't in the--you saw it on television, or did you see it--?
Speaker 2: Well I saw, what I saw on television when Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald] was shot.  And when my husband [Lacey Kirk Johnson] and son were down there waiting for them to bring him down to this jail.  Now, just, people were just everywhere standing because nobody knew what to do, it was just such a shock.  People did not know what to do with themselves.  And so that morning, I kept calling my house, and finally, that afternoon he answered.  And I said, "I was trying to call you because I saw where Oswald was shot."  And so he said, "Really?"  He said, "We just kept waiting, and finally, I just told Kirk [Dawrence Kirk Johnson], 'Let's just go home.'"  And he hadn't heard it at the time.  He said they said something about, "He won't be coming."  And they were standing across from the jail they was supposed to been bringing him to.  And he says all they said to him was that, "He's not coming, you can go home."  And so they came home, and I told him, I said, "He was shot, that's why."  They didn't have the technology they have, have now.  I couldn't text him or anything like that.  And so, and I came home early, and we sit there and watch a black and white television.  And I remember sitting there and started to cry, and my baby came over and he said, "Mommy, don't cry.  Look, there he is.  He's on the television.  He's not dead.  There he is."  And you know, he, he would see him.  They would show clips of him doing certain things and, and but he was a, he's a, you know, old, full grown man now.  Been married twenty-eight years.  But he was just a baby, you know, a little kid then.  But it was, for the longest time, I think the City of Dallas [Texas] carried such a heavy burden over that murder.  But the paper that day fed right into it.  You know, there was a full-page ad, anti-Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] that day.  And, and where, where Oswald lived, we lived in the same, same part of town where he rented a room.  And we passed that house and looked at it.  As a matter of fact, that, that sign, "Room for Rent," stayed out there kind of like a monument for years.  It might be still out there, I don't know, I haven't seen it for a while.  But for years and years, it was there.  But the city, the City of Dallas in its own internal hurt, really carried that burden, and to a large degree, still carry it.  But it did stimulate a lot of dialogue between different groups.  And, and we started our goal, our goals for Dallas.  And, and I participated in where they, people from all parts of the community came together and set goals to have a more compatible, happy city and it touched every area, environment, everything, education.  And ultimately, I had my own goals for black Dallas and, and they incorporated into that, but the goals for Dallas went on, oh, ten or fifteen years.  Where every year, or every other year, they'd have a review and update them.  And, and it's kind of a citizen participation thing.  And it was well funded through contributions.  And I think out of that, a lot of the attitudes in Dallas began to change.  And it kind of became a can do type city, where there was more involvement with people, more effort to pay attention to people's complaints.  I still, even since that time, we have talked about, Dallas never had a riot.  Never had an uprising.  And we've said that maybe that was an opportunity missed because the healing from racial disturbance was always quelled by a lot of the leaders coming out of the community and kind of quieting it down and what have you.
Story_ID: 640252
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the other leaders in those days?  Now you, you were volunteering, and we were talking before we took the break, about the attempt to desegregate the department stores and to make them fair and what was there and--was any of the well known civil rights organizations involved in that effort?
Speaker 2: Well actually--
Speaker 1: Like CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: --it was just a group of us, kind of adlibbed the--we had the, our meeting place was the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  Yvonne, Yvonne Ewell was one of the people that now has a school named for her there in Dallas [Texas], Imelda Brooks [ph.].  She, she died kind of early, so I don't know if there's anything.  Marion Dillard who was one of the leading, civic leaders in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, but the name of the organization?  You didn't have a name?
Speaker 2: We just, it was just, we just called Fifty Sensitive Black Women [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure they ever got up to fifty, but that was our goal.
Speaker 1: Fifty Sensitive Black Women.  Now did any of you all go down for the March on Washington the summer before Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: I did not.  I don't, I don't, I don't remember that any woman did.  I think we had, there were several men from the city who did.
Speaker 1: I wrote down Fifty Sensitive Black Women, it was fifty sensitive women, right?
Speaker 2: Fifty Sensitive Black Women with that group.  Now there was another group that I worked that was very mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was, see, during this time, there was a fourteen man committee.  And so there were women who were saying that we can be involved too.  So we made our own committee.  But the fourteen man committee was seven blacks and seven whites.  See, at that time, it was a black and white society in Dallas.  Now it's one of the most diverse communities now in the nation.  But back during that time, it was black and white.  And the original group that I worked with made up of representatives from the National Council of Jewish Women, National Council of Church Women, the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and there was a Greek woman, a Greek American they worked with.  It was seven, seven of us, and each of us represented something.  I know the, the executive director of the YWCA was kind of a mentor with me.  And she was the one that brought me in.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Marion Dillard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Marion Dillard?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was the youngest one, and my, and I belonged to a bridge club and sometimes I'd have to miss my bridge club and they would tease me about hanging out with old women during that time.  But I still keep touch with my old bridge members, bridge club members.
Speaker 1: So you all did some testing in these stores, and what was the outcome?  The final outcome?
Speaker 2: Well they opened them up.  They, they opened the stores and, and made us welcome because they could feel the pinch of us not shopping.
Speaker 1: So the boycott, you said the boycott?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, so how, how, how long did it take to--
Speaker 2: It took a while because I remember we had, and, and that was, that was like '59 [1959], '60 [1960], '61 [1961].  Because in the process, we moved to another neighborhood in like that January in '60 [1960], and we had started just before then.  And we kept it up.  Because I remember one day, we, there was a black newspaper [Dallas Weekly].  The guy who owned it was Tony Davis, and we got him to send a photographer so that any black person going into one of those stores, we wanted their picture in the paper.  And that's how we were able to discipline everybody to stay out of those stores because they didn't want to see their picture in the paper.  And, but it absolutely closed some of those stores.  But, you know, it did open up after that.
Story_ID: 640253
Speaker 1: But the first one that gave notice that they had opened was Neiman Marcus.  And that was the most exclusive store downtown [Dallas, Texas].  The original Neiman Marcus was--
Speaker 2: And that was the newest one, you said?  Downtown too?
Speaker 1: That, that was, that was, that the, the first Neiman Marcus store.  And the Marcus family, you know, lived right there.  And now, you know, Carrie Neiman was the, was the Carrie Marcus Neiman, and she was the sister to Stanley Marcus' father [Herbert Marcus, Sr.], that started Neiman Marcus.  And, and ironically, later it was Stanley Marcus who gave me a job so I could run for office, because I had to leave the VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas] working for the government.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is 19--you said '59 [1959], '60 [1960], '61 [1961] that all this was going on?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then on into '62 [1962], '63 [1963]?  Did you all work on housing or any of the other issues in the city?
Speaker 1: You know, we didn't, we did, we did work on school desegregation.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm just going--it could have been, we didn't really have a housing policy, but I remember that Maceo Smith [A. Maceo Smith] worked for HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and he was one of the leaders there.  He started, as a matter of fact, it was Maceo Smith who started the Urban League [Dallas Urban League, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And black chamber [Dallas Negro Chamber of Commerce; Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce].  And he was, he and his wife [Fannie Fletcher Smith] were kind of mentors to me.  He was an early civil rights person.  And they were well established when I got there.  He was a fraternity brother to my husband [Lacey Kirk Johnson].  And we got to be quite close with that.
Speaker 2: This is Maceo Smith?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] involved there, in any of this?
Speaker 1: The NAACP was, they kind of stood ready to bring lawsuits and that sort of thing.  Back during that time, the majority of professionals in Dallas [Texas] were teachers.  And if you were a teacher, you couldn't belong to the NAACP. And I remember that our membership for our family was through my name 'cause I was not a teacher.
Speaker 2: Now why is that?  Why was that true?
Speaker 1: Well, racism.  They didn't, didn't want you to have, I guess, some kind of civil rights connection.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just trying to be direct.  So what you're saying is that if you were a teacher, and you belonged to the NAACP, the school board would check and see?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You--
Speaker 2: And then you could be fired?  Is that it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the thought.  I don't know if anybody got fired, but I know this.  My husband was a teacher and he did not belong.  But we paid my member- our membership, family membership through me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Also at that time, a husband and wife could not both work for the Dallas Independent School District, so that's, when I first started working there as a young nurse, most of the aides at the hospital were black men with college degrees.  Their white counterparts had three, third and fourth, fifth grade education, working right alongside these college degreed people.  But that was the government job they could have while their wives taught school.  And I was fortunate that, you know, I never taught.  My husband taught on up through until he left and went to a federal job.  But you know, when you think about it, you really, it, you recall how restrictive everything was.
Story_ID: 640254
Speaker 1: Now, in 1966, Barbara Jordan was elected to the Texas Legislature.  And I'm, that's what I have here.  So did, did you know her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I knew Barbara quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Barbara ran for the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives] twice and lost.  And then Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], she was a volunteer for Lyndon Johnson, and he told them he wanted a seat made for her for the Texas Senate.  So she went to the Texas Senate.  She was the first black since Reconstruction to go to the Texas Senate.  The year that I won in a Texas House is 1972, is when she came to [U.S.] Congress.  And again, it was Lyndon Johnson who said, "Make her a seat."  And redistricting so she could have a congressional seat.
Story_ID: 640255
Speaker 1: Did, did Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] presence as the president of the United States from, you know, sixty--fall of '63 [1963] through '68 [1968] help, you know, the civil rights struggle there in Texas?  I mean, well, in Texas? Not here, but in Texas (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes.  In the nation, he did.  He was very scorned by it in Texas, but he took some pretty strong stance.  You know, he, during the, he's the one responsible for the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  For the, the, he helped with the first redistricting in, in Texas.  So a lot of the civil rights legislation, the common way that it's put in Texas is that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] laid the ground work and Johnson did the work.  Because Kennedy was not president long enough to get too much done.  With Johnson following him, implemented most of what most people thought Kennedy would have with the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], Voting Rights Act, and then enforcement.  Sending troops to Little Rock [Arkansas], and Alabama, and University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] and all that.  And so, you know, civil rights has been a struggle all of my life.  There are times when you'd think that, 21st century, and not a lot has changed.  A lot has changed, but attitudinally there's still overt racism.  And some of the changes have come quietly and suddenly until you really have to think back to realize the change really has come. (Pause)  You know, I had a, my, my she was a classmate, high school classmate [at A.J. Moore High School, Waco, Texas] I believe to my sister [Sallye Johnson Moore], maybe a year ahead of her.  Whose husband was murdered in either Mississippi or Alabama, during the, back during the time of Medgar Evers.  And you know, to know what some of the people have gone through.  I went through a lot of stuff myself, but it was nothing as brutal as being, having your house bombed, and all the things that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went through.  Some of the things that happened with me, well on my job as a nurse.  The VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas] from downtown is nine or ten miles.  And when I was a young nurse there, mostly before I married.  I was riding a bus back and forth, and the shifts were like 3:30 to 12, 12 to 8, kind of a little overlap.  And, and sometimes the nurses would come on to relieve me would purposefully be late because they knew the last bus that went downtown was 12:05.  And I remember having to walk from that VA Hospital all the way downtown.  I wouldn't do it now, it'd be too dangerous, but back during that time, because I didn't have any other way to get home.  And when I think about how cruel that was, 'cause they knew that I had to catch that bus.  But I just went ahead and did it.  And that's when one day I said, "I'm not gonna do this anymore."  And I went down to talk to the chief nurse, and she said, "Please don't leave."
Story_ID: 640256
Speaker 1: So I stayed, but I got an aide that was Latino, Alberto Gonzalez.  And we decided that we were gonna change some stuff out at that hospital.  And we sat and wrote policies.  And at that time, the regional office was in St. Louis [Missouri], and we'd write all that stuff up and mail it to St. Louis.  And then one day one of the, since the hospital administrator called me in and had every bit of it.  They showed that they sent it back to him.  And he said, "You do this?"  I said, "I sure did."  And so he said, "Well, we gonna try to make some changes."  And so they did send in some new administrators.  And I worked with them and I, I wrote the, the civil rights, the affirmative action statement policy, and you know, when after I left there, went into office, I went back to visit and look at that book.  They had that same policy.  They had just gone and put somebody else's name.  And so I, I tease him a lot because the, the assistant hospital administrator was from Maine.  And, and, and we kept in touch and we made new friends up until his death.  He has a son that lives in Dallas [Texas] now.  Lives in DeSoto [Texas] that I keep in touch with.  But those were some trying days.  But we did make a difference.  I helped organize a union at the VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas], but I couldn't belong to it because I was part of the administration.  But we needed it.  And they celebrated about a thirty-fifth or fortieth anniversary here not long ago.  But we, we did change a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So both, both personally and organizationally, you were able to make it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Challenging process.
Speaker 1: Well, and I think it was through that effort, and through doing the civic work.  Because they would put sheets up and ask for volunteers to do certain things, and I'd sign up.  And then some, and two or three times they'd come and say, "Nobody come and signed up but you.  We scared to send you because it's in a white area."  And so, I'd say, "Okay.  Fine."  But, it was, it was civic work and doing things like that, that I started being encouraged to run for public office.
Story_ID: 640257
Speaker 1: How did you, I mean, can you remember when you first met Barbara Jordan?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I met Barbara Jordan back when she was in the Texas Senate.  And the one thing that I remembered about her was she'd gone through this speech training.  And when you would, you know, you would talk with her on a one on one basis, and you'd get one tone.  And when she was speaking publicly, you got this other tone.  And--
Speaker 1: So she didn't talk like that all the time?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, you know, if she was speaking publicly she did.  Her speech trainer, I don't know.  He might be still living, I don't know.  But he was down at TSU, Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  But Barbara and I had a very connected relationship, I'd say.  When she came to [U.S.] Congress, I went to the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives].  And she would have me as a, as kind of a little consultant on the scene.  She'd say, "Eddie Bernice [HistoryMaker Eddie Bernice Johnson] I need you."  Or, "Check out so and so."  And I'd check out organizations, and she would be trying to determine whether she was gonna take a speaking engagement or something.  And I'd kind of do the little research and, and we'd talk back and forth about it.  She was a very, very private person.  You had to kind of be in her little inner circle to get to really know her.  She was a lot of fun, told a lot of jokes, and the biggest association that, in, in the Democratic Party, we'd go to these various conventions.  And, and at that time, you know, blacks considered her Uncle Tom, you know.
Speaker 1: Now I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: You didn't?  All you gotta do is talk to a few Texans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Al Lipscomb--
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was when she was in the Texas Senate, you were saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or I mean the--in [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I just want to make sure we get a date for it, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It, it was, I got, I got to know her before she came to Congress.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Through Democratic Party stuff.
Speaker 1: And that would be around what?  Nineteen--what?
Speaker 2: She came here in the election of '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that, that's the same year I went to the Texas House.  She came to the U.S. House [U.S. House of Representatives] when I went to the Texas House.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at conventions, some of the more militant voices would always be trying to push me to replace her in certain positions.  "We need a real person."  And, and I wouldn't do that.  I had great respect for her, but there were little plays in Texas.  That would depict her, as that, "I'm Barbara Jordan.  I represent the oil industry of Texas."  They teased her because, I won't say tease, but whatever you want to call it.  She would, she would vote with the big business.  But I can tell you this, when she, she's the person who plays the Latino protection for voting.  During the reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] in 1975, she, she put in the law for the Latinos in Texas to be protected the same as, as blacks.  And Bentsen [Lloyd Bentsen] carried it in the Senate, and that was one of the first pieces of legislation that minorities saw her giving the minorities attention.
Story_ID: 640258
Speaker 1: So, no I didn't realize that, I mean, well, I know the perception of Barbara Jordan on television, she had a very stiff, formal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --demeanor.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you think about it, during the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]--
Speaker 1: The Watergate hearings you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Was it Watergate when she said, when the [U.S.] Constitution was written?  Well, that's what she became known for, you know, all over the country.  And, and I sure don't want to be a person that would knock her, but her image in Texas among blacks, they don't talk about it too much.  But it was different than the rest of the world, than what the rest of the nation saw.  It was nothing, I remember in 1974, there was a national convention to rewrite the charter of the Democratic Party.  And we begged Barbara to help us get some language, and to make sure there was black representation at all levels.  And she said to us, "Blacks are represented.  I'm here."  And you know, little things like that.  But, would be the talk in the circle.  But she was never one that wanted to be pin holed as a black.  And so, but on a one on one basis when we would talk back and forth, she never wanted to speak at an all black audience.  So if she got an engagement or invitation, she'd call me and say, "Check, check this out.  See who is gonna be there.  What--."   And we maintained that relationship, both distant and close.  We were not social peers, but professionally, we were pretty close, her--and her family was aware of that.
Story_ID: 640259
Speaker 1: Now she [Barbara Jordan], she did have a, a lot of people in the black community just loved to hear her speak about, you know, quote the [U.S.] Constitution, and all this kind of things.  But I guess it's a different--I mean, there are all different ways of perceiving somebody that's doing that.  Well, okay.  I'll just leave it at that.  Now the, what about Mickey Leland?  You know--
Speaker 2: Mickey and I went into office together.  And we were as close as sisters and brother.  As a matter of fact, at his mother's [Alice Lewis Rains] home, there was a room they always called my room.  We did a lot of stuff to open up Texas together.  And actually there were, we had a foursome.  It was Mickey Leland, Craig Washington, Benny [Benny Reyes], what was Benny's, Benny's last name?  Benny was Hispanic, and me.  And we challenged every system in Texas.  And we, we did pretty well.  We used to say Mickey, Mickey was the one out front.  I was the den mother.  Craig was the brain.  Craig was a very, very sharp attorney.  We all went to office together.  Craig is the person who replaced him when he got killed.  And, but we were very, very close.  We would go to state hospitals unannounced at midnight, check the conditions, report it.  We went to prisons unannounced, we stayed, we both stayed on the witness stand twelve or thirteen hours back in, probably the '80s [1980s].  We changed the Texas prison system.  Course, he was up here [Washington, D.C.] then.  I was still, I was in the Texas Senate, but we testified for my experience of having gone to see the conditions in these prisons.
Speaker 1: So you'd make surprise visits to prisons then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we spent, we spent many, many days and nights looking at state systems and demanding that they clean it up, and higher education.  We, we filed complaints with the justice department.  I filed on behalf of women of Texas.  Paul Raines [ph.], now he's now dead, he was the first--he filed on behalf of blacks; and Benny filed on behalf of Latinos.
Story_ID: 640260
Speaker 1: And the one, the one that was, that came through first, the decision, was with the women.  And with the comptroller's office.  They didn't have a single face of color, and had about three women, with all these employees was state comptroller.  And he'd been the state comptroller for years.  He was almost ninety years old then.  Anyway, the justice department ruled on my behalf and he, he said, "Who is that nigger woman?"  And that statement went all over the world.  I got mail from all over the world.  It was when Dolph Briscoe was governor.  I went down to the capitol [Texas State Capitol, Austin, Texas] and had a press conference and asked him to call a special session so he could be impeached.  And he was just, the governor was just standing on his feet trembling.  "Don't, please don't do that.  Please don't do that.  We'll, we'll work this out."  Well, he did retire.  He retired, that comptroller.  But, we ended up getting to be very good friends.  He was just an old timer from a bad, a racist mind.  And he'd, "Just tell me what you want.  Women, they can make coffee."  I said, "Listen," I said, "women can do anything you can do."  I said, "You gonna have to set up a program here to bring women in.  To do a professional job."  And he, he could not even get his head in that direction.  But he did the best he could in trying, but he retired.  And it was, well, I had talked to Bob Bullock, who ended up being the lieutenant governor.  He's the one who helped George Bush [President George Walker Bush] through.  I talked him into running for comptroller.  And when he announced Jesse James retired, and so, and Bullock pretty much got a free ride for comptroller.  But he, he told, he totally changed that agency.  It was like day and night that he changed that agency to make it more diverse.  And from that point he ran for lieutenant governor and he was, he was running for comptroller in seventy--'77 [1977].  'Cause I remember I had left the statehouse [Texas House of Representatives] and taken a job with the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  I went back to stand with him when he announced.  And he was, he was just the opposite of Calvert [Robert S. Calvert].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the previous comptroller, Calvert?  That's the one who said, "Who is this N woman?"  Right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Jesse James had been the treasurer.  We did away with state treasurer under Ann Richards. When Ann ran for state treasurer and suggested it be done away with.  They didn't need a treasurer and a comptroller both.  And, and when she got to be governor, they did away with that office.  Kay Bailey Hutchison was the last person to serve as state treasurer.
Story_ID: 640261
Speaker 1: Now, I did not ask you, I got sidelined with the Barbara Jordan story.  But I did not ask you how you got involved with politics as a candidate and that sort of thing, so?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, from my volunteer work, the first person that mentioned to me about running for public office was the wife of a former mayor of Dallas [Texas] who had become a congressman.  Her name was Dearie Cabell [Elizabeth Cabell] and he was Earle Cabell.  The federal building is named for him in Dallas now.
Speaker 1: That's Campbell?
Speaker 2: Cabell.  C-A-B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she sent one of his assistants out to my office at the VA [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas].  And said, he said, "Dearie came and told me to come out here and tell you that you ought to think about public office."  I'd done all this little civic stuff.  And I said, "Public office?"  I said, "There's no way I'm running for public office."  I said, "I'm just getting a divorce."  And so he said, "Well, she's serious now."  And I just kind of laughed it off, and then he just kept coming and mentioning it to me.  And that same, later that year, which that had to be '71 [1971], they came to me and asked if I would help to raise money to bring a lawsuit against single member districts.  So I collected money from door to door to help to raise the money where we could bring that lawsuit.  Then after we were able to get the districts, I served on a screening committee where we were going to screen candidates.  And we had, the first black state representative, was Joseph Lockridge who was killed in a plane crash.  And the interesting thing about that, he was getting ready to come back to Dallas and so was my husband [Lacey Kirk Johnson].  And my husband gave up his seat.  He was a state representative on that plane, to let him have it.  So I went to the airport looking to pick up my husband, he wasn't there.  And all these cars and everything.  And I said, "What's going on?"  And they said there was a plane crash.  And I said, "Oh, my god."  I just knew that my husband was on that flight.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: That was in 1968 or '9 [1969]?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640262
Speaker 1: Because after he was killed on a plane crash, it was Reverend Holmes, Zan Holmes [Zan Wesley Holmes, Jr.] that was chosen.  At that time, there were fifteen state representatives from Dallas County [Texas], and they would choose the fifteen, you know, the great white father, as we used to say.  Citizens Council [Dallas Citizens Council] used to choose the fifteen that they would get behind, and they'd, and, and once the blacks started complaining, they put a black on, in, in that fifteen.  And that's how Joseph Lockridge was elected.  He was one of fifteen.  Then he got killed in a plane crash.  And then after that, Zan Holmes, was elected, he was a minister, a United Methodist minister there in Dallas [Texas].  And then, he had been a classmate of mine in Waco [Texas] years earlier.  And so it was during the time when he was our state representative, when they had had large, that he started talking about, "Why don't we get some districts?  And I think we can get more people."  At that time, everybody was a Democrat.  And so, even the ones that are Republicans now, at that time were Democrats.  So we, we, we raised this money, and we started having meetings.  Various civic leaders to select some candidates to back.  And so I was on the screening committee.  And he walked in one day, and he said, "Listen, you need to get off this screening committee."  And I said, "For what?"  He said, "Because I want to submit your name as a candidate."  I said, "Oh, god.  I don't, I don't think so."  And so he got up and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson is resigning from this, from the committee."  And he said, "She's resigning because her name is gonna go in consideration for being selected as a potential candidate."  And I was just as nervous as I could be.  I never even thought about public office, never had crossed my mind.  And so I went home and slept overnight, went back over the next day for the meeting and I said, "You sure you wanna do this?"  I said, "I don't have a clue what I would do."  And he said, "You do the same."  So we, we were pretty close friends.  So he always would call me to see what was going on in the community.  He would say, "You been my eyes in the community.  You know what's going on."  And so anyway, that's how I got talked into it.  But I still wasn't convinced.  So filing deadline day, I was at home.  I just couldn't make up my mind to file.  I was helping my son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson] with homework and I got this call.  And he said, "You haven't filed.  You need to go downtown and file."  And I said, "Well, I don't know what to do."  'Cause I was then a government employee.  So I left home driving, and I got to the point of where the traffic was such a jam, I parked the car, and got out and ran two or three blocks to get to the hotel to file.  And I walked in the hotel, it was about three or four minutes after six.  And they said, "Sign right here.  Sign right here.  We filled it out."  And so I signed.  They said, "You've filed."  And so they said, "It's fifty dollars."  And I said, "I don't have fifty dollars."  He said, "Okay.  You've got thirty days to pay it."  So I left and went home.  One of the, what was it?  A Dallas Cowboy said, "My name is Sims Stokes and I have finished campaign school.  I'd like to be your campaign manager."  And so I said, "Well, okay.  I need to talk about it."  And I hadn't, I just didn't know what I had gotten myself into.  So I went on to work the next day, and that was a Tuesday.  So by that Thursday I told them that I had filed to run for office.  So they did everything to try to keep me on the payroll, at least until after the election.  But they couldn't, they couldn't do it.  So I resigned that Friday and went to work for Neiman Marcus that Monday, which was, I think it was close to Valentine's Day that February.  And, 'cause I think February the 5th was the filing deadline.  I worked that week and then went on to work at Neiman's.
Story_ID: 640263
Speaker 1: So Neiman's [Neiman Marcus] provided a way for you to work and s- and be--
Speaker 2: They provided me a job so I'd have some income.  'Cause I had to come off the payroll.
Speaker 1: But did the job have liberal attendance qualifications?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was placed in personnel to assist the nurse.  And then Ed Marcus [Edward Marcus] took me under his wing to show--he's the one who started the catalogue.  And he took me under his wing to show me how he got started in the catalogue store and I, I learned quite a bit about the sales.  And I did miscellaneous things.  He set me up a little office up there on the seventh floor with them, and I was free to go throughout the store and ask questions, observe and that sort of thing.  But I learned quite a bit.  I learned a lot about retail.  I learned a lot from Stanley Marcus and how they set up the personalized attention.  He would have store meetings, and he would know, he'd get the conventions calendars, and he'd know when people coming in. He would study to see who some of the leading people were in that convention, and look at their likes and dislikes.  And they would make things available so that they could, you know, create a culture for them to shop.  I learned quite a bit about retail and marketing.  And, and it was Mickey Leland who was in [U.S.] Congress at the time, who called me one Saturday morning.  He said, "Listen.  I have an idea for you to make some money."  And he told me how to become a part of the airport packaging for airport concessions.  And I did that and I started to own airport stores.  And I had two in DFW [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas] and two in Love Field [Dallas Love Field Airport, Dallas, Texas].  I sold them, I went in blind trust when I got elected here.  And they were sold in December of 2010.  Not a bad venture.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I didn't want to get that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I kept them some twenty something years.
Story_ID: 640264
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the election now.  When you filed and decided to run, who was your opponent?
Speaker 2: My opponent, I had three male opponents, two Anglos and one African American.  The African American was an attorney that was a native of Dallas [Texas] who had run once before as at large, and lost.  And he kind of felt that it should be his, I just outworked him.  Went in, went in to a runoff, and I beat him at a runoff.  It was very, a very different culture then.  I was, I had sorority sisters that helped me, Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], church members.  But back during that time, I had women questioning whether or not this was a women's job, black women.  And, but most of the people that I'd work with in church and civic stuff were supporting me.  But there were still, there were still black women asking me if I thought this was a job a woman should have.  And so I said, "Well, you know, nobody had asked me that when I was getting streetlights put in and walking door to door for the heart fund [American Heart Association], and Red Cross [American Red Cross], and volunteering for Red Cross, and volunteering for all the other kind of stuff."  I said, "So, I, I learned how to do that, I can learn how to do this."  Anyway, I won pretty well.  And that was the beginning of my elective office career.
Speaker 1: So this is 1972, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were elected to the Texas House of Representatives of District 33-0 [Texas House District 33].  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Right, 33-0.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As a Democrat, and you served from '73 [1973] to '77 [1977] as your first term in office?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were the first African American woman elected from the Dallas area?
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, I learned by reading a book that I was the first African American woman to be elected to anything in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's important to say too.
Speaker 2: But I, you know, I didn't even think about it at the time.  It was, I just read that like maybe ten years ago reading a, a book of his- a book on Texas women and it had that in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what, did you have one in particular issue that you wanted to tackle as soon as you got in office?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the issues was maternity leave for teachers.  My sister had been a teacher or was a teacher.  She got moved on up to superintendent, but she--and when teachers, it was always under certainty when teachers got pregnant, whether they could continue to work or whether they have any leave or what have you.  So that was one of the first bills that I carried, was maternity leave for teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So before, that's hard to believe.  They didn't have a maternity leave?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The teachers?
Speaker 2: No.  During that time, they didn't even want teachers to be pregnant coming to work.
Speaker 1: I've heard there was a time when, if a teacher got married they'd have to resign.
Speaker 2: Well, in Dallas you couldn't be married to another teacher in the same, in the Dallas Independent School District.  And so most of the time, the women would teach and the men would either work in an adjacent city school district or vice versa.  Or they would, a lot of them became aids at the VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas] because they were making about the same thing.
Story_ID: 640265
Speaker 1: Now what else?  Now we've got maternity leave for teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, the next, the next bill that I passed my last term I was in the House [Texas House of Representatives] was a mandatory breakfast bill.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, this affects the schools, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Two school districts appealed it, challenged it all the way through the supreme court [Texas Supreme Court].  It was upheld twice.  The Lubbock school district [Lubbock Independent School District] and the Garland school district [Garland Independent School District].  But kids are still able to get breakfast because of that bill.
Speaker 1: So it, it mandated that the schools had to serve breakfast for low income children or for everybody (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they had a poverty level of 10 percent.  I had put twenty and it was, kept being held up in the Senate [Texas Senate].  So I went over and talked to the senator and he said, "Well, it leaves my kids out, if you make it 10."  And I said, "Well, the original though was 10, but I moved it to 20 to keep from messing with you know, whatever was being, not maybe objected to."  But anyway, if you have 10 percent of your students at poverty level, then you're mandatory, it's mandatory that you serve them breakfast.  And it's furnished by the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture.  But they've done a number of studies.  As a matter of fact, when I first got to [U.S.] Congress, they looked me up, and they said, "We want to tell you about that bill you passed years ago, and what the outcome has been."  And they told me that, you know, attendance improved, and attention span of kids was better, and that it, it was, it, it worked well for kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so if you're in a school like that, let's say you're not a, is it only for the kids that are below the poverty level?  Or can any kid have breakfast when they get there?
Speaker 2: Well, that's why they say if you have a level of 10 percent or more, then you serve breakfast.  Because--
Speaker 1: So for all the children?
Speaker 2: All the kids.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But most of the time, I mean, it's gotten worse.  Back during that time there, they did pick out a number of kids, you know, that were eligible, and they would determine who was eligible, and who would pay for the breakfast, who would not.  Now, in my area, there are so many immigrants, you know, they are 80 percent of the school district, that all of them are eligible.  And, matter of fact, in the last three or four months, I learned that Dallas [Texas] was one of the ten hungriest cities for kids.  And I was shocked because we've never had that kind of poverty in, in Texas, in Dallas.  But when we, when I went home to ask about it, it was really because of the influx of immigrants.  And so I said, well, we need to have a Dallas summit.  So we had a summit on hunger, and to find that it was a language problem and one of fear.  A lot of kids were fearful to ask because they thought their parents, you know, most of the parents weren't citizens.  They thought their parents would be in trouble.  So we tried to erase all of those barriers, because the main thing is, is kids needed food.
Story_ID: 640266
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Lauren [ph.] from your staff.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson, I'm congresswoman for District 30 Texas [30th Congressional District].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: December 3rd, 1935, Waco, Texas or McLennan County.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the June the 18th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And we're continuing an interview--oh, where are we at the present time, please?  Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: I'm in my congressional office at 2468 Rayburn House Office Building [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now, we are continuing the interview that we started this past spring, and we were discussing the breakfast program that was in operation when you--that you tried to--that you brought into being when you were a state--
Speaker 2: State House representative, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to recall the exact year.  It was either '75 [1975] or '76 [1976] or '7 [1977].  But, anyway, it was a mandatory program for the state that called into play the national breakfast program [School Breakfast Program].  The state was not utilizing the opportunity to feed children, and I made it mandatory for as long as that program was available.  It was challenged to the supreme court [Texas Supreme Court] twice; one by the Garland school district [Garland Independent School District], Garland Texas school district and the Lubbock school district [Lubbock Independent School District], however, it was upheld and it became law.  Wherever there were 10 percent of the children eligible for, in the poverty guidelines, for the food then their schools would be obligated to offer them breakfast.  After leaving the legislature and serving with the current administration and back to the state Senate [Texas Senate], and then here to the [U.S.] Congress, I received several visitors telling me, that work with elementary school and young people programs, that how useful that program has been over the years because it increased attendance, because young people didn't have any food, looked forward to getting to school so they can eat breakfast, and it increased attention span, thereby, causing kids to perform better in school.  And so it made me feel that it was worth having put it on the books as a law.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular incident or that inspired you to propose this legislation?
Speaker 2: Well, I know this that we have a lot of poor kids in the country.  We have a lot of poor kids in Texas, and food is one of the things that should be available to all children, especially, but to all people regardless of how poor they are.  There are programs that address the issue at all ages.  Many of them are not mandatory, but they are available.  At this time, this program was available federally but not mandatory.  It was up to the schools--the states or the school district whether or not they offered it.  And so I simply passed a law to mandate that where we had the students that qualified through the poverty guidelines by at least 10 percent per school, they should offer these programs, and it was a little bit--it took me a while to get it passed.  I first started out fearing that it would be cumbersome.  I put in 20 percent, and that passed the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives].  When it got to the Senate, that was a problem.  I went over and visited with the senator who was tagging the bill, and he said to me, that, "It does not get my school in it and I had poor kids."  This was an Anglo state senator from West Texas, and he said, "If you put it at 10."  So I said, "Well, I had it at 10, but I was so fearful it wouldn't pass that I made it 20."  So we put it back at 10 to please him.  It passed, and when it came back to the House almost midnight the last day we were in session, whatever year that was, just before we signed the dot it was--the amendments up to the bill from the Senate were agreed to, and the bill passed into law.  And as I indicated, it was challenged by two school districts but--all the way to the supreme court, but it was upheld.
Story_ID: 640267
Speaker 1: Now, '75 [1975], I guess, was a campaign year for Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], too.  Did you play any role in the Carter campaign?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], was it, yes.  As a matter of fact, I did.  When he was considering running in 1975, he visited Dallas [Texas], I was a state representative then, and I promised I would help, and I did.  I worked primarily throughout the state to assist in organizing getting votes out for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '75 [1975], the note I have here is that also the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was up for renewal, I guess, too, but that's a national issue, but I don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and I worked with Senator Bentsen [Lloyd Bentsen] as well as Congresswoman Barbara Jordan who amended it to include Latinos at that authorization, and Senator Bentsen supported it in the [U.S.] Senate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, '76 [1976], you earned a master's in public administration from Southern Methodist [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, on that renewal of Voting Rights Act, I think I was invited to the bill signing that year.  Let's see, who was president then?  I came--
Speaker 1: That would be Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], I guess, before Carter.
Speaker 2: I'll have to look back, but I remember being invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for the signing of that bill along with Martin Luther King's father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] and several other political leaders throughout the South.  I think I have pictures of that occasion that I did come for the signing, and it was probably that interest in inviting me was probably generated by Senator Bentsen, because I had worked pretty vigorously with him and with Congresswoman Barbara Jordan on behalf of that bill and tried to--and got public support.
Story_ID: 640268
Speaker 1: I had mentioned the master's in public administration from Southern Methodist [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas].  So does that take place during this time, '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to Southern Methodist University for my master's that same year of the election.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I was the only car out there that had had a car and a bumper sticker on it, but, you know, back during that time, that was really kind of a Republican haven.  It's much more diverse now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you had a reelection in '76 [1976] as well.  Did you have any opposition?
Speaker 2: No, after I won the first race in 1972, I didn't have any more opposition running for the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives].  I came out of the House.  I resigned in 1977 to take a position with the current administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what position was that?
Speaker 2: Regional director of health, education and welfare [for the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's for Region VI, right?
Speaker 2: Region VI.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which includes--
Speaker 2: Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, New Mexico and Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us what you did in that capacity.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very, very big region and had oversight for all of the health programs, education programs and welfare programs.  That, that was really like the issues dealing with Medicaid and some--a little bit of overlap with agriculture, with food stamps and that sort of thing.  It was, it was an interesting job.  It was a job that no woman or African American had had, and it was very difficult for some of those people to accept that I was a little skinny black woman coming to work in that capacity, but it was a good challenge.  I was called some very colorful names.
Speaker 1: Can you repeat any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I can.  I don't know if you want to put it in there.  I was called a nigger woman and, you know, every other kind of term that, that's uncomplimentary.  I did request the person who referred to me as a nigger be moved to another region.  One of the persons who had been head of the health aspect of it was so disrespectful that I had him removed.  He got sent on a outplacement to the medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you expect that kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, being a black woman in Texas, you really didn't know what to expect, you know, when you got treated very respectfully you were wondering where you were pretty much, but, you know, I tried to respect people in the way that I wanted to be respected, but I'm not sure that I could say I was totally surprised.  I had been in other challenging positions I had to deal with that kind of thing.  When I first went to the VA Hospital [Dallas VA Hospital; VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas], as a first African American nurse they ever hired, I was even younger and smaller and didn't--you know, I had not had my twenty-first birthday and you had to be twenty-one to vote then.  I had some problems.  People not being sure I could--that I had the competence, and yet I didn't meet any intellectual challenges on that job.  I did my homework, I had graduated in very high standard from my college of nursing [at Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana], and the chief nurse there was very supportive of me, so--but I had been accustomed to racism.
Story_ID: 640269
Speaker 1: Now, 1979, you moved from the main-to the main office of health, education and welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] in Rockville, Maryland?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how that happened?
Speaker 2: Well I requested it.  There were several people that, that were just refusing to take orders from me and the kind of work that we needed to achieve.  We were working on a project, and I talked with the secretary of health, education, welfare [Joseph A. Califano, Jr.] that I had a good relationship with--
Speaker 1: Who was that in those days who was--
Speaker 2: The name escapes me right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll think of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's in New York now.  We still keep in touch periodically, and so I then was transferred to Rockville office.  I had a office down here on Independence [Street] in there, but in the research area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you served there for the balance of the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I was offered the position to remain, but I did not want to remain after Carter was defeated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Jimmy Carter was defeated by Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your reflections of the Carter years?  Do you have any reflections on the Carter years and serving in the Carter administration?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the whole time I was there it was very apparent to me that President Carter did not go deep enough to make changes in the staff, so he was really being undermined from the internal aspects.  Same thing that's happening with Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  You know, he went in a timid way and promised not nobody would lose their job as a goal of reorganization, and so while he was, I guess, getting it in his mind how to do it, the people in those positions were making themselves permanent employees.  The same thing that's happening with President Obama, he gets undermined the same way in this administration.  It's so interesting to see the people who bend over backwards to be nice are the ones that get toppled from the inside.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So--all right.  So meanwhile, back in Texas, Barbara Jordan retired from [U.S.] Congress in '79 [1979], I believe, right?  Just before--
Speaker 2: I think, she had--I think just served two terms and retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you decide to do next in 1981, what do you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back home with no intentions of running for public office again, but I kept getting pressure to do so, and so in 1986 I ran for the state Senate [Texas Senate] and was successful; and stayed there until I came to Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 640270
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are some of the highlights of your term as a state senator?
Speaker 2: In the state Senate [Texas Senate]--
Speaker 1: Or your time, rather.  Well let me just say this, you won 75 percent of the vote.  I just want to say that.  I don't know if you remember that, but you have a note that you defeated your opponent substantially?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1986.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see--I got to put my head there now (laughter). Out of thirty-one people there were two African Americans; one from Houston [Texas] and one from Dallas [Texas].  It was Craig Washington from Houston who was there when I arrived.  I had served with him in the House [Texas House of Representatives], and I had served with Mickey Leland in the House who was like a brother.  They both were like brothers, and Mickey Leland is the one who replaced Barbara Jordon when she retired from illness.  And--so we worked together on a number of things.  I worked--had focused on opportunities for small businesses, focused on STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education, I served on the state affairs committee [Senate Committee on State Affairs], and on the finance committee [Senate Committee on Finance], and the committee that confirmed appointees.  I can't remember the name of that committee now, but the committee that reviewed the appointments from the governor and made recommendation were they be confirmed or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The housing, hate crimes, opportunities for women, education was still my focus, I guess, you would call them the people issues.  I worked with Laur- Laurence Tribe at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who put me in touch with one of his student assistants or some assistant who ended up being Gene Sperling who I met up again when I came to Washington [D.C.], and I had a relationship with him on telephone was we would work at wording for various bills that would bring about some equality and some diversity in legislation, most especially in affirmative action wording so that it would be legal.  There were challenges, as you know, to affirmative programs on a national level, both in transportation, especially. I wrote the federal government, had them hold up all the transportation money coming to Texas until they could get in place that would make some opportunities for everyone to be able in the (unclear).  So that did break up a lot of the massive contracts into smaller contracts. I really forgot that I had asked that money to be impounded until they came to me and asked me if I let it go.  And I'd forgotten all about having done it.  But, you know, after they rewrote some of their guidelines, I agreed to release it.
Story_ID: 640271
Speaker 1: Now, the Chicago Tribune quoted you as talking about a double handicap when you were elected?
Speaker 2: Talking about what?
Speaker 1: A double handicap?
Speaker 2: Double handicap?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a double fact.  I don't know if I would consider it a handicap.  To some yes, a female and black, so I had to deal with both of those, and I remember when I was elected to the House [Texas House of Representatives] very early, I had reporters asking me which had been the biggest problem being female or being black, and my response to that was, back during the time my mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] was pregnant carrying me, they didn't have the technology that could tell you what gender you were going to be, but the one thing they knew, I was going to be black and knew I had to deal with that, so I guess from the time I was born I dealt much more with being black than being female, but of course as I grew up I could see the differences of how the discrimination was against both.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think you alluded, too, to the fact that most of the major decisions were being made in huddles of white men?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, I had to ask some questions.  I've never been a person that looked for controversy, but I always seem to have a little bit of something surrounding me, because I would not allow them to stop me because I was back or female.  I'd find some way to try to address the issue, so I didn't create a lot of popularity I probably created a little bit more respect.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, during this period of time, I believe it was, Texas elected its first Republican governor since Reconstruction from what I read?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Clements.
Speaker 1: Bill Clements.  And there were some incidence of--
Speaker 2: I served under him as a governor.  Awful.  But I had a relationship with him because I'd go to him to talk about the things, rather than talking about them somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went directly to him.  I had a relationship with--just like I went to President Bush [President George Walker Bush] when he was in office because I didn't see much point in getting on the mics blasting people that when you had a opportunity to talk with them directly to tell them what problems you had.  It might not have helped, but it probably didn't hurt as much as just blasting about them somewhere else without it being to their face.
Story_ID: 640272
Speaker 1: Now you, in '87 [1987].  I think you called for--call for Judge Craig T. Enoch to be questioned about some incidents that took place at the polling place?
Speaker 2: Well, that must have been '89 [1989], because in '88 [1988]--
Speaker 1: Or '87 [1987].  I'm sorry '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Might have been--it was an election time that he was one of the people that was running for judge, and they went and put signs in front of black polling areas, great big intimidating signs, that said, "Stop, you may be prosecuted" to try to intimidate people from voting.  So when he came up for confirmation for--to become a judge, I brought that post and showed it to him and questioned him about it.  And I held up his confirmation until we worked something out.  I came to admire him because what he did say to me is that he put up one sign, he knew it was wrong, even though he had been instructed to do it by his party, he didn't put up but just that one sign, and he stopped doing it.  And he cried and everything else in my office in a private meeting.  He cried like a little child, and told me how he didn't believe that, and that he would be fair and that sort of thing.  And so after, you know, I believe everybody can make mistakes and I believe in redemption and so when we went back to the committee a day or so later, I express my--that I would support him for confirmation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just to be clear, now correct me if I'm wrong, what is often used to discourage black voters is the threat of some kind of legal investigation of them--
Speaker 2: Yes, and I requested investigation myself from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], but that was simply a political tactic to keep African Americans from voting.
Speaker 1: Right.  So if you vote, you might be investigated or something or--
Speaker 2: Or--
Speaker 1: --if you had an outstanding ticket or outstanding warrants or something--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you can be hauled in at the polling place?
Speaker 2: And, you know, when you were black then you didn't have to have anything outstanding, all you had to do was be black and they would accuse you and you still have to defend yourself against it whether you were guilty innocent (background noise).  I don't have any control over that.
Speaker 1: I know.  We just have to wait for it--yeah, so just like Reconstruction, instead of having a gun to keep you from voting, they put the sign up and have say, stop or you could be arrested?
Speaker 2: And, you know, today the same thing is going on.  They're trying to keep us from voting now with all this new voter suppression legislation and tactics that they're pulling.
Speaker 1: That's right, you're right.  This is a new era of that kind of legislation, yeah. People are fighting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) History will repeat itself.  (Laughter) You have to be very mindful of that.
Story_ID: 640273
Speaker 1: I have a note here about something that--yeah, about Bill Hobby [William P. Hobby, Jr.], too. He was a--was he a ally, or?
Speaker 2: Bill Hobby was a lieutenant governor.  I work very hard for him, and for Senator Bentsen [Lloyd Bentsen]. The--I ran their campaigns in Dallas County [Texas] in 1982, and that was the year that we defeated Clements [Bill Clements] from reelection, but then he came right back and defeated Bill White later, but we were able to--in 1982, I was not in office.  I ran the Dallas County Democratic election primarily covering the entire minority community the southern sector of Dallas, and that was a very satisfying election because that's when we got a complete slate of Democrats that were moderate to liberal Democrats.  And I knew all of them personally, and that's Ann Richards became the state treasurer, Jim Mattox became the attorney general, Jim Hightower became the agriculture commissioner, and it was a good year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Clements was defeated.
Speaker 1: In 1988, you served on a National AIDS task force [National Task Force on AIDS Prevention] sponsored by the American Red Cross.  And you said that Texas was dragging in the war on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, I didn't even know what AIDS was until right after the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and when I went back to Dallas [Texas] I had been asked to serve on several boards there in the city and county, and there were representatives of the gay community that came before the committee and kept bringing up the fact that there was this new disease called AIDS that was killing people.  And so I started to try to understand it more and encourage the panel to listen to the people.  As a matter of fact, the chair of that panel was Mrs. Hortense Sanger whose husband's family owned Sanger's department store [Sanger Brothers; Sanger-Harris] which is now a part of Macy's [Macy's, Inc.].  But we had become pretty close civic workers and so she and I decided we would try to see what we could do be educating people and we listened to them.  Every one of them now are--that were leading at that time are now dead.  But I've always been grateful to them because they insisted and didn't back off about what AIDS was this virus, then it got to be everybody thought it had to do with being gay and that sort of thing.  But having a health background, I could not see how any virus could determine somebody's gender or how they would pick a partner.  It might be a result of the activities, but it didn't make a difference whether you had same sex tendencies or what.  If it was a virus, it was a virus and so that was the attitude that I took, and we started to try to educate public and I try to bring in black ministers and physicians in the workplace and sort of thing to start talking about this virus.  So we did get some assistance in attempting to try to bring about some education.  I will always be grateful for those gay leaders who would not back down because now the largest incidences of AIDS is in the African American community in this country, and it actually is more of a epidemic than it is in Africa.  I traveled to Africa to see what was going on, look at research and what have you, they made great strides there.  But they've also been very good about educating from the time kids in the first grade up.
Story_ID: 640274
Speaker 1: Okay, we--you were talking about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and some of your educational efforts in the black community especially, but.
Speaker 2: I had, I had a meeting where I invited African American physicians to talk about it and some of the precautions and spread information.  Then I had another one with black ministers, and I was told I need to leave it alone, but the ministers took the education pretty well, 'cause it was a matter of educating people, it was a viral disease that could be controlled with behavior and it didn't make any difference whether you were having unprotected sex with another person of the same gender or some other gender if that virus was involved and so at that time it was--the incidences reported were more homosexual people at that time.  For the longest time, diagnoses were not listed as AIDS.  They listed almost everything but that, cancer and all kinds of other things until it got to the point where the public, I guess, couldn't receive more truthful information about it what it was.  Some didn't know because the side effects that came from having the virus that became a full blown disease as AIDS would cause other types of illnesses, lung tumors and different other things where the causative thing was--might have been the AIDS virus, but what it led to got a separate diagnosis.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: The public was not really educated as to the detriment and the devastating results of having this virus go undetected and untreated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I was think- staying like pneumonia.  A lot of people died from pneumonia because their defenses are down and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they're still saying died of cancer, died of pneumonia when the causative agent could be that virus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think that black people in Texas are more conservative than other people around in the country or just the black community is more conservative around AIDS?
Speaker 2: Well, I have not experienced, generally speaking, attitudes of blacks outside of Texas necessarily.  I think that black people all over the country are somewhat in denial sometimes when it comes to having to admit behaviors that they don't want to talk about.  I think that, generally speaking, it was not everyday conversation among African Americans.  Anything to do with sex or sexual behavior or sexual activity.  I mean, I was fully grown before I knew what a homosexual was.  You know, what I mean? We just didn't talk about it.  There were two or three young boys that we went to school with they said was a sissy.  I didn't know what a sissy was.  Nobody explained it, you know, you just knew it was somebody that was a little different.  So I think that we as a people were probably much more in denial as it relates to AIDS than some others.
Story_ID: 640275
Speaker 1: Now, now you made some strides in housing too, and you had some legislation in '88 [1988].  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I passed the bill that made--that authorized an agency to investigate discrimination, and I also had in there they couldn't be discriminated against based upon their gender.  You know, gender was included in the definition of race and what have you.  And, and that was back when--I can't remember who was governor.  Anyway, I had one of the governors come to me and ask if I could alter or something, so I changed the wording a little bit but I did not want to alter the legislation to be meaningless.  I wanted to make sure that people were covered and protected from discrimination in housing, and so it turned out pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in '89 [1989], you testified in federal court about racism in Dallas [Texas] city government, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did.  Let me see '89 [1989], what was that about it?  It might have had something to do with--
Speaker 1: I think you criticized some of their appointments--well, in Dallas and in Texas you criticized the Texas Board of Regents to--for, you know, being all white, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, that's right.  Yes.  I didn't see enough progress being made for opportunities for African Americans in any level of education, but, you know, tax dollars came from everybody to pay for it, so I did challenge the fact that they had no African Americans on the Board of Regents that was governing one of the largest industries in the State of Texas and there was this education, higher education system.  We were able to get a African American appointed, I think, in the University of Texas [University of Texas System] and A&M [Texas A&M University System] boards.  Those were the two largest most powerful boards almost in state government, and, you know, strictly run by very powerful wealthy Anglo men and the population growth.  The African American growth was not that great, but the minority growth in Texas was beginning to be noticeable.  It's so interesting, because when I was growing up there was so few Latinos, what were then were called Mexicans, that they were considered Anglo but as the population started to grow more and more then they became minorities (laughter).  It's interesting when the bigger you get the minority you become.  So it was at that point when you had to fight a battle for not just black but also for minorities and women.  Senator--Congressmen Gonzalez [Charlie Gonzalez] from San Antonio [Texas] had been a state senator before he was an acknowledged minority, and he had attended the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] before Latinos were considered minorities, but he was aware that he was and he fought for minority rights, and I've always had great appreciation for him for that.  But the larger the growth became, the more minority they became.  In school desegregation originally, it was black and white and as the Latino population grew it became black, white and brown, and, of course, it's now full blown.  I've always felt that every problem I could think of could be solved through education and communication, and if you denied people education they would not gain the ability to be what they'd like to be.  And so that's why it was always important for me to make there were opportunities or at least educational opportunities; and opportunities to be independent, you know, you can't expect people to take care of themselves if you're going to deny them every opportunity to do it.
Story_ID: 640276
Speaker 1: In 1991, you were chair of the reapportionment committee of the Texas Senate, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--now, you're in the Senate now.  You were elected to the Senate in '86 [1986], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're in the Tex- so you're addressing this new population of Texas?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, see back in 1972 is the first time we had single member districts for it, and I had walked the street collecting money to help bring about a lawsuit to get single member districts.  I had no idea of running.  I was later encouraged to run.  When I got to the Senate, it was clear that, you know, when I went to the House [Texas House of Representatives], Barbara Jordan came to the [U.S.] Congress, and then the next decade there was a state senator from Houston [Texas] that was elected, and the population growth was larger in Houston than in Dallas [Texas], but it wasn't so much larger that with the opportunity we couldn't have more representation.  And so what we learned is that you drew lines in with a pencil and you couldn't see it on computer.  The first time it was done by computer where you can see clear lines was in 1991 and '92 [1992], so when Lieutenant Governor Bullock [Bob Bullock] was running, he had come back into my life back when I was called a nigger by the state comptroller [Robert S. Calvert] back in 1973 or '74 [1974], and I challenged him and we got him out of office, and I recruited Bullock to run so he became state treasurer then, and we maintained a relationship.  He turned that agency completely upside down and really did a lot of fixing.  Then when he ran for lieutenant governor, there were people in Dallas saying we want a member of Congress, and so he promised them without my knowledge at that time that he was going to appoint me chair of that committee and I could draw a district and we would get representation in Dallas.  So when I--when the time came, he did (laughter) with lots of opposition.  He called me one Saturday night about ten o'clock and said that Martin Frost had found him in Hillsboro [Texas] in the country fishing to plead with him not to make me chair, because that meant he might have to give up his seat (laughter).  And--but he just called me, he said, "Listen don't even tell him but you're going to be chair, I'm putting you there so you can make sure that those African Americans get a seat in Dallas."  He said, "Just don't discuss with him."  A little bit later Martin had lunch with me to plead with me, he never did say he had been to visit with the lieutenant governor to try to keep me from being chair, because lieutenant governor told him that.  That's what he had in mind was to make me chair of that committee, that he had promised some of the supporters as he was running.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did serve as chair.
Speaker 1: You were able to, through your activities; you were able to get minorities elected as officers?
Speaker 2: Yes, because at that time the University of Texas at Dallas [Dallas, Texas] had one of the most progressive bodies of information in the country, as a matter of fact.  We were one of the first states to have access to a good computer system that clearly identified where people were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, also in 1991--now, did your activities have anything to do with the election of Ann Richards as governor in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: We worked very hard for Ann, but now let me tell you, I had two very good friends running for governor that year; Ann Richards and Jim Mattox.  Ann was like a sister, Jim was like a brother, and I would not, I would not endorse in the primary.  They both worked on me very hard, but I said I cannot make a difference between a sister and a brother.  But once they got through that primary and Ann beat Jim, I worked for Ann and it wasn't easy.  We had to work pretty hard to get that vote out for her.
Story_ID: 640277
Speaker 1: It seems--when you look at Texas today in 2012, as we do this interview, it seems like an uphill struggle for them to ever get another women governor or even a Democrat for some reason--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --so.
Speaker 2: --that's very true.  There has been a much more vigorous effort by the Republicans to organize and keep control of the state than what we've seen among Democrats and, primarily, because they had so much more access to money.  The Democrats that I worked with as I came along are now Republicans.  Our Democratic county chair never said he was Republican, but he didn't support Democrats coming home too well, and most of those old Democrats now are either independent or they're Republican.  So when motion and growth started, we got the new airport [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport] in Dallas [Texas] that drew a lot of corporate headquarters.  It was very strategically located and it brought in a lot of corporate headquarters.  We now have the largest number of corporate headquarters of any other city in the country now around that airport.  And once these big business leaders came in, the big CEOs, J.C. Penney [J.C. Penney Company] and all these companies that came in, they were all Republicans so the Democrats then felt a little bit more comfortable moving out of the Democratic Party, and so--and I still get support from some of these people, but it's clear to me that they are not Democrats, you know, they'll give me a little bit of something if I ask them.  I just look at--you know, when I was there when the Dallas Cowboys  started, and it was a pretty good Democratic organization.  Now, you don't know what the players are but you know that everybody have to do with the players are now Republican.  When Jerry Jones came there from Arkansas, he was an out front Democrat but no longer.  You know, so I think it's like being an in crowd, we have a large large number of billionaires in Dallas and they're all Republican.  And so to be in the in crowd, the shift came, and with that shift went the money to people too.  And so--
Speaker 1: Now, this shift took place in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], and continues to go on.
Speaker 1: The shift in the rest of the South took place mostly in late '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And, you know, Texas--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --always considered itself Southwest and independent of anything else, and I think it was that kind of independent attitude that they still don't consider themselves a part of the South, which is just as southern as Mississippi, but that Texas produced.  You know, when I was growing up everybody had to take Texas history and you were taught it was the best state in the union, you grew up thinking that until you start to look at what was--really going on.  But I think that the Texas pride issue many of the very, very old pioneers are now gone, been replaced by other generations and new people that--A good example is Stanley Marcus who was the CEO of Neiman Marcus.  That's who gave me my opportunity to run for office, and he was an out front Democrat.  I must say he was more conservative than his brother, Ed Marcus [Edward Marcus] who was the Republican in the family with me, and so it was, it was both a class and when the Democratic Party was dominant, it was white male dominated and as the rules came along on a national basis with having to put a woman and a man, you know, the McGovern [George McGovern] rules into the new charter, which I participated in all that in 1974, I think, or something like that when they rewrote the Democratic Party guidelines and--
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972]--
Speaker 2: --and wrote in (unclear), that was the beginning of the deterioration of the Democratic Party, because the white male domination had been broken into.
Speaker 1: So you think they revolted of that and joined the Republican Party, is that the reason?
Speaker 2: I can't say they revolted and joined, but their interest became less and less, and then as Republicans--some of them moved in and started to be more active as Republicans, it was just more comfortable for them to be in another all male white domination.
Story_ID: 640278
Speaker 1: Now, you ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1992 and to represent Texas 30th district [30th Congressional District].  So how did you--who persuaded you to run or did you see it as a good opp- time to do it or what happened?
Speaker 2: No, I had been really pushed by the people to run.  As a matter of fact, I was pushed by the people as early as the '70s [1970s] to run for [U.S.] Congress, but I had no way of knowing whether it was possible, because at that time we didn't have computers.  It really was--we went on what we were told pretty much by some of the hierarchy of the Democratic Party.  I remember the news media calling me and saying, "Are you looking to put (unclear)," and that sort of thing.  After my first term in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives], and I said, "No, but I do plan to run for reelection."  And didn't have any thought of that, and that was after Barbara Jordan had run in Houston [Texas].  Well, the history of Barbara Jordon had to do with the fact that Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], she ran twice for the statehouse and couldn't win.  She volunteered for Lyndon Johnson.  He demanded that she have a seat be drawn in the Texas Senate, and so that's when she won the Senate seat.  Well, I didn't have anybody demanding a seat for me to be drawn (laughter), and I didn't know what was possible so the people that were close to me and advising me didn't suggest that I run for the Congress.  I had just spent one term in the Texas House when that even came up.  Well, in my third term is when I left the House anyway to take the job with the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  I was pressed on that.  Bob Strauss [Robert S. Strauss] and--is who decided that I should go, he and Jim Mattox, said, go ahead and try it.  I said I don't know.  Bob Strauss was originally from Dallas [Texas] and he was kind of a godfather figure of Democrats and had been the party chair, and so he was one of advisors.
Speaker 1: This is Richard Strauss?
Speaker 2: Bob--Robert Strauss.  He's here now.  Akin Gump Strauss [Akin Gump Strauss Hauer and Feld LLP], that firm.
Speaker 1: So election of 1992 this is when Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected president, [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun was elected the first black woman to the [U.S.] Senate?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were elected.  Was your election or--your campaign an easy one or was it--
Speaker 2: It was fairly easy.  I won the primary by 92 percent.  I don't know when I won the (unclear) in the '70s [1970s], I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty--that's a landslide?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In both counts.  Yeah.  So, was it because of the district being, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) heavily black.
Speaker 2: As soon as the districts--now, they were challenged, of course, and they were upheld by the [U.S.] Supreme Court, but during the second term there were lawsuits brought of the extreme gerrymandering and it was filed against--well, it was filed against--well it was actually filed against Martin Frost because the Republicans who filed it said that it caused me to have to move into the northern end and outside Dallas County [Texas] in order to accommodate him.  And, of course, that was the story of an African American Democrat is getting split up so you can elect some white Democrats, and that really is--was the redistricting battle in Texas and almost anywhere you see African Americans and Democrats.  But the districts were altered for the third term and--but he was still able to survive and altered my district quite a bit.  As a matter of fact, his attorney kind of gave me the short end of the stick, but I was able to survive it at that time, and then after that is when the Republicans became majority here and was able to get a majority back in Texas, and that's when the DeLay [Tom DeLay] plan was filed and eliminated even more Democrats out of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was easy to eliminate Democratic districts because all they had to do was split up the black precincts so they wouldn't be concentrated in a district large enough to elect a Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's been what's happened is that the Republican majority in Texas has been drawing these districts, and that battle continues.
Story_ID: 640279
Speaker 1: Now, what was--now, this is the 103rd Congress [103rd U.S. Congress], right?  In t- 1992, what was it like going to [U.S.] Congress.  Now, you're a seasoned law maker by this time, and--but this is your first time in Congress.  How was your reception, what do you do--did you introduce to the Congressional Black Caucus, did you already know some of them and how did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did some of them, and I was invited, of course.  When I came there were--had been twenty-seven, so we had gotten three additional seats during that the.  We went up to thirty, and I was in charge.  I was supposed to be twenty-eight.  I said, "No, I'm taking thirty because everything else around me was a twenty-something and I wanted to make sure that this stood out."  So I picked the number thirty, and two of my classmates coming from Texas knew people, where people had been in the [U.S.] Senate.  We had twenty-four or five members that were Democrats from Texas then with Jack Brooks being the dean, and that's when Gonzalez [Charlie Gonzalez] was still here and Ralph Hall was a Democrat, and so they welcomed us and we had a good cushion with that many Democrats around you, and I had been in a deliberative body, I went lobbied--well, visited trying to influence legislation and funding for certain programs with individuals prior to coming as law makers will come in from states and visit you.  I had a very good relationship with Congresswomen Boggs [Lindy Boggs] out of Louisiana, because I had worked to encourage her to start the Head Start program and different programs of that sort, and she was Louisiana, had a good working relationship with Livingston [Bob Livingston] who came while I was a regional director in HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], and he was Republican but I had worked with most of those members of Congress when I was with the federal government.  And so I had some acquaintances, but I also--my philosophy always been is that fools rush in where angels fear to tread, so I came in to learn and not to take over, and I used Congressman Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes], Congressman Julian Dixon, and Congressman Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], Congresswomen Collins [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins] and Congressman Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] as kind of mentors.  When I came in, the New South was a part of that class of '92 [1992] and the Congressional Black Caucus membership doubled, and so it became a body of considerable strength at that time because we, we went from like fifteen or sixteen to thirty something, and--
Speaker 1: Now, has it ever been--is it that large today?
Speaker 2: It's forty-three today.
Speaker 1: Forty-three today.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was the largest it's ever been and Democrats were in a majority.  We had--there were, I think, thirty-eight of us that needed 218 for everything, and I think we were like 240 something (unclear).  For major legislation it became very clear that they had to carry the Congressional Black Caucus.  We were only that strong for one term, and that's the first two years of Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, then we lost the majority.  When we lost majority and the speaker that took over, Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] did away with all the caucuses in order to get rid of us.
Story_ID: 640280
Speaker 1: Now, this is the Republican Revolution of 1994--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Newt Gingrich's contract for America [Contract with America] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Contract on--Contract for America.  We called it Contract on America.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.  Right.  Exactly, Contract on America is what the Congressional Black Caucus called it, and this is--
Speaker 2: It was a--
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  Before we get started.  I just want to point out the two of the big leaders were Dick Armey and Tom DeLay of Texas, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Two of the biggest followers of Newt Gingrich.
Speaker 2: Well, Dick Armey's district was adjacent to mine [30th Congressional District].  And as a matter of fact, the second drawing of those lines put his house and his office in my district.  That's Martin Frost's drawing.  So I pointed that out.  They put in a little scoop to take it out, but I had a working relationship with the Republicans, because as I came, I also visited with the Republicans, as well, because I had quite of few of them surrounding me, and, you know, I vowed to work together for Texas and that sort of thing.  And so Tom said to me then, "If there's anything you ever need, let me know."  And I said, "Same here."  That's when I was in a majority.  And we had conversations and we talked about I was on transportation committee [U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee], and we did talk about some of the projects and I worked with him.  In return, he helped me to get what I needed, so in terms of being in a minority at that time I did have the help from Tom DeLay, so I was able to achieve as much as in a minority almost as I have been in a majority.  And just working with them quietly, going and talking with them, telling them what I was trying to do and asking for help to get it finished and get it through, what have you.  I didn't meet with much opposition.  There were times when they said, "If you'll just change this right hear or limit it to this, or limit it to that, I'll help." And so I would do that.  Because you can't get everything you want at one time anyway.  Even if you put it all in there, it might change in the senate or in conference, and so I had a good working relationship with Tom DeLay and with Dick Armey.  Dick Armey spent a lot of times trying to recruit me to become a Republican (laughter), and I spent a lot of time telling he need to stop smoking (laughter).
Story_ID: 640281
Speaker 1: Now, there were some black members of the Republican Revolution in those days.  You got Watts from, J.C. Watts from Oklahoma (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) J.C. Watts from Oklahoma.  I was a friend of his.  We used to ride with (unclear), and I had invited him to join the Congressional Black Caucus, and he did and he gave a nice speech and indicated that, you know, we wanted the same things, we might use different techniques to get there and what have you and then that was a Wednesday, and by that Friday he had a press conference denouncing that--his membership in the caucus and it made everybody think that the caucus didn't want him.  I spent a lot of time clarifying that it was his choice, that we welcomed him.  Well, we learned that Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] didn't want him to be, because he wanted him to be a part of the leadership of the Republicans, and that has held true.  It's very clear that anybody they're looking at for leadership positions, they don't want them to be a part of the caucus.  They didn't object to the first member.  He was here when I got here from Connecticut that was a part of the caucus, and he was there--he's been easy to work with, as well.  You know, he's going to agree with his party.  Now, this time around West joined the caucus, but the other person--
Speaker 1: Allen West of Florida.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the other one from South Carolina did not, and that's because they wanted him to be a part of their leadership, and so--but, you know, we talked back and forth.  West has come to the meetings and, you know, each of us have a responsibility sponsoring lunch for the group each week.  It rotates, and so he's done that. More recently, he has not been coming.  I think some of that break came--I'm not sure what brought that on, but I know last summer there was a several city stops for members of the caucus to talk about jobs, and when they got to Atlanta [Georgia] I believe or Florida, his brother [Arlan West] showed up looking for a job, and he said that his brother had told him to come.  Anyway, I think it was a little bit too much discussion made of it, and since that time he has not been as active in coming to meetings, but he'd been very regular in coming, and he entertained his time.  When it's his time to sponsor lunch, he brought Chick-fil-A (laughter).  We usually just get it catered.  Now, when I first came here, and we had caucuses, they were legitimate, you could use part of your office account to pay your dues to your caucuses.  When Gingrich got to be speaker, he did away with all caucuses.  The reason we could remain organized is because we had a foundation that had nothing to do with being a member of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] as such, we had the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, we later organized Congressional Black Caucus Institute [Congressional Black Caucus Political Education and Leadership Institute], and we reactivated Congressional Black Caucus PAC.  So we were able to withstand this onslaught by each individual sharing the cost of the staff, we could put a shared staff.  They always allowed shared staff, so we just have shared staff, and when it comes time for entertaining we pay for the lunch about once every year and a half or two years as it rotates. The more people you got, the longer it takes to get back around to your name to sponsor the lunch.  We meet for lunch every Wednesday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So when you joined the caucus members, the Congressional Black Caucus, members doubled to thirty-four and today you say there are forty-three out of total of how much today?
Speaker 2: The total--out of the total Democrats, the whole House is 435.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Democrats right now, we have about 130, 192, I think, eighty-nine or ninety-two something like that.
Story_ID: 640282
Speaker 1: But Congressional Black Caucus theoretically is nonpartisan, right?  So you can't have Republicans--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you could have them if they were in it?
Speaker 2: Yeah well we, as a caucus, don't say Republicans can't join, because we are not necessarily an organized caucus as such, because it's not recognized as an organized caucus by the guidelines, but it doesn't--it's like any other caucus, you can get a caucus on anything.  It's just not going to be financed, funded or anything you can do from your office accounts.  So we pay extra the expenses of these caucuses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] days, let's see now--
Speaker 2: Oh, and let me just point this out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Prior to these caucuses being abolished, we had lots of paid members of the Congressional Black Caucus that were Anglo.  Almost every member you could tell by who had a substantial percentage of African Americans in their district, they'd come seeking membership, so we had associate membership and lots of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So white congressmen who had a substain- significant number of African Americans in their district joined the Congressional Black Caucus?
Speaker 2: Or even if they just requested without having that many.  And that's one of the reasons why when I came I had a very diverse district [30th Congressional District].  I had a lot of Latinos and a lot of other immigrants from other places, and a lot of Asians, and I started the Asian caucus [Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus], the Hispanic caucus [Congressional Hispanic Caucus], of course, was already organized.  I started the Asian caucus because there were three Asians at the time; one from Hawaii and two from California and it grew from that.  And once it grew up to five or six, I no longer attended.  But when I became chair of the Congressional Black Caucus is when I organized the Tri-Caucus [Congressional Tri-Caucus] so the three groups could work together on common issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what are some of the common issues that Tri-Caucus works on?
Speaker 2: Our common issues are very obvious in a way. It's education, healthcare, out of poverty issues, jobs and there are areas in which we've had some very dynamic discussions and we worked out agreements, and one of those is the immigrant--we're working on a comprehensive immigration bill.  It became very obvious that there were feelings that many of the illegal people from Mexico were in jobs that African Americans unemployed could have, and so we worked out language to deal with that.  And, probably, the only way we could have worked that kind of language out is working together.
Story_ID: 640283
Speaker 1: Now, a little while ago you spoke to some of the other--the senior Congressional Black Caucus members like [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes in Ohio, Rangel of Harlem [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins of Chicago [Illinois], William Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.].  Tell us a little bit about why you look to these as mentors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, these, these members were here long before I came, and as a matter of fact, the year that I went to the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives] is when Cardiss Collins came here.  The same as when Barbara Jordan came here, and so we became--I sought her out for advice when I was looking to do certain things and the same thing with Julian Dixon, same thing with Clay, with Louis Stokes.  I would look to see some of the things that they were accomplishing that I needed to accomplish, and I would ask them for advice in getting it done.  And they offered help.  I would say that Stokes gave me a number of ideas of how to get some earmarks on certain programs and I followed his instructions and he helped me, and I was able to get it done.  The same with Bill Clay.  I asked Clay what he considered his greatest success for his constituents, and he told me how he addressed some of the programs.  He said, "You know, don't go trying to ask for the world on certain programs, you look at some of your nonprofits who are doing good jobs and you earmark money going to them specifically so that they don't have to go through a lot of network and red tape to try to seek funds." And so I, I did that.  I pinpointed organizations that I thought were doing good work in housing and community stuff, I would put them in to get, get money.  That was helpful.  I could see where Congressmen Stokes was doing a lot in housing and HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  You know, he was on a appropriations committee [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations] covering VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], and HUD, and what have you and he told me how to get a lot of things done for my area.  Secretary Cisneros [Henry Cisneros] was a secretary of HUD when I came at that time, and I was able to get a commitment for him to help clean up these old run down apartments in the area and would straighten and clean up some of the public housing, and they've been transformed in my area into almost completely new.  Every housing project has been redone in my area.  Many of the old thrown up apartments where people would just throw them up, get all of the money after twenty years, they didn't care what happened to them tore a lot of that down, cleaned up and getting restoration done. Much of that and how I was able to achieve that, that information came from Louis Stokes when I asked him how to do it.  Some of the--many of the nonprofits that were dealing with smaller problems in the area are doing a small part positively about problems.  It was Bill Clay who told me how to put in for those and it was really very, very helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was some of the, I guess, key issues that you remember that you worked on in your first term in [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, I started out with--this committee's been named several things, the science, space, technology [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology] now.  And the transportation infrastructure [U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee] that was public works, I think, when I came here, but those have been my committees for as long as I've been here, so I look for opportunities and both of those areas to assist my area, my state, my district [30th Congressional District], and I have been pretty successful.  More successful than anybody before me that ever gotten done.  I used the opportunity that I had working with those committees to do as much as I could to be of assistance.  I visited with those local municipalities and, you know, my city and all, to see what the needs were, how to have them to write it up in good detail; and I would go for it and I've been pretty successful.
Story_ID: 640284
Speaker 1: Did you work at all on the Clinton health plan?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The first one that?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, that started, you know, with his [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, and I was coming out of the health field and so, yeah, they had a group, of course, to try to put something together.  It was--because Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was heading it up, I think it was kind of almost dead on arrival.  It was such opposition to her involvement from the other side that by the time they finished a product, it had so many distortions I don't think people ever really knew who was being proposed. And it was very close to what this president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] has had to deal with in healthcare. See, the enemy to change and the way the healthcare system is being run, is insurance companies.  They have dominated the field so long, they determine what will be covered, when it's going to be covered, how much they're going to be paying and all that.  That--and they have picked up so many friends along the way, because they've been very profitable, they have paid for their support and so it's very difficult to penetrate that industry.  This president was able to do that, and they're trying their best to make sure he pays for it through all kinds of opposition.
Story_ID: 640285
Speaker 1: You were reelected in '94 [1994], the same year as Repub- Republican Revolution.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so how do things substan- did things substantially change for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was such a depressing election (laughter).  At that time, I had decided that I wanted to go to either ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means] or energy and commerce [House Committee on Energy and Commerce] where healthcare was directly addressed.  And so Election Day, I called Jack Brooks who was our dean and I said, "I love my committees where I am, but I need your help.  I want to go to either ways and means or to energy and commerce because I want to be directly involved in healthcare."  And he said to me, "I believe they're going to whip me down here."  And I said, "Are you kidding?"  And he said, "No, I've got a tough campaign."  And I said, "Oh," and I said, "I wish you well," and I got off the phone.  I was in a state of shock.  Then I called Ford [Harold Ford, Sr.] in Memphis [Tennessee].  He was on ways and means, and he said, "We're having a battle down here."  He said, "I hope I survive it."  And that's the first--that was Election Day of '94 [1994], and that was the first time it came to me that Democrats were having that hard time around the country.  I guess, I was so busy getting myself adjusted in [U.S.] Congress those first two years, and that I was just not aware of that much turmoil going on.  What I did learn, one of the people at Southern Methodist University [Dallas, Texas] called me and he said, "What's--," this was about two weekends before election.  He said, "Listen," he said, "Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] called and wanted to know if I would handle his Southwest media election night, because he's going to become speaker."  And I laughed about it.  And then when I talked with them on Election Day, thinking that we were going to get back to get back here and start--I realized then that it was not going to be the same Congress.  So that night, and election night, I was having a little gathering for victory party stuff, and I see totally distracted.  I could not be jovial, and when they asked me about my election, I said, "I'm not concerned about mine. I'm concerned about what I'm going to be facing when you get back." And--and sure enough, it was an onslaught and we made--and we had a huge defeat and I guess Democrats were in a minority for the first time for like forty some years.  Well, when I came back here, when we in an attempt to try to organize it, we were all just kind of in a state of shock.  So--and we had a lame duck session between Christmas and getting back here the first--right after January the 1st of '95 [1995], they totally changed this entire system.  The Republicans did, they fired something like three thousand people; two thirds of them were African American.  They said they were Democrats, and they were going to get rid of them.  The Democratic pictures that were on the wall ended up on the floor.  It was just--everything about bill paying had changed, they stopped--they had folding rooms when you put out large volumes of mail.  They had shut down, she had shut down practically everything going on and for two months you couldn't get bills paid.  They finally had to regroup on some of this stuff.  We had gas cards, you know, for traveling in your district.  You go use a card, they pick it up, bill hadn't been paid.  It was a complete mess.  Telephones were shutting down in district offices, so they finally had to pull back some of the same people that they fired in order to just get bills paid, but it was awful.  The president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came over to address the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus], they wouldn't let us use the chamber that they'd been allowing us to use.  We had to stand up in the basement to meet with the president.  I had never seen anything like that in my life.  It was like Gestapo had happened, and it was such a drastic change with everything that I think that that complete turmoil of everything just got things so off kilter that some things they had to restore; for example, they closed the complete furniture shop down.  They said everybody had to buy furniture from the outside.  Well, most of the things that we use in these offices are built here and restored here.  They finally had to regroup on that.  But it was a period of pure misery (laughter), and that's when they start putting R and D besides your name for everything you--if you went to supply, you had to identify whether you were Democrat or Republican.  If you went to the doctor's office, you had to identify whether you were Democrat or Republican.  That had never happened before.  And so it was a complete change in mentality.
Story_ID: 640286
Speaker 1: How do you account for that?  I mean, it was a surprise to you, but upon reflection what do you think happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the Republicans had been in a minority for so long, that they intended to just punish anything identified as a Democrat, and in their minds it was a time for Republicans to be in charge, and that was their attitude, and it flowed through their staff.  It was like if you were a Democrat, you were just like a piece of dirt around here.  And so it gradually kind of equalized itself as people begin to understand that with much of the seniority, that's the only way you knew had to do anything, so some of the respect to our senior people kind of gradually returned.  But it was--it reminded me of an invasion of some foreign coming in to take over and do it their way (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1994.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '95 [1995] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything--and that was one of the worst winters in history, everything was snowed to a shut down.  It was, it was quite an experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, and--now, anything happened in '95 [1995] we need to talk about, because I don't have a note for it right here?
Speaker 2: Well, in '95 [1995]--the election was in '94 [1994] but it takes effect in '95 [1995].  The office locations were, of course, all changed and I just been here that first two years just getting accustomed to what the routines were then, and then all of a sudden it was just a upside down change, and they had not at that time finished those extra meeting rooms down in the basement between the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate, and so during that time we asked for an assignment of a meeting room that the Democratic caucus could use, and they gave us that HC9 [ph.], and that's about the only space that we could use.  We had to walk around and see all the pictures of Democratic presidents and all that stuff on the floor for a very long time before they--I don't know what they did with them, stored them I guess, but every piece of material--space they could find on the wall in 9, they put some Democratic faces up and that's the only place you saw them.
Story_ID: 640287
Speaker 1: Now where, where had those pictures been hanging previously?
Speaker 2: Different places around.  I remember that Rayburn had a statue that right that was off the Rayburn room in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] it disappeared.  I don't know where it went (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a statue of Sam Rayburn--
Speaker 2: His head, yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Texas who was the speaker of the house--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --during the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] era?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] era?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they took his statue away?
Speaker 2: Is that statue disappeared, and so it was, it was a very disconcerting period, because there were so much attention being put on the change that it was very hard to concentrate on the work.  But I must say that in the midst of all that, the two committees--of course, we lost members.  Nobody went onto ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means] or energy and commerce [House Committee on Energy and Commerce] because we lost members because, you know, that the ratios change, and they have to--the majority picks who they want on committees, and then they--you have to wait until they get everything they want and then they'll tell you how many you can put on, so if you been a majority, you're going end up with a fewer members.  And so after that, I made a decision I would stay with my original committees and make the best of it, which ended up being a very good decision, and because I, I really did have a votes to go on ways and means and the support of the chair, because Rostenkowski [Dan Rostenkowski] got convicted and he went out and the person would replaced him was very friendly toward me coming and what have you.  But after we had no seats, I decided that I was not going to put another term in these committees and then start over in another one, so I decided I would just stay where I was and make the best of it.  And they've been very good committees from my district [30th Congressional District] and they've also been committees that did not have that much a partisan running until this term, both the science committee [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology] and the transportation committee [U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee] were strictly focused toward the subject matter and there were a lot of things we couldn't do.  The people on the committees were very nonpartisan and we strictly looked at policy and the overall picture of the nation as it came to public works.  That worked well all the way through me being in the minority party for twelve years.  There were things that I was able to do when we win a majority on both of those committees that I had not achieved before, but I had not worked on them just as a Democrat.  I know working with Republicans as well.  But when I became a part of the majority again in 2007, we were able to achieve many of those things.  And then the switch came again.  Well, this time around these committees do not reassemble what we've been accustomed.  They're pretty much dominated by the new philosophy of the Tea Party, and the more reasonable members that are still present on the committees have been kind of pushed aside, I guess, by leadership because we have a person who jumped in front of two more senior members become chair of transportation.  Both of them were very reasonable moderate people; Jimmy Duncan of Tennessee and Pete (unclear) of Wisconsin.  The person who was chair of transportation came when I came.  The other members had been here a lot longer, and, you know, you talk with him one on one about something he'll tell you he has to take orders from headquarters and you talk to headquarters which is the speaker, and he points to him so I don't know who it is.  I just know that it's a very different attitude in the committee, and the, the new people are heading many of the subcommittees and they're very hard core against the moderates on the committee.  On the science committee, they chair all of the subcommittees and very, very hard core.  I don't understand the reasoning unless the speaker (background noise) and their conference is doing this to appease a very large majority of Tea Party people that were elected.  I think it's eighty some of them, and they pretty much dominate what's going on.
Story_ID: 640288
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the Women's Health Equity Act [Women's Health Equity Act of 1996].  I hear--have here you played a major role in this (pause) of 1996?
Speaker 2: Are we ready?
Speaker 1: Yes, we're rolling.
Speaker 2: We had a pretty active women's caucus, that's bipartisan it continues to be.  You have coleaders; one from Republican Party and one from Democratic Party.  In '96 [1996] I'm not sure who that was.  It might have been Eleanor Holmes Norton, and I know that Pat Schroeder had been, and the member who is in the [U.S.] Senate who is retiring this year from main, Olympia Snowe, and there are reasonable people to work with, and these were bills that individuals had introduced that we put together and made it a package of that women generally, both Democratic and Republican, felt by a clear majority could support and it became the women's equity act. The research as it relates to osteoarthritis, lupus and all the various things that were affecting women 'cause what we discovered is that they had never been any focus on research in women issues, and the more we examined it to more that I concluded is that we never had had a lot of women here, and so consequently was not so much that men were against research issues related to women, they were just not sensitive to it.  There were more sensitive things that affected men, and so that was our attitude is that we must speak up for ourselves and so we took all of the various pieces of legislation that women or anybody who had introduced and had related directly to women and put it together as a package to pass it so that some attention could be given to those issues that relate to women specifically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Osteoporosis and different--
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a list--yeah, everything from breast cancer, ovarian cancer--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --fairness to minority, women's choice and reproductive health.  Also in '96 [1996], the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled that certain House [U.S. House of Representatives] districts in Texas were gerrymandered racially?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you had to fight for--
Speaker 2: This--I'm in my fifth district when it should be going into the third one.  Once the Republicans got the majority that was one of the things that they were determined to do, and there was change to make up of the delegations, not just in Texas but all over, but Texas was an obvious one.  And that's when we lost really a majority of the Democrats, because they--the way they did it was split up the minority votes into little squares, little triangles, and put them into majority white districts that--where they were voting primarily Republican.  So they made the state Republican, that's when they got--when I came here in Dallas [Texas], Fort Worth [Texas] there were six Democrats, and up to now since that time, it's been one and that's me.  Because they couldn't totally rule out all minorities and so they cut them up into little slices and this gerrymandering really became worse under Republicans because they were busy splitting up the minority votes so that they couldn't have really any impact, and that's why we're in court now.  You know, Supreme Court also changed and became much more conservative so they were received in a much more friendly manner when the--when they were challenged and, of course, we'd have to appeal it and it was--I thought when the Supreme Court upheld, that plan that Texas submitted in '96 [1996], I lost all confidence (laughter) in the Supreme Court.
Story_ID: 640289
Speaker 1: But you were reelected in 1996 anyway, so you, you come into the 105th Congress [105th U.S. Congress] and so--so things are now kind of more of an uphill fight now with this Congress, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, see this Congress, it was the, the, the year, the, the term after the first two years of electing President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] as president, it seemed to have become a goal to make sure that African Americans would never think of becoming president again.  And, so, every agenda has been targeted against this president, and when all this huge millions and millions of dollars were put out within ten days of the last election in 2010, it was an avalanche of defeat of Democrats and that was to stop Obama's progress and this entire term that we're in has been focused on making sure Obama is a one term president.  I don't care what issue you bring up, I don't care how basic it is, it goes back to defeating Obama.
Story_ID: 640290
Speaker 1: But so let's, let's try to get us up to now?
Speaker 2: Okay.  In 1996, is when--let's see.
Speaker 1: So you were reelected in 1996 and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: And it says you were selected to serve on the committee of science [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology] and the House committee of transportation infrastructure [U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee]?
Speaker 2: See the same committees, it's just that I, I had reached some seniority in both committees.  So I served on the ranking member on a subcommittee in science [Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology] and remained there until I shifted to the, the subcommittee on water [Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment]. I think in, I can't remember now what year.  But the reason I switched is because--no, it was around 2000 when I did that, because Bush [President George Walker Bush] was president, and I'd been working on the Trinity, and I can't remember exactly which one of those elections I shifted because there was an opportunity for me to be the subcommittee ranking member on water on transportation, and we were working with the focus on flooding in Dallas [Texas] with the Trinity River, and I wanted to be on that particular committee and that's when I gave up the ranking position on science.  You can only hold a chair ranking member on one committee.  I gave it up on science in order to move to having one on transportation.  Didn't change committees, just focused on leadership roles, because I was in a position to be in a leadership role on either committee but when a position became available over the water committee on transportation, so when I switched away from science to that in leadership positions.
Story_ID: 640291
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I think there was--a big issue was the route 35 [Interstate 35] going through Texas, the NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] super highway in 1997?
Speaker 2: That really came in '93 [1993] and '94 [1994] I think.  When we had the NAFTA trade agreement, that was in '94 [1994] or '95 [1995].  It was when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president, it was when Bentsen [Lloyd Bentsen] was the secretary of treasury.  It was kind of early in the Clinton administration, because they were still reorganizing some, and they had made a determination to close the regional office [Dallas/Fort Worth District Office] for small business [U.S. Small Business Administration] and move it to Colorado.  When they called and asked me for my vote on NAFTA, I knew that labor didn't like it, but I also knew that the economy in Dallas [Texas] depended on trade.  And so I called the president, and I said, "You know, if I give you my vote, you're going to have to give me something."  And that's when I said, "Leave that small business regional office in Dallas because we have the largest number of small businesses in that entire region."  And so he said, "Okay.  Well, give me somebody to run it."  And I said, "Okay.  I'll get something over to you tomorrow."  I had an application on my desk for someone who had applied to be my chief of staff or district director.  Any way, he was a retired military and had some management experience, and I sent his name and he got the position and ran that region very very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Breedlove [James Breedlove] was his name.  But that was pretty early in the Clinton administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't know why they have a note here about it, but we can move on. But I was just saying. Now, the--tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did that pass that trade agreement, and after they passed the trade agreement, I-35 came in debate as the trade corridor, 'cause it was the trade agreement was between Canada and Mexico and the U.S.  That highway ran from Canada through Texas into Mexico, and the designation of it being the NAFTA highway was important because it ran the entire route.  Most of it was in Texas and it meant getting additional dollars to improve it and keep that highway up.  So I did work to get that labeled the NAFTA highway.
Story_ID: 640292
Speaker 1: Now, stop me if I'm moving too fast, but--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: --in 1998, you know, is when President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] starting in trouble around the Monica Lewinsky affair, and so then the impeachment process.  Now, tell me some of that fight, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very supportive of the president, and I encouraged him more than one time to hold his head up and get through that, because my attitude about that whole thing I knew something about a little bit of the internal stuff on it.  How this girl had just pursued him apparently with encouragement of some other people, and I knew the person who hired her over there and how the rumors had gotten to be kind of like, she can't keep her mind on her work, she acts like she is just totally drawn to trying to get his attention.  And so when that hit, I had already been hearing these little rumors about how this girl was just, would drop anything if she heard he was in the vicinity or where she was, to go after him.  I didn't have any clue that anything other than that was going on.  But when it came up, I also considered that a real--'cause the person that he had fired from over the White House and sent over to the [U.S.] Department of Commerce--of defense [U.S. Department of Defense] had been in schedule, I think, with the present preceding which was Senior Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], was very angry that she had been moved, and so it was very career that the rumor had it that she was just digging ditches as much as she could there.  And so I considered it all a part of that anti-Clinton situation.  I was very very disappointed and sorry to hear that it'd come to that point but it did not distract my support from Clinton.  I had been on buses traveling across this country working on his campaign with him, and I had seen how women just threw themselves at him, and so when I heard about this young girl over there doing the same thing, I just considered some of the same behavior that I had seen previously.  And I was really beginning to feel more sorry for him being pursued the way I had observed, and so when it did happen, I did not slack on my support for him, although, I disagreed with what apparently took place, I knew that it was a part of somebody's little conspiracy to try to get something on him, because, you know, in retrospect I think that he was treated almost as badly as Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] by the Republicans.  Not quite as bad, because he had more of an outreach than what Obama has.  And so he kept a lot of contact with members of [U.S.] Congress, and there were quite a few Republicans who really liked him.  It really could have been worse had he not had some relationship with some of the people.  It didn't keep the House [U.S. House of Representatives] from voting to impeach him for the trial in the [U.S.] Senate, but it did affect how the outcome was in the Senate.  But I talked with House members directly who felt that they had been pressed to vote forth but did not feel that that should have come to that point. But I never removed my support for him, because I felt that I could identify with where he was trying to go as president.
Speaker 1: How did it disrupt, I guess, legislation?
Speaker 2: It was depressing.  It was a period of time when it was very difficult to continue to keep your mind on your work, however, I was on two committees that were not that partisan, and at that time they sure were not and that was both science and transportation.  And so we intended to keep right on an agenda of working.  It was much more apparent in committees like John Conyers' [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] committee.
Speaker 1: The judiciary committee [U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary]?
Speaker 2: Judiciary.  There was much more disruption there, because most of that activity rested with that committee.
Story_ID: 640293
Speaker 1: Now, you were reelected in '98 [1998] and in 2000 again.  In 2000, that was the--did you have any--well, first of all, before we leave the President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  Do you have any reflections on President Clinton's administration?
Speaker 2: President Clinton's administration was the best administration I've worked with since I been here, including this one.  He was the person who worked at communicating with members of [U.S.] Congress.  If he had a position, he would get on that phone and call individuals to explain it, he would have groups coming over to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to dialogue with him on issues, major issues.  When I--the first, from the first term that I was here, I was an officer in CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] all the way up to becoming chair.  Which was after President Clinton left.  And he invited--I was a whip for the CDC.  He invited the whips over.  He invited different caucuses over, different committee members on--he was always in touch with the members to talk one on one back and forth on what issues were coming up and what he wanted to see in it and so he built relationships.  He called individuals one on one.  I remember one day, I was walking through the Rayburn room and one of the security guards came and said, "You're wanted on this committee--on this telephone, it's the president."  And I said, "Oh, okay."  So I went over to the telephone, picked it up, and he goes, "Nancy?"  Then Nancy Johnson was on ways and means [House Committee on Ways and Means] at that time as a Republican.  I said, "Oh Mr. President, this is Eddie Bernice [HistoryMaker Eddie Bernice Johnson]."  He said, "Oh, hi Eddie Bernice, I was trying to reach Nancy Johnson."  I said, "I'll see if I can help you find her."  But, I mean, he didn't just call Democrats.  He called Republicans, as well.  And not long ago, somebody asked one of the Republicans, "In your opinion who was the best president you've experienced since you been here?" And this is somebody who was here on the first Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] as well.  He said, "Bill Clinton."  Bill Clinton took the time to build relationships with members of Congress, and Bush [President George Walker Bush] did it to a small, much smaller degree, but this president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] has not done so.
Speaker 1: I know he's criticized by the left for trying to make too many relationships with the right, but--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what I blame--first of all, is it okay to talk about the current president right now?
Speaker 1: Sure.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: First of all, this president, you have to understand, he didn't grow up black in America.  That's number one.  Number two, he was not a part of this institution here very long before he ran for president, so he never really learned, I think, what makes an effective relationship with the Congress.  And he didn't surround himself with anybody who had those relationships.  And so what I blame him for is not putting people in place who can be of help to him in building those relationships.  It's very important for a president to have relationships with the Congress if you're going to get anything done.  But to have a conference and spill out what you want done and never had touched base with anybody in leadership, it's a mistake.  First of all, you create a feeling that you are roughshodding the people.  When you open up a big package, the best way to get package passed is to have dealt with every aspect of that package with people who are going to be key people in passing it.  With whoever the committee chairs are, whether Democrats and Republicans, whoever your leadership people are, Democrats and Republicans, when you don't do that whether you see it or not, there is a wait and see on whether you're going to respect me or not.  And so I think this president made more mistakes on that level than anybody that I've worked with.  I've only worked with three presidents.
Story_ID: 640294
Speaker 1: I have a question about that, and specifically--but we need to go back and backtrack on some other things, but I wanted to ask you about the health--the Obama healthcare legislation [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010].  Were you consulted on that at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was by internally in the House [U.S. House of Representatives].  I was at the table in helping to put that together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because you're focused on health, and so he did consult you on that?
Speaker 2: He didn't consult me.
Speaker 1: Oh?
Speaker 2: I was consulted internally here.  I did say to some of the White House people some of the things that I thought about issues, and some of that has been since the bill has passed.  On this thing, as it relates to the Catholic church.  I never, I never saw that as a church issue.  And but I did get on a conference call when they were getting ready to announce the policy on that.  I was asked to be on that call, and I said then, this is not a religious issue.  This is a personal decision between an insurance company and a person.  It had nothing to do with a hospital.  Unless a hospital just--if somebody wants an abortion, and the hospital doesn't do it they got to find another one.  You know, I respect that.  But I kept trying to explain to the White House, if this was religious I would be taking a position.  But when you're talking about coverage on an insurance policy that only that individual can access, the hospital is not going to decide whether that woman is going to have an abortion or not.  That woman is going to decide that.  If that hospital doesn't want to do it, she has to go somewhere else, which is what's been happening all the time.  But whether or not that insurance company covers that part of the policy is strictly a decision between that woman and the insurance company.  It has nothing to do with religion.  And so this is what I've been trying to say to Valerie [HistoryMaker Valerie Jarrett] and anybody else I could talk with about that, and it just seems that it never really comes out quite like that.  Although, they have--I've seen them use some of the things that I said to them about it.
Story_ID: 640295
Speaker 1: Well, before we really get into depth about this administration [of HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], let's deal with the Bush administration?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Now Bush is from Texas, George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush], he's elected in 2000, controversial election?
Speaker 2: He wasn't elected, but he--the [U.S.] Supreme Court allowed him to take the position.
Speaker 1: To be selected?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you have any kind of relationship with--what was your relationship to George W. Bush?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew George W. Bush before he ran for governor in Texas, and I never dreamed that he would ever run for governor, let it alone president.  He was a nice friendly person who loved baseball and loved to party.  You know, he called several times inviting me to games and that sort of thing.  So I had a relationship with him, distantly, about as distant as a Democrat and a Republican in Dallas, Texas can be.  We knew each other civically. When he called to tell me he's running for governor.  I said, "Well, you know, I'm a Democrat."  He said, "Well, don't be too hard on me," and we just kind of left it like that.  I knew Karl Rove before that, and I, and I worked with him when he was governor.  I mean, we were in touch much more often than I'm in touch with the current one, who had been a Democrat that I knew as well.  And we were back and forth talking all the time.  And I would give him my true opinion of what I felt about some of his policies and that sort of thing, and he said, "Oh, we got to do it the Texas way."  And I said, "Well, the Texas way ain't always the best way and," you know, we'd go back and forth.  But it was a friendly disagreement, and the same thing was when he was here.  I came in as chair of the Congressional Black Caucus the same year that he won, and there has been discussion as to whether they thought that was the right time in case he won, and I said, "Well, I know him and we're two different spectrums of philosophy, and I haven't had any problems up to now in standing my ground in what I believe in."  And so I won, and so any way, when he got to be president, I wrote the routine letter asking if we can have an audience with him, and I didn't hear back at first.  So I called Karl Rove, and I told him it was routine that we as a caucus meet with the president.  So he said, okay, he'd look into it.  Then he set a meeting, the president called me, and I was on the House floor [U.S. House of Representatives] and he wanted to know what we wanted to talk about, and I went down the list of items we wanted to talk about and the last thing I had on there was Africa, and he goes, "Eddie Bernice [HistoryMaker Eddie Bernice Johnson], what is this about Africa?"  I said, "Mr. President, that's our motherland, and we have to look out for Africa in this Congress [107th U.S. Congress]."  So he said, "Oh, okay."  That was the only thing he asked a question about.  So we went to see him the next day or so, and it was a very good exchange.  And so we'd been there--he'd given us an hour, we'd been there an hour and fifteen or twenty minutes, and his staff was beginning to stand up and Cheney [Dick Cheney] wasn't cracking a smile, staring him down.  And so I said, "Well, Mr. President, I know that we've taken longer than you expected and whatever."  He said, "No, no, no, but we're going to talk about Africa before you leave."  He had schooled himself on issues of Africa that day.  He said he had talked to Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and he had talked to Condoleezza Rice, and he said, "I want to talk about Africa."  And so we did, and it was at that meeting that he said, "We're going to address AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Africa."  And his commitment to that was stronger than most of the other subjects that we had talked about.  And he did that.  And, obviously, he's gotten probably more credit than he deserves, but he took--he looked at every program over every agency to see how it address AIDS.  And he took all of that and consolidated into one program.  And, of course, it looked and sounded better to do that, and he pushed it.  So--and I said to--I call him Carty [Andrew Card]. What was his chief of staff's name?  He's in the (unclear) now at the Bush library.
Speaker 1: You're talking about Rove?  Was it Scooter [Scooter Libby]?  Not Scooter?
Speaker 2: It was something.  It was Car- Carty.  His nickname was Carty.  But any way I said to him, I said, "Listen, I know that we're all Democrats, but you need to keep in touch with us."  He said, "For what reason?"  And I said, "There will be topics that you will want to talk with us about during this course."
Story_ID: 640296
Speaker 1: We were talking about President Bush's [President George Walker Bush] initiatives in Africa and you were saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's one thing he took to that you were surprised--
Speaker 2: He, he did.  And he kept his word on it.  He, he pulled everything together and then he had a Rose Garden meeting to talk about it.  Now, it was not so much what he did as an individual except that he pulled all of these programs together, got 'em reorganized, and then he offered it as a package.  And it did put more emphasis on coordinated approaches to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in Africa.  And he'll always be remembered for doing that because it did take his leadership to coordinate this to have better expenditures in Africa.  He didn't do that for this country, but he did do it for Africa.  That's what we asked him about when we visit with him.  So he did do that.
Speaker 1: Now, what about STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education and No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001]?  I think you had some kind of a compromise in that?
Speaker 2: Well, in No Child Left Behind, you know, he, he had three people working on the program that didn't always agree with each other.  One was a former county Democratic chair, Dallas County [Texas] called Sandy Kress that got to know him when he was governor.  He was practicing law there in Austin [Texas].  And he left Dallas, 'cause when he found out he had kind of torn his pants for running for office.  So he had worked with him.  Margaret who became a Spellings [Margaret Spellings], who had been his advisor on education when he was governor.  And then his secretary of education, who was Rod Paige, whom he had met when his father [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was running for president.  Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] tried to pull all these ideas together, which he pretty much did, and put that bill together.  And, and the bill had great intentions.  Had some flaws, and then they gave so many waivers that it was almost ineffective.  But that, that focus on education was a sincere effort I think on his part.  On, on science education, we had his support.  I worked with Congressman Ehlers [Vern Ehlers] from Michigan who was a Ph.D. in physics for seven years before we could get a bill passed, and that was after we became majority.  And then it became Gordon's [Bart Gordon] bill because he swung back to the committee after being gone for twelve years, and became chair because of seniority and leaving his slot there in the committee.  And it passed then as America Competes [America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science Act of 2007], but it didn't start with him.  It really started back when Ehlers, and I were trying to work to put it together.  And so he not only encouraged it to pass, he pledged more money than we thought he would.  He pledged $35 billion, which was quite an achievement.  The reauthorization of that bill came later and the reauthorization did come.  The--I think the thing that, his economic policies and, and his continual involvement in the wars is what cau- and then his favoritism toward these big institutions.  All of that came a loose while he was still president.  He kept it very quiet.  But that Wall Street stuff and all that?  That crumbled under him.  You know, that first stimulus package that passed was his stimulus package.  And in my judgement, that's the part that was over his head, 'cause his interest, I'm sure he was interested in that too, but I think his interest of trying to do good was there.  I, I really think that he made an effort to do good in education.  He made an effort to do good in Africa.  He was fairly supportive of transportation.  He was not supportive of that Trinity [Trinity River] improvement.
Story_ID: 640297
Speaker 1: But I kept, I kept talking to him [President George Walker Bush] and talking to him and talking to him about it.  And so we passed that bill.  And, and, and I called and talked with him and told him to look at it closely and then I talked to--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just--well, I think people--well, the Trinity, that, that's the Trinity River situation?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That, that's the river that flooded your parents' [Lillie Mae White Johnson and Edward Johnson] when you were, when you were in college [Saint Mary's College, Notre Dame, Indiana], right?
Speaker 1: It flooded when I was a kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I was in Waco [Texas] at that time, but you know, it was supposed to have been protected for a hundred year flood.  But I had lived in Dallas [Texas] long enough that I could see the change and why that was not gonna hold up, you know, that hundred year flood thing.  And that was all of the growth that had come to that river.  Tall trees and all that was not gonna let that water flow.  It would splash it and it would flood.  And so I was--and I saw flooding in Dallas that came up to people's roofs at the turn of that Trinity down there.  And so I was determined that when I came here, as a matter of fact when I was running for [U.S.] Congress, that flood took place.  And, and I said, that's the one thing I wanna correct when I get to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So I'd been working on it and, a little at a time, and then when we got the majority and I was chairing that subcommittee [Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment, U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee], I knew that was my time to do it.  'Cause you know, you don't wait here.  If you've got a chance to do something, you better do it then.  So I, I started talking to Karl Rove about it, and I talked to the president about it.  And so when we finally passed that bill, I had worked with everybody with key projects, both House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate because I was intending to make sure that I had the commitment to pass this bill.  And so, I, I told Karl, I said, "Look, tell the president not to veto this bill."  I said, "It's a good bill, check it out closely."  I said, "Now, I'm gonna tell you, if he vetoes, it is likely to be overridden."  I don't think he believed it, but he waited until the last--I said, "Tell him to let it go into law without a signature."  He waited until the very last day that it could go into law without his signature to veto it.  And it was a weekend time.  When I got back to town that Monday, I started working on that override.  The people who had those projects in there, they wanted those projects.  So we were able to pull together that vote, and he got a shocking override.  The only override he got the whole time he was president.  But, he didn't show any anger toward me when I saw him the next time.  He said, "There's Miss Trinity."  And so, right now, we're still friendly.  Because whenever I was trying to get people to support me on something, was not with a lot of anger, but I tried to do it with a lot of understanding as to why I felt it was so much needed.  And so when he was, I saw him on day when, when I was over with Dr. DeBakey [Michael E. DeBakey].  We'd taken a picture and so I said, "Mr. President, are you gonna move back to Dallas?"  And he said, "If I can find anything I can afford to live in."  And I said, "But you haven't decided where yet?"  So he said, "No." I said, "Well, when you find out, I need that address."  I said, "I wanna build a trench from that Trinity River to your front door so you'll be the first to know when it floods."  And so we laughed about it, and he still calls me Miss Trinity when I see him (laughter).
Story_ID: 640298
Speaker 1: So we've had, we had a friendly relationship.  I didn't expect him [President George Walker Bush] to agree with me on everything.  And I'm certain he didn't expect me to agree on everything.  But one thing I said to, to Andrew Card very early, I said, "Keep in touch with the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus].  There will be some times when you might need us."  And he said, "I can't remember what that would be."  I said, "Well, keep the, just remember this word.  T-R-A-D-E."  And the first call that I got from the president, I was sitting at my desk one night, and my cell phone rang.  And, I don't know if it was the first call.  We, we kind of kept in touch.  And I said, "Hello?"  He said, "Congresswoman Johnson [HistoryMaker Eddie Bernice Johnson]?"  I said, "Yes."  He says, "Hold on just a minute.  The president wants to speak to you."  And I looked and said, "This is on my cell phone."  We were in session that night.  And he goes, "Eddie Bernice, I need you to help me on a trade bill."  And I started laughing.  And I said, "Mr. President, I'll look at it."  I said, "But it's hard to talk about trade right now when we need jobs."  I said, "But I'll take a look at it, but I can't make a commitment right now."  And so he said, he said, he just handed the phone to Andrew Card.  So I said, "I told you there would be times when you would call."  I said, "This is one of those times."  I said, "I'm not saying no right now, but what I'm telling you, it's very difficult for me to work for my vote or anybody else's when we're in need of jobs."  'Cause people think that trade bills cause jobs to leave the country.  So he said, "Okay."  So he sent over Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to talk to me, and he sent over everybody he could think of.  But I didn't vote for a trade bill under his leadership.  Mainly because I didn't agree with his foreign policies, and I didn't know what he was going to be negotiating in those trade bills.  And--but I'm basically supportive of trade because that is the crux of our economy.  But with his economic policies, I, I just didn't trust what would be negotiated.
Story_ID: 640299
Speaker 1: Now, let's, let's talk about 2001 I guess and his foreign policy.  You had some thoughts about why he [President George Walker Bush] was so adamant about invading Iraq, even though we were--9/11 [September 11, 2001] was attacked by other, other than Iraqis.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) coalition of Egyptians and Al-Qaeda.  People that had nothing to do with Iraq.
Speaker 2: Well, if we were gonna be responding in defense of this country, and in my judgement, we should have been going to Afghanistan because we had experienced 9/11.  And it was clearly from Afghanistan.  But his priority, and this was proven by people right around him, was to invade Iraq.  And, and it appeared that the only real justification he had, was the fact that Saddam Hussein had threatened his daddy's [President George Herbert Walker Bush] life or something at one time.  And so I considered that pretty personal.  And I never saw a reason we should be a unilateral first strike on a country.  That had never been this country's philosophy.  We have always said we would not be a unilateral first strike on any country.  We would have to be in a defensive mode.  And we didn't have the UN [United Nations] with us, we didn't have NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] with us, it was a unilateral first strike that we made on Iraq.  I could not see that and, and we wrote a statement that we still hold to.  That there was position of the Congressional Black Caucus on that.  I thought that, you know, there were a lot of turns and what have you.  And I went to Iraq a few times.  The first, I was with the first group that went after Saddam Hussein was brought down, that went over.  But I still, and, and you know, many of the people in Iraq were very pleased that Saddam Hussein was brought down.  Especially those who suffered so much oppression under him.  But we don't have the right to go to these countries and strike somebody down because of the oppressor, we'd be striking the whole world all the time.  It's a lot of oppressive countries.
Story_ID: 640300
Speaker 1: Now tell us about--now that same year that 9/11 [September 11, 2001] took place, you began an initiative called A World of Women for World Peace.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was somewhat related.  That encouraged it.  I had been to Bosnia, and that was the first time that I'd experienced what a war torn country would be like, and it really troubled me.  And then we had 9/11, which was even more troubling.  About two weeks after 9/11, I picked up a magazine that had on the cover these two African kids dressed in war garb with machine guns in their hands.  And I just thought to myself, this has just gone too far.  And it stayed with me.  And, and I was trying to figure out what I could do to see if we could help with a culture of peace in the world.  And it just came to me to start working with women and mothers.  Because I remember Another Mother for Peace, way back in my early career, that there were a group of peace oriented women started, I was working with in Texas.  And I thought of that, and I hadn't heard of them, and I started to ask questions about what groups were involved in trying to bring about peace.  And so my idea, I thought it was just too big for me to try to tackle, but then I thought about the fact that to achieve anything, it takes little pieces and steps at a time.  So I thought about trying to establish a group that would work toward developing a culture of peace in the world.  And that was the beginning.  The name came to me as I woke up one morning, A World of Women for World Peace.  And researching, I found that Mother's Day came out of the, a little bit of Mothers for Peace [sic.] after the Civil War.  They didn't want to see all their sons get killed again in war.  And so I had to put an infrastructure together that would help to direct steps at a time.  And that's when I decided to do some educating here and to start to do some educating around the world.  Bosnia was a, one of the first countries, 'cause that was the first time I had seen real war torn when I went there in the '90s [1990s], and I still work with Bosnia.  When I saw the strong feelings that mothers, primarily women had a town hall meeting with them there.  How strongly they felt about everything being torn up around them, what have you.  And so I wanted to keep touch with them.  I started to have dialogues here on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  I was in touch with the peace center there in Dallas [Texas] who told me about the peace program at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That a Dallasite was running, Swanee Hunt.  So I went in and visited with Swanee.  We continued to stay in touch with each other.  She's been very supportive of me and I've been very supportive of her program.  So I wanted to join hands with every peace group and in the world that I could make contact with.  I contacted the UN [United Nations], started working with the UN.  They had a curriculum that had been developed in The Hague [the Netherlands] that taught techniques.  They would be integrated into schools that would teach young children growing up.  Conciliation and, and attempting to dialogue and understand respecting differences rather than going to fight for every different thing that came up.  So that's how we initially got started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the way I have continued it is I visit other countries, I make the requests before we leave here to, through the embassies to meet with the leading women in the various countries to talk about what the crux of peace might be and what leadership from women would impact.  And so I admit with people all over the world, I've used Voice of America, I've used Radio Free Europe [Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty] and dialogue back and forth interactively as well as visiting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's still, it's--this program's still going on over there today (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 640301
Speaker 1: Now you were elected in 2002.  And so 2002 is--well in 2003 you were appointed the ranking member of the House science and technology committee [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology]?
Speaker 2: No.  That was two thousand--I'm in my first set term of the ranking member for the full committee.  So it would have been 2010.
Speaker 1: So 2010?  Okay.  We were way off.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It--2011 because it was after the election of 2010 that I got to be ranking member.  So I've just been there this term.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're not, well, let's not worry about that then.  So what happened in 2002?  What, what were some of the events of 2002?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].  Let's see.  There was a change in districts again. (Pause) You have any notes?  See, I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: I'm trying--
Speaker 2: After 2001 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had that note about the science.
Speaker 2: --I continued to work with, I started to develop--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --that program [A World of Women for World Peace].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, he was asking, well do you remember when the Democrats left the Texas Legislature en masse?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  That was, had to be, let's see, we had the census in 2000.  It must have been 2000, that had to be, be 2001 and '02 [sic. 2003].  Yeah, during that redistricting time.
Speaker 2: Well what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, of course we were in the grave minority and numbers in the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate and, and we knew that they were ignoring our input as a party for drawing lines.  And so when the Senate knew that they were being overpowered, they, the Democrats broke the, the quorum by going to--well, they went to New Mexico.  The House went to Oklahoma to protest what was going on in the redistricting.  Ultimately, we lost.  We might have had a little more input, but we still didn't really get justice (laughter) in terms of, of seats.  They still did it just like they wanted to.
Story_ID: 640302
Speaker 1: Well one, one big thing that happened in 2002 was that you voted against the authorization of the use of force in Iraq.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I voted against the war in Iraq [Iraq War].  I voted for the defense in Afghanistan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So in hindsight, do you think, I mean, other than the personal reason you gave for President Bush [President George Walker Bush], did you see any other--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --the, the personal motivation that you thought that President Bush had, was there any other motivation for the war?
Speaker 2: I'm really not a product of, not a, a student of war.  And I, I feel very strongly about the U.S. going into a country to tell them what to do.  I mean, I'm not saying the countries are right, but we would feel equally as strongly if they were coming here trying to tell us what to do.  I believe in a democracy.  All of us know that most of the world is not organized as a democratic--as democracies.  But we have a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] that we agree that would study the world situation and we've also agreed that we would not enter a war unilaterally.  Just as the UN--U.S. by itself going into war, unless we were defending ourselves.  And going into Iraq, we were not defending ourselves, we didn't have NATO behind us, we didn't have the UN [United Nations] behind us.  It was a unilateral first strike, which is against everything this country was built on philosophically.  And so I, I couldn't see supporting that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in addition to that, we were sending a lot of young men and women across the world to kill a lot of other young men and women.  And they didn't even have a reason why.  We could not give a legitimate reason why we were doing it.  The, this [U.S.] Congress never got a legitimate policy reason of why we should be invading Iraq.  I was sitting in my office one day, and all of a sudden this breaking news came and we were dropping missiles in Iraq.  And, and it became the longest war in history.  And it's still what, I don't know what we went for, but whatever we went for, we didn't get it.  Because it's still not over.  We made a decision to come out.  Most of them want us out, some of us wanted to stay.  The ones who wanted us to stay were just afraid of security.  They had not been trained to protect themselves.  But we were not wanted in that country.  I work with women from over there right now.  And, and I worked with some of the people who were in exile over here that went back afterwards.  Some of them ran for office, some of them won.  And I emailed one of the people all the time who was one of the, she had been a judge over there and was in charge of the judges as they tried Saddam Hussein.  So it was a three way religious disagreement.  But the main thing he wanted to do is take down Saddam Hussein.
Story_ID: 640303
Speaker 1: So the U.S. invades in 2003 and there's a lot of--some of the, I don't know if you have, some have criticized the Bush administration [President George Walker Bush] for fattening up some of his colleagues in the oil industry?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of rumors flying and some of it has proven to be almost true, I think.  One had to do with oil, one had to do with Israel.  Some blamed Werkovitch [sic. Paul Wolfowitz], or whatever his name is.  And the other one that, one was a Jewish man, and then one was the secretary of defense [Donald Rumsfeld] or something.  They considered it their war.  Cheney [Dick Cheney] they blamed for Halliburton [Halliburton Company] being in charge of everything, and making all the money while he was still on their payroll as vice president.  So there was just nothing really that the American people had to feel good about that invasion.  It, it was almost like an act of personal vengeance.  And, and I, I truly believe that if you did a poll of the American people today, the majority of them would still feel that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were in favor of invading Afghanistan?
Speaker 2: I was, because Afghanistan invaded us.  You know, I mean, that's who attacked the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] here, and the two buildings [World Trade Center] in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: So to me, that was enough to defend yourself for.
Story_ID: 640304
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer's Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson--
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) District 30 [30th Congressional District], Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June the 26th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And, just confirm that we are finishing an interview that we did the second part of last month, if not two weeks ago, I believe?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So we left off, we were talking about the administration of George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] and your activities in [U.S.] Congress during those days.  Now you had a reelection campaign in 2002, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Like what was your opposition and what were the issues?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember who my, I know I had a Republican, do you have anything on it?  I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].  I know that it was, that first election right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], it was at that time, it was sort of a climate of us trying to come together and work together as a Congress.  I think that the 9/11 activity forced us to appreciate where we are, the democracy we enjoy, and the fact that we, we have the responsibility for serious business.  I'm not quite sure how long that lasted in terms of attitudes, but I think that, I really believe it lasted through that last election, my next election.  I have not routinely had primary opposition.  I've always had general election opposition.  But somewhere during that time, I think it must have been that next election, there was redistricting again.  And it was the era of Gingrich [Newt Gingrich], is that when Gingrich won?  I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: No, that's back in '90 [1990]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --ninety-four [1994].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 1: It was too, under George W. Bush.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think that, that one of the key points that we have on the outline is that you opposed the invasion of Iraq?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Before and after it took place.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Yes, we were with the backdrop of 9/11.  It was clear to me that the country had to defend itself against Afghanistan.  But instead of looking at Afghanistan, President Bush looked immediately at Iraq.  And, which I didn't feel was appropriate.  And NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], nor the UN [United Nations] supported invasion.  And so my concern was a unilateral first strike, which was never a part of the U.S.'s positions.  So I did take a position against that war [Iraq War].  I never thought that it was a war that we should have started, and especially should not have started without it having a strike or without it being a NATO invasion.  And it was not, it did not qualify.  So I had strong objections to entering into that war.  For all that was circulating, it appeared that it was the personal goal of President Bush from the time that he became president to invade Iraq because of some breach that he, that Saddam Hussein and his father [President George Herbert Walker Bush] had.  I thought that was not anywhere near big enough to justify invading a country.
Story_ID: 640305
Speaker 1: Now you talked--last time we talked about that, we discussed the fact that you knew George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] and had a working relationship with him at least--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Texas, so.  But we'll get back to it in a minute, but can you tell us about, now in 2003, you, you were rated 100 percent by SANE [National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy; Peace Action] indicating a pro-peace voting contact.  You were also the ranking member, a ranking member of the House science and technology committee [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology] and the House science and technology committee played a major role in dealing with environmental concerns then in those days.  I know those were the days of, I think when Al Gore was working on his movie ['An Inconvenient Truth'].  And so, tell us about your role in the House science and technology?
Speaker 2: Well, in the, I came here interested in science and technology.  You know, there's a will, there's transportation.  And I participated in the world dialogues on the environment up until President Bush was elected, he made the request that we not participate anymore.  That the [U.S.] Congress not participate anymore.  As a matter of fact, when they were going through all this voting, and who was gonna be president, I was in The Hague [the Netherlands] attending one of the world conferences on the climate change.  And it was puzzling to me that the United States did not want to be a part of the world dialogue on climate change.  Because we were the world's greatest polluters in this country.  And, and we certainly needed to work with the rest of the world to do something about that.  We didn't have maybe the greatest fumes or what have you, but we had the greatest electrical, environmental damage and pollution of anywhere else in the world.  And I thought it was rather strange that the president did not want, he didn't want the protocols of course, to be agreed with that came out of the world conference.
Speaker 1: Kyoto Protocol (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Kyoto Protocols.  He was against them, and so they never really came up for a vote in the [U.S.] Senate.  But which, in, in my judgement became a, one of the first real mistakes that we as a country made, to drop out of that world planning.  And, and of course it's continued.  But I thought that was a little nearsightedness that we would avoid the dialogue simply perhaps because we didn't want to comply with cooperating with the rest of the world to do something about global warming.  Global warming had a lot to do with diseases and the travelling of diseases around the world, around, and so I thought it was very worthwhile that we be on the forefront of what could come out of this information.  But President Bush wanted a stop brought to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I know earlier if, correct me if I'm wrong, Al Gore urged the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] to sign the Kyoto accords, but the Clinton administration didn't sign?
Speaker 2: Well it was up to the U.S. Senate.  And, and of course to comply with getting rid of pollution, does take some very thoughtful strategy.  We, we all know that many of the things that we are doing will not lend itself to cleaning the environment.  Most of the things that have to be done, the technology is available to do it.  But it's expensive.  Businesses don't want necessarily to do it and it's been a struggle.  But that's why even up to today, the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] administrators are constantly under attack.  And all she's [Lisa Jackson] trying to do is meet some standards of air and water that would be healthy for American people.  But there's great resistance to meeting many of these standards.
Story_ID: 640306
Speaker 1: I think we, we talked about, a little about, about STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics] education last time in regards to the Bush No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes, I have been very interested in STEM education since I first started public office and one of the reasons why is because I saw my community become a very high tech community.  And I knew that was the wave of the future.  And I knew that if we were going to maintain any prominence on the world stage, we had to prepare our young people with the skills and information that they needed.  And the only way that you can do that is to emphasize the science, technology, engineering and math education.  And so, that has been, I, I, really I passed my first legislation regarding that in 1974 when I was in the Texas House [Texas House of Representatives].  But I continued my interest here because instead of it beginning to maybe level off and it was getting to be a greater concern of education in those areas.  And, and I see it every day where young people are graduating with degrees that have no relevance to our future.  And, and it's very common among African Americans to go to colleges and not have a sound education and meaningful areas for our future.  And so that has become even more important to me, that we get the information out and try to make opportunities for young people to understand that to have a role that is meaningful, and to have a job that pays, the background is, is one that you cannot overlook.  That the future holds for our country, is to have a good background in science, technology, engineering and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 2003, did the, in your opinion, did the, I mean did they, was the Bush administration [President George Walker Bush] on the right track with the No Child Left Behind?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that was a great attempt.  I don't know that anybody can really come up with the answer where one size fits all, and educating our young people in this country.  First of all, we start at different levels.  Our population growths are different, and it is very difficult to just put out one program without much flexibility.  It's got to have some flexibility, so when we're reaching our students, for example, in our home state in Texas, our whole population has changed tremendously.  We have become sort of a world stage people where we're very international and our students have different levels of understanding in these areas.  We're finding that the young people who come from India, and who come from the Asian countries, are ahead of our students that are natives in this country.  And our new immigrants coming from South and Central America are just as behind as African Americans.  And so, and this way our growth is now in population.  So we've got to give special attention to the areas that have had the least quality and education.  So, Leave No Child Behind [sic.] was a very good start, there was great resistance all over the country and mostly in the South as well to the provisions of Leave No Child Behind.  But that, that education piece was put together largely by Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], along with the help of the Bush administration.  I will say that I can compliment President Bush for being very interested in education.  The America Competes [America Creating Opportunities to Meaningfully Promote Excellence in Technology, Education, and Science Act of 2007] was a, a very good example when we finally got it passed.  He was willing to fund it at the level of funding that was requested.  And so w- he clearly seemed to understand that that was an investment in our future, and in this nation.
Story_ID: 640307
Speaker 1: Now moving forward (unclear), now 2005, you know, saw the tragedy of Hurricane Katrina in adjoining Texas.  You know, what role did, did you play in--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm from North Central Texas, which is a ways from the border.  From the border both from Louisiana and the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico].  But we were affected, we were affected primarily because people are looking for rescue.  I had to, by majority came into Texas.  And, and right away, there was a tremendous need for space for the people to be.  That was probably one of the worst disasters of the, of the nation in terms of how it affected families, and, and it was a situation that could have been avoided.  That, that's what the sad part is.  We, on the transportation committee [U.S. House of Representatives Transportation and Infrastructure Committee] had been given the information about the questionable levees and the conditions of those levees.  And we actually had a simulation showing what would happen if something was not done about those levees.  Well, we didn't do anything about it.  As a matter of fact, from the time the president [President George Walker Bush] was elected, he never really encouraged, therefore no, no bill along water interest was passed.  The last bill that had been passed was before he was elected.  And yet his own administration showed in research that this country needed $19 billion a year for the next twenty years to bring our water conditions and all of the technologies that it needed for safe, clean water and control of flooding.  Well, we tried to do a one term bill that had 17 billion in it, he thought that was too much.  So we were not taking care of the people's business as it related to the water and the future projection of flooding.  And so Louisiana was caught in the middle of that.
Speaker 1: So did--was a $17 billion proposed bill from the infrastructure committee, transportation infrastructure?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  All right.  'Cause you're also on that committee too.
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a matter of fact, I, I, when we finally got a bill, I was subcommittee chair of that committee.  And, and I just pushed it through using Katrina as a great example of what happens when we neglect what we're supposed to do.  I don't know that anybody thought it would be as bad as Katrina turned out to be, but we did have forewarning.  At least five or six years prior to it happening and we didn't do anything about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So research was presented to the committee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Committee, yes.
Speaker 1: To the committee.  Okay.  Anything else from 2005 that you can think of that--
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005].  It was, Katrina was probably the most historic activity of that year.  It was extremely disturbing.  It, it really kind of unbalanced really the, the equilibrium of this nation to see that this kind of catastrophe (background noise) had happened in this country.
Story_ID: 640308
Speaker 1: Now you were reelected again in 2006, well, 2004 and 2006 [to the U.S. House of Representatives].  And, does it, I guess, is it a, so you always win by a landslide it seems.  But is it annoying to have to run every two years for office?
Speaker 2: Well, it's really not annoying to me.  I think it's something you get accustomed to and, and I think it might be good to run every other year.  You never really get through running, but what it does is it keeps your business on your mind.  You, you have to answer to the people, the people either determine that you are doing a decent job and will keep you or they will turn you out.  And I think it's good to have it on your mind.  I have never complained about having to go up against the voters every other year.  You hardly get finished with one until you're starting out for another, but it does keep you on your toes and make sure that you are doing your worth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were the, I guess the Democratic, Texas Democratic convention, you were the host, I guess, right?  In 2006? Is that true?  In terms of introducing members and nominees and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.  I was, I think at that time, I was chairing the Texas delegation.  And, the Texas Democratic delegation.  And so I was called upon to speak and introduce the delegation at the state convention.  It was following that convention that we had to deal with redistricting right in the middle of an election year.  And I think, it was at that time that, I think that was the delayed redistricting at that time.  And it was--
Speaker 1: Time delay?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It, it was, we went through our primaries and, and got all finished and then the district shift came and it was a very dramatic shift in districts.  And we had to have another open primary.  And I believe that's the, I think that was the election that I had seven primary opponents.  And, and a lot of new territory.  I believe that's the year, anyway, I won without a runoff.  I, I, it was, had been predicted that I would have won.  I always, I don't take anything for granted.  And I always give the voters their due respect that they have a right to switch who they want to represent them anytime they get ready.  And so, but that particular time, I think that's the year then I had to pay primary due- primary fees again.  'Cause we had to have a second primary and, and general election.
Story_ID: 640309
Speaker 1: Well, in 2006, now, can you tell us about the Renewable Funds, Consumer Protection and Energy Efficiency Act [sic. Renewable Fuels, Consumer Protection and Energy Efficiency Act of 2007].  Oh that's 2007, I'm sorry.  Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 2: That was one of the landmark pieces of legislation we tried to pass to deal with our future energy needs planning and the environment.  It was, but that was the year that Democrats came into a majority.  And, and we, we tried hard to deal with those issues that have been almost impossible to deal with the twelve years we have been in the minority.  Which included, you know, education and transportation and energy.  All of those major issues.  And I must tell you that it's easier to deal with the issues like that when, when the [U.S.] Congress is in a majority, rather than who is in the White House.  Because, it, it is, it is very clear that the president, no matter who the president is, can have a lot of goals and set out what they want.  But unless they have those votes in Congress, it's very difficult to achieve it.  And so some of the things that President Bush [President George Walker Bush] got credit for is because we had a majority in the, in the Congress.  Just as President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is getting criticized now for not getting things achieved; and he has no control over it because he doesn't have any control over who's the majority in the Congress.
Story_ID: 640310
Speaker 1: Tell us about, now a lot of people have heard of OPEC [Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries], but there was another bill called NOPEC [No Oil Producing and Exporting Cartels Act], right?  In 2007 (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That, you know, dealing with oil independence or energy independence from the rest of the world has been a very difficult problem.  We are more oil independent now than we have been for years.  But still, that dependence on oil coming out of Africa and the Middle East has been a source of, of real trouble.  Because prices are manipulated, supplies manipulated each time there's a war over there which seems to be continuous.  Supply is, can be played with and manipulated.  There's more drilling in this country now than there has been for many, many, many years.  But we still hear the rumbling about the Middle East.  But as long as it's this much money that can be placed in elections, it would be difficult to get the votes to really address issues of this sort that's better for the nation.  And because these big corporations can give unlimited money in elections and nobody wants to lose.  But, and some people are more tied to the corporate support than others.  And, but it seems to me that those who are tied to that corporate support are in the majority.  And that means that these corporations have great influence on which way policy goes.  And, and the, as long as it's that way, we will always come up short as a nation.
Story_ID: 640311
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about some of the revelations of the Iraq War?  Like, the Abu Ghraib prison situation (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when we saw those pictures that had been taken--I, I just didn't finish watching them.  I thought it was so very, very degrading and such a disappointment and just a, two or three of our troops being involved.  But in war, it is hard to control and especially now because you have an all voluntary military.  Many of the young people are going into the [U.S.] military, are coming from homes that are low income and poor, that are looking for opportunities to improve their education opportunities and opportunities for jobs.  It is not like a draft where everybody has to spend some responsibility doing that.  So you have to look at where you start.  And right now, it, there's probably not a single voluntary military person who did not come from a very poor home.  And, and often, we know that the opportunities that are offered for the poor in this country are at the very bottom of the list.  And so we start out with military people that don't have even the mixture of people that have a mixed background.  And so we do the best we can with what we get.  And, and I have nothing but great respect for those who are willing to volunteer to go in.  But, we are dealing with a very different population than what we dealt with back when we had a draft.  When you had a very big mixture of people coming from all walks of life, all income levels, and all educational levels.  The majority of our young people going into the military now don't have much education and might have finished high school.  And haven't had too many experiences beyond their little encapsulated neighborhoods that they grow, grow up in.  And so we are likely to see that kind of situation when that's what we're dealing with, with our military.
Story_ID: 640312
Speaker 1: Now, in 2008 was an election year.  And you know, stop me at any time if you think I'm going too fast.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: But 2008 was the election year.  The candidates that we were trying to enumerate them in the car on the way over here.  You had, you know, of course, Joe Biden, John Edwards, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was a favorite, and then you had Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who was the candidate that was gaining steam.  But you know, a lot of people in the beginning didn't think he had a chance.  Well, this is actually 2007.  That's kind of when it starts.
Speaker 2: Yes.  When we start to look forward to the election in 2007, there were a number of very qualified candidates on the Democratic side.  And in 2006, my family, my son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson] and family came for my oath taking.  And actually, in my judgement, that was going to be my last one.  And but they got a chance to meet with, what was to become president, Senator Obama.  And they were very excited, and of course, from the time he came to [U.S.] Congress.  There was some undercurrent talk about he could be a president.  And as a matter of fact, I was interviewed at the convention in Boston, Massachusetts that year [2004 Democratic National Convention].  And I was asked what I thought about him, as going to be elected as U.S. senator.  And I said, "Well," I said, "I'm very, very pleased and I think that gives us an opportunity to entertain the idea that he could become president."  And I never thought that my words would become history.  But at the time, he was exciting.  He came here, we got to know him, I was pretty close to him in this Congressional Black Caucus, and he met my family and took a lot of pictures and, and we were all very pleased.  And he really, and people all around were saying, you know, "He should be running for president."  At that time, however, when it was really going, you know that Senator John Edwards had run the election before.  And he came and did my prayer breakfast because I have an annual prayer breakfast at home and he was my speaker.  And that was really shortly after the election in 2006.  Wait, was it '6 [2006] or '4 [2004]?  It must have been four.  And, and so, he asked if I would support him for president and I kind of smiled.  But he had the support of many of my financial supporters in Dallas [Texas].  Mostly plaintiffs lawyers, and I said, "Well yes.  I think I can."  So when the time came, I was already committed to John Edwards, whom I had great respect for.
Story_ID: 640313
Speaker 1: All right.  We were talking--so you were committed to John Edwards by two thou-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a spillover from the 2004 campaign?
Speaker 2: Right.  Let's see (counts) yeah, he had run in 2004.  He came in 2005 to do my prayer breakfast, and it was at that time I said, "Well, if he runs I surely would consider supporting him."  And--'cause I had supported him when he was on the ticket with Senator John Kerry.  And really urged Senator Kerry to put him on the ticket with him.  I had--I was very impressed with Senator Edwards.  He was very bright, very hard working and had no reservation in speaking up for people in need, and so I had great admiration for him and I still do.  He made some mistakes, but I still have great admiration for him.  So there was this array of people out there, and I had worked very hard for the Kerry-Edwards ticket, and then I still think they won, Ohio was cheated.  They were cheated out of Ohio just like Senator--
Speaker 1: Gore [Al Gore], I guess.
Speaker 2: --Gore was cheated out of in Florida.
Story_ID: 640314
Speaker 1: But, nevertheless, we--you know, life goes on and there's nothing you can do about it, and so when--then when Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] talked about running.  I had been very close to Hillary and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  They were a couple that I truly admired, but I was committed to Edwards [John Edwards] when all that started out.  And as we moved along, I kept saying it depends on, you know, what happens.  I don't have anything to give but my word.  I've given to Edwards, and that's where I'll stay until we see what happens.  Well, as we moved along, Senator Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] kept saying, "I need your help--." He came--he was not sure at first, and then one day he came into the Congressional Black Caucus luncheon and he said--he came right to me, and he said, "I'm going to do it."  And I said, "You're kidding?"  He said, "No, I've prayed over it, and I'm going to try it."  And so I said, well--I said, "I'm committed to Edwards but I know my entire family will be with you."  He said, "Oh, you're committed."  I said, "It's been that way."  I said, "And that's where I've given my word.  That's all I have is my word.  I'm true to it, so let's see how things go."  So I immediately called my son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson] and his family and they were all excited about Barack Obama.  And as things moved on and I listened to the various debates, at the debate in South Carolina I attended and it was very clear to me that Edwards was getting ready to pull out.  So Obama walked that runway and came down and he looked right at my face and so he said, "You still not with me?"  I said, "Let me just say this."  I said, "If Edwards pulls out, I will be with you."  He said, "I'm a hold you to it."  I said, "Okay."  So--and it wasn't too long after that, that Edwards did pull out.  He called and talked with me, and I guess it was really about early 2008, because when the day he pulled out I was on the train headed to central Virginia to go to a Democratic caucus.  And I had my two cell phones with me and they were both just ringing, ringing, ringing.  I was glad I couldn't hear too well in that train.  And I had to think about it, because, you know, the first person that called me was President Bill Clinton, and then everybody--I'd knew just everybody worked in that White House when--and they called.  I had people from home calling, and I had to think about it and think about it.  But I had said that to Obama.  And at home in my district [30th Congressional District], the sentiment was with Obama, and so I had to just brace myself and say, "I'm going to support Senator Obama not because I'm against Hillary, but because I want to encourage all these young people who is showing interest for the first time and then when she gets the nomination I can bring them back to the general."  And that was, that was really from my heart.  I really thought that Hillary would get the nomination and then I thought that I'd be able to say to these young people we need to go back to the polls in the general election and--because they were all for Obama in my district.  They were not Democrats or Republicans.  They were just for Obama.  And so I felt that if I was going to maintain any credibility that I needed to be with them in order to talk to them in coming and giving a vote in the general election when it would not be Obama, is what I thought.  And so I explained that, and we had talked back and forth with President Clinton and with Hillary and it was not an easy thing, because I had met them before they married and had been close to them for all of that time.  I was the one who started pushing President Clinton to think about running for president ten years before he ran.  And so I was--and I'm from Texas and he's from Arkansas, and we worked in the McGovern [George McGovern] campaign together back in 1972.  As a matter of fact, the two of us led Texas in working together.  And that was hard, but I did it because I thought sincerely that these young people for the first time that I had seen that kind of enthusiasm for anybody running for president I could not be a part of discouraging them.  And so I thought I made the right decision.  I still think that I made the right decision.
Story_ID: 640315
Speaker 1: But it was not easy, because I knew the Clintons a lot better than I knew Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Did you think at that time that he had, he stood a decent chance?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't.  I really thought that he would get these young people all energetic and maybe for was the first time we can capture their participation to remain eager to participate.  But I felt that Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] would get the nomination.  But I have never seen anything like I experienced with people coming to those polls for Obama and coming back for the precinct conventions, and for the district conventions, and the state conventions.  We have never had that kind of participation before, and we haven't had it since (laughter).
Speaker 2: So was there a point during the campaign where during the Democratic primary campaign that you thought he was going to be the nominee, a turning point?
Speaker 1: You know, even as we worked Texas, the, the enthusiasm that we saw.  For example, our precinct convention went from like having four or five people there to having four or five hundred.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, it was something that we had never experienced, and I think that once I went through the precinct convention, let alone the district convention, I thought that there was a possibility, because I had never seen this kind of participation.  And I saw people that were in my age and older who were Anglo coming to those district conventions that I think it's time for us to get a different person.  And I was shocked.  I mean it was unbelievable.  I had never experienced that in, in all the years that I've been active in politics.  But it was my state and the response from the young people in that state that gave me rise to believe that he probably might get the nomination.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you--did your opinion of Hillary change any--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --based on the primary?
Speaker 1: No.  My opinion of Hillary did not change.  What--after my own state reacted then I thought that she might not have a chance of getting the nomination.  I was disappointed that she stayed as long as she did, but I was not critical because I felt that if she believed as strongly as what I believed that she would get the nomination then I, you know, it's hard to walk away from that.  And, and that was, that was a very, very difficult time for me and I didn't believe--even after the election and that night, I was still in a state of shock that this country had elected the first African American president.  I mean it was just hard to believe, and I worked very hard.  I worked states and I turned my campaign office into an Obama campaign office in a sense, because we were doing calls to other states, we were doing telephone into Missouri and to Ohio, and South Carolina, Kentucky and I was traveling through the south and going to churches on his behalf.  Because it just seemed like--it, it seemed to me that this isn't a time where you can't not allow not to be a part of this.  That this was an opportunity that I had never seen or experienced before.  And so it was the energy that, that people did not allow you not to have.  I mean, if you can get excited about anything this was it.  And so that, that night of election night, I was, I was truly in a state of disbelief that it actually could happen.  And--but it was--anytime anybody said anything to me, I said, "I have lived to see history I never thought I'd ever see."
Story_ID: 640316
Speaker 1: I had no idea this nation (laughter), the--many of the people in this nation, would be as evil as they have toward him, but it happened and it happened with votes that nobody could take away.  You know, nobody--nobody could steal a state.  It was so overwhelming that stealing one state wouldn't have made a difference, and, you know, in the last election stealing Florida made a difference and stealing Ohio made a difference, but you couldn't steal one state in this one and make a difference.
Speaker 2: Now, do you remember where you were when he won the election?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had been working all day that day at the polls, and running around and so I had a--sought a victory celebration and we went several locations that night.  We went down to where the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] headquarters had been.  There was a big celebration there, and as a matter of fact, I had mine in conjunction 'cause his campaign had been virtually my campaign, in a sense.  And, and people were dancing in the street.  I mean, old and young.  It was just a--something had happened in this country that hardly anybody could conceive could happen.
Story_ID: 640317
Speaker 1: Now, now what has President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] relationship been to--with the Congressional Black Caucus?  How do they get along?  How have they got along (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It has been okay.  It has--I think that there have been expectations that he has not met, and I think a lot of it is because all of us in the Congressional Black Caucus have had a different experience than Obama has in being black in this nation.  Obama didn't grow up black in America, and all the rest of us did.  And so because of that, I think there were expectations of direction, however, what I can say is I think he's tried.  I think he's tried to be a president for all the people; trying not to be just a black president, which is what he should be.  He should not be just a black president.  And so naturally there have been some disappointments, but when you look at the circumstances of which he's been president, I don't know very much more we could expect because his policies have been right on time.  He just is not--the first two years he had a majority in the House [U.S. House of Representatives], but it was, you know, having majority of Democrats does not mean having a majority of votes that you need on things.  But it was better than what we have now than these second two years.  And so it, it, it has not been easy for him.  But it wouldn't be easy for any black president.  This is, this is a major turning point in history for this country, and this country has a deep, deep history of racism, and that's never going to go away during my lifetime.  I don't know if it'll ever go away, but it sure wouldn't be during my lifetime because it's not going to come in the next hundred years.  And so it's, it's hard.  It's hard for him to be president and be a black president.  He has to be president for all the people, and so consequentially the things that go on normally in this country are still going on.  We're still of the highest unemployed, we still have the least educational opportunities.  And magically that was not going to change anyway.  It certainly hasn't changed on any white presidents, so it's certainly not going to change of a black president because the resistance is still there.  So I think under the circumstances when you really understand what he's dealing with, I think he's been the about the best we can expect.
Story_ID: 640318
Speaker 1: Has there been any major Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] initiative that you've, that you consider, you know, I guess the, his best offering, you know?
Speaker 2: You know, we worked very hard in helping him put the jobs bill [American Jobs Act] together.  We worked very hard and had a great impact on putting together the stimulus packages [American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009].  The, the healthcare bill [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], we had a lot of to say about the healthcare bill because we've experienced what people experience.  Most of the people at the bottom of the totem pole know that these insurance companies have dominated the healthcare industry and no that they had, had people by the throat in whether or not they were going to have coverage if they got sick at all.  So we knew the problems.  And so we all worked very hard to get language in that would help to correct these problems.  I think that was major.  As a matter of fact, I think that health bill is equivalent to social security, and social security in this country has been the program that has brought more people out of poverty, that has been a program that has been successful where a check has never bounced.  And I think that this healthcare bill is equal to that status if we can get it upheld.  I hope the [U.S.] Supreme Court will uphold it.  You know, it's a very political Supreme Court, but we hope that just based on law and trend that it can be upheld.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you wish he had done that he didn't do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can think of a lot of things I wish he had done that he didn't do.  But I understand why he didn't do it.  If there had been a--it was just hard to get all that in, but if it would have been a stronger energy policy, stronger guidelines in education.  There are a number of things.  Even a good fair and comprehensive immigration reform.  All of that was very important.  All of that we wished for and hoped for, but when you look at the circumstances this man is presiding as president, we probably have done as best he can get done right now.  We don't have the people--see you can't--the president can't do it without the infrastructure.  The infrastructure is the [U.S.] Congress, and that's where the votes are.  That's where the decisions are made.  He can only do so much by executive order.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you think his chances are for reelection as we sit here in 2012?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Months away.
Speaker 2: Well, if the people understand the circumstances of which he's been president and can recall the goals, I think he'll be reelected.  I think that he's up against a person [Mitt Romney] that nobody knows who he really is.  He's--every crowd he's in he tries to deal with that crowd, and that's not the makings of a good president.  Whether people agree with you or disagree with you, if you are committed to something you've gotta stay with it.  If you're not true to yourself then you sure can't be true to anybody else; and as I compare the two candidates right now I'll take Obama any time regardless of his color.
Story_ID: 640319
Speaker 1: The--as you were saying earlier I think your family was excited about the prospect of a black family being in the White House [Washington, D.C.]?  What are your thoughts in terms of Michelle Obama's performance as first lady and the girls [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama]--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the interesting thing is out of all of the families that I had known to be in the White House, and I'd say it's probably the one that I was, in early times, more familiar with, was Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] forward because I knew that family so I could identify with them in the White House.  Prior to that, I'm not sure that I knew that much about the families and didn't really pay it as much attention.  But I think as we look from, from Johnson forward, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] certainly measures up very very well.  He's--there's no rumors of an affair, there's no scandal, he has a very bright educated wife who is very popular with the people, who is herself, two wonderful daughters.  You couldn't have a better image of a first family, no matter what color.  They certainly have measured up.
Story_ID: 640320
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point and--are you looking forward to more years as a congresswoman?  Are you looking forward to retirement or what?
Speaker 2: Well, clearly my--most of my public service is behind me.  I can't say when I will terminate it.  It'll be at my pace, but no matter when I leave, I will be very aware that I didn't get nearly as much done as I would have liked to, and I believe that's probably true of everyone because it's going to always be plenty to do.  I will never forget when I was toying with trying to leave the House of Representatives [Texas House of Representatives] and take a job with the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], I made the statement there's so much to do and Senator Ted Akin at that time, who was considered the father of education policy in Texas with the Gilmer-Akin bills said to me, "If you stay here a hundred years when you leave it's still so much to do.  The job is never done."  And so that's the way I can give myself some sense of satisfaction is that no matter how long I stay the job will never be done.
Speaker 1: What today will you consider your congressional legacy, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think, probably, passing that water resources bill in 2007 [Water Resources Development Act of 2007] and urging it into overriding a veto would probably be one of the things that I was able to do.  And I think the other thing is trying to bring attention to the need for STEM education [science, technology, engineering and mathematics].  I have tried to alert the nation of the importance of that education, and now serve as a national leader of a STEM education program for Links, Incorporated [The Links, Incorporated] which is a national black women's organization, as one thing.  But there are many other venues of which I've tried to take my message on how important it is that young people go into college when they go and take courses that's going to mean something to not only their future, but the nation's future.  I hope that in passing this message along that we will encourage so many young people, and mostly African Americans, to stay out of those courses that's virtually a waste of their time and money now, and--because there's some curricular that taking it and not going onto a Ph.D. at least as a minimum there are hardly any jobs and there's hardly any need for that kind of degree.  And so--and while I don't want to knock anybody, but these young people that are coming out now with sociology degrees and political science degrees.  Unless, they plan to get Ph.D.'s and everybody can't depend on doing that, it's not enough work in the world for the number of people that are taking these easier curriculums out of college.  We've got to make sure that young people grasp skills that they need for their future and for our nation's future.  So my lasting effect, if I can just get that across, how important it is that we focus on research, on science, on the technology which brought us to where we are today, on engineering that not only brought us but will take us into the future and mathematics.  If we have a good background in those areas, whether we are college educated or not, there's a role for us in society.  If we don't, you can be in college education and not in those areas, and you still don't have what your money paid for.
Story_ID: 640321
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: One is to focus on good education opportunities.  Whether you're college bound or not, you need a really good background and your sciences and maths in order just to know how to function in this society.  You know, technology changes on a day to day basis.  We're never going to go back, we're always going to go forward, so I would think that I would encourage young people to look at seriously at their moral standards and their education choices.
Story_ID: 640322
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about your home state of Texas being a battleground around creationism and science in the classroom?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm from a very, very large state that is embedded in the Confederacy.  It has some of the most conservative human beings on earth and some of the most liberal.  It's a very popular state, a very independent state, and a state that required that every student takes Texas history, but the way it's taught, you're taught that it's the most important state in the world.  You know, how great it is and when you get out of school and look back at your state, you realize that it's--it might be a great state, but it has a great thing--a great number of things to achieve and so while I can appreciate all of its history and appreciate the independence and thought and the creativity of the people of the state, I would be much more proud if they had a little bit more openness for opportunity and advancement, and a little bit more intellect in the air.
Story_ID: 640323
Speaker 1: Now, once again if you look back at your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could change it?
Speaker 2: That's hard to say, because once I got into the public arena, I was really carried so fast by supporters and people that believed in me that I really didn't think very much of being outside of that box.  When I thought I was really out and finished with it, the minute I got back home from the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], people started saying, "You need to be back in office, you need to be back in office."  And so I've been really kind of pushed and steered in the directions of which I've chosen.  If I had not gone in that direction, I'm not sure where I would have gone except to stay in my medical oriented area in nursing, which I have great respect for and see that role becoming more and more important in the delivery of healthcare.  So and that really grounded me, and also gave me a focus for where I should be concerned about our future as a people and as a nation.
Story_ID: 640324
Speaker 1: Congresswoman, can you tell us something about your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I am from a family that, an intact family.  A mother [Lillie Mae White Johnson] and father [Edward Johnson] that was in the home.  There are three girls of us and a boy.  I have an older sister [Sallye Johnson Moore], a younger sister [Lee Johnson Willis], and a brother [Carl Johnson] who is the youngest.  And I don't, I cannot fathom having a better past.  Both parents were there, I knew we were loved.  I, I didn't know really how poor we were.  I never considered us to be poor.  We were always looking out for others.  But as, you know, as you get grown, you realize you weren't rich.  But I had a fairly happy childhood.  My older sister and I were fairly competitive.  She was competitive with me because I was constantly keeping up with what she was learning in school.  As a matter of fact, my, I was born in December, so I had to have a little age change so I could go onto school.  'Cause I was driving my mother crazy when she was teaching both of us at home.  I would catch on faster than my older sister who was in school at the time.  But we're a very close knit family.  I was the youngest for eight years before my young, younger sister was born, and she was the youngest for eight years before the brother was born.  And so I frequently would say that after I was born, my parents started having kids every eight years.  And that's essentially what happened.  But we all are very close.  Both parents are gone now, but all of us are here and still very close.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have any children?
Speaker 2: I have a son [Dawrence Kirk Johnson], one son who is married and this is his twenty-eighth year of marriage coming up and he has three sons.  And all of them are my, I just consider his whole family my family, my, my kids.  I was divorced just before I ran for public office.  And my, my husband's [Lacey Kirk Johnson] family and my family were pretty close, and we still are.  And, and probably if I had not gone into public office we might have ended up marrying again because he never married and I didn't, and we had this one son that we were always around.  So we spent all of our holidays together in the family, which included his family and my family as well.  And so I was a Johnson by maiden name, and a Johnson by married name.  And so, I sometimes have to explain to people, "No, that was a Johnson on my husband's side, or on, on my side or something."  But we've been a close knit family for all of my adult life.  And my husband had passed away in 2009.  And my son took really good care of him and he was, my son lived in Austin [Texas] and I lived in Dallas [Texas].  And his daddy lived in Dallas.  He was driving back and forth so I would help with the care.  It, it was not unusual for me to be the nurse in the family, no matter what side of the family it was.  Even with my husband's parents as they got older and as we were even terminating our marriage I was still available for helping with their care.  So we became, we were a very close knit family on both sides.  And my mother continued to talk with my then ex-husband all the time as well as his mother.  So there was a closeness between those families all the time.  And so that really, my mother-in-law did not want me to run for office, 'cause she was more interested in getting my family back together.  It was, my divorce was final in October in 1970 and I ran for office, started getting ready to run for office in '71 [1971], ran in February of '72 [1972].  So it was a close period there and most people didn't know I was divorced until they'd read it in the paper after I became a candidate.  And, but I had the support of both families.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: My, I have two grandsons now who have finished college, and one grandson who is going into his senior year in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're still very close.  We're very close to all of the Johnsons from his side as well.  I'm still their aunt, and that's the way we still keep it.
Story_ID: 640325
Speaker 1: Now do, do you have a certain philosophy that keeps you going?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my philosophy is being true to myself, being true to the people, being true to who I say I'm gonna be.  I have committed to represent the people, and I want to do this sincerely.  I try very hard to be in touch, to keep a, a hand on the pulse of the people I represent.  And I try to be responsive to whatever their needs are.  And, and that's where I get my degree of satisfaction, is working directly with my constituents.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to raise before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think that if I had any real concerns about coming through all this process, it would be the responsibility of choosing competent staff.  It's always been my goal to have highly competent people who can help me achieve what I have in mind.  And it's always a disappointment when I don't get that and I've had many disappointments, but I've also had some successes.  And so my motto became, no work, no play, no stay.  And I, I don't have any apologies to give to the people when I get rid of somebody because they already know that my standards are high.  I give them a chance to meet them.  If they can't do it, no hard feelings.  I've just got to get somebody who can.  And so, I admit any time I'm speaking publicly.  I hire and I fire until I get it right.  And that's my philosophy.  And I've stayed with it, and most of the time when I say that to my constituents, I get a standing ovation.  'Cause they know how hard I work.  And I had great demands on my staff.  So if they stay with me any length of time, they're good.  If they stay with me over three months, other people want them, 'cause they know me.  And I don't put up with too much slack.  And so that's, that's a mark I want to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: If I'm gonna do it well, I gotta have people on my team who will do it well.
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As somebody who remembered how she got there and what she went for.  I tried to work hard to deliver what I could to the people that I promised to represent.
