Story_ID: 485332
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Vivian R, for Robinson, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson].  And my first name is spelled V-I-V-I-A-N.  Robinson is R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, and my middle name, and I want to mention that because it's very important for my story, is Josephine J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is the significance of your middle name?
Speaker 2: I was named after my [maternal] grandfather Joseph [Joseph B. Wilson], who is a very important person in my life; he lived with us when I was growing up in Los Angeles [California].  I was born in Chicago [Illinois], but I grew up most of my growing years in Los Angeles, and my grandfather lived with us and he really was the influence who taught me about Africa and African history, African American history, as did my parents [Lillian Wilson Miller and Lonnie Robinson].  He had more time; they were both working nine to five [o'clock], and he was also working, but he had his own business; he was a small building contractor.  And so he would make it his business to be at home when I arrived from school; I was the youngest child in the house, and he would be there and he would put me in the car with him and take me wherever he was going for his business, so I went to lumberyards (laughter), to hardware stores, and to pick up the prints for various and sundry things.  In fact, he also did some--in addition to, to building houses, he actually designed some housing--houses, and so I knew about blueprints and I knew about two by fours and nails, and I had a wonderful time visiting the sites and learning about the level, and so on.  I didn't know that this was unusual for girls, as one doesn't, you know, compared to what, when you're growing up.  And later years, I realized how important that was because during those times with him, he told me about the news of the day that had significance for black people, as well as stories; he was a wonderful storyteller.  I should mention that my grandfather's own experience was very important in this regard because my [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Wilson] died when she was twenty-six years old, and my mother was six.  My mother was the oldest of three daughters, and my grandfather raised those three children by himself, with housekeepers, for their growing years, and he therefore was very comfortable with little girls, so he could comb hair, listen to piano lessons, and cook, so it was a wonderful opportunity for me to be with someone who really had a great influence on my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we'll, we'll get to him later on--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes; July 24th, 1935, Chicago, Illinois, Cook County.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a retired professor of education from Boston University School of Education [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 13th, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at our home at 44 Norwood Avenue, Newton Centre, Massachusetts, 02459.
Story_ID: 485333
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they make me ask people as a warm-up (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I probably do, but I would say probably mango is the food that I enjoy as a, a special flavor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: All right; favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Summer, without any question.
Speaker 1: Okay; favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: That one is a bit harder.  I would say it's really an African destination when I can afford to do it, and in addition, Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'll have to think about that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485334
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history--
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lonnie Robinson] side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's full name is Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Lois, L-O-I-S, Wilson was her maiden name, W-I-L-S-O-N.  First married name was Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, and she remarried Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R [Lillian Wilson Miller].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 20th, 1908 in Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot of history there, so--now, what do you know about the, the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, those are the ancestors that I am currently researching, and I have learned that my family in Arkansas which is where her family--my grandfather [Joseph B. Wilson], for example, was born--that family, I have learned, owned land in Arkansas as early as 1882, and I have also learned that members of his family--of my grandfather's family, started going to college as early as 1894.
Speaker 1: Okay--in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know if they went to--
Speaker 2: Arkansas A and M [Branch Normal College, Arkansas Industrial University; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Arkansas A and M, Pine Bluff [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any stories about them?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the stor- well, I'm putting together stories, and so it, it's a little difficult to, to select a particular one, but I think one of the stories is about how I began the search, and it is that I was visiting in Chicago [Illinois] with cousins--I have wonderful Chicago cousins--and the oldest of those cousins, who was in her late eighties at the time, asked me had I--if I had seen the family Bible and I had not, and she was surprised and I was surprised.  And she showed it to me and it had only one entry in it, and that entry was a, a marriage in 1868, and so--and those were my great-grandparents and her grandparents--my great-grandparents.  And I was looking for the kind of traditional things in Bibles--the begets, you know; I was looking for that listing of people that very often are found in family Bibles and I didn't find that; as I said, I found only one listing, but it turned out that that was a very important listing for genealogical research because they were married in 1868, and it turns out that they were still in the same place in 1870, and that's when formerly enslaved African Americans are first listed on the federal census, so I was able to find them on the federal census and to find three generations on one page.  So that's, for me, a very, very important story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a clue that really paid off.
Speaker 2: It really did, it really did.
Speaker 1: So they--this 1868 marriage, was this in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 485335
Speaker 1: And so you have a history that at least goes back to the, you know, very end of the Civil War so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Was it the tradition that the couple--your great-grandparents were, were born and raised in that part of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, not according to the census, they were, they were both born someplace else and brought to Arkansas; they were--one was born in Mississippi, for example, so I'm now reaching back into those records.  And this is when it gets to be very challenging because now, the records are not as clear, and one has to go through a lot of records in order to find the significant ones.  This is the hard, hard research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One was from Mississippi and the other--
Speaker 2: The other was from Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That says something about the dispersion of black people in the 19th century; you can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes it does, it does, it does.
Speaker 1: --yeah, people can trace their grandparents and great-grandparents from one place, but that isn't necessarily where they were from.
Speaker 2: That's right, were--exactly, so it's very hard.  We have a great challenge.  Incidentally, I wanna mention that my husband [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I are very involved in the African American Historical and Genealogical Society [Afro-American Historical and Genealogical Society, Inc.] which will be meeting here in Boston [Massachusetts] next month.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  We know, we know Bob Hayden [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden] who was very much involved in that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly.  We heard Bob Hayden give his family story and, of course, I've known Bob and worked with Bob over the years here in Newton [Massachusetts], as a matter of fact, and so when Bob gave--told his story, we were really very moved; it's a, it's a very powerful story.
Story_ID: 485336
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your family moved from Arkansas, or why they moved from Arkansas to Muskogee [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.  My [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Wilson] and--and incidentally, my--not only did my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph B. Wilson] attend Arkansas A and M [Branch Normal College, Arkansas Industrial University; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], but so did my grandmother attend, which is very unusual, as you know, for any young women to attend college as early as 1906, and that's what she did; she was in college in 1906.  When my grandmother and grandfather married in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], he was looking for employment opportunities, and there were not very many at that time--they married in 1907.  And so they decided to go to Oklahoma, but remember that had been Indian [Native American] territory, and as it became a state, there were lots of opportunities in the oil fields and in various other employment areas, and so my grandfather took his young bride and they got on the train, and my understanding--and I'm trying to make certain of this--my understanding is that there was a train directly to Muskogee [Oklahoma] from Pine Bluff, a fairly new railroad.  And so they took the train to Muskogee, he found work, and I have found the city directory indicating where they lived and I have visited that site.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, yeah, Oklahoma was a (unclear) for a lot of black people after the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think it was thirty black towns in Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Muskogee, I don't think, was an all-black town, but it was a lot of black people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but it, it had a, a lot of black people in it and that's, that's why it was (unclear).  I have another story that I would just like to mention here because it's one of our connections, and how many ways we are connected that we, of course are, are unaware of.  Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I were attending a, a lecture by Charles Hamilton [Charles V. Hamilton], you know, who wrote 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America'] with Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture], and he was talking about growing up, and afterwards, I came up to him and I said, "You know, I thought you grew up in Chicago [Illinois]," and he said, "I did, but I was actually born in Muskogee, Oklahoma."  And I said, "Really?"  Willard and I had just come back from Muskogee, you know; we, we went to hear him early in the fall; we'd been there in August.  And I said, "That's where my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] was born."  And so he turned to me and he said, "Oh, really?  Where?"  And I told him, and he stopped and he said, "That's the street I was born on."  And so here we have--and now he's much younger of course, but here we have those kind of connection that is just quite amazing and yet, you know, because of segregation, we are often from the same communities.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something.  Charles V. Hamilton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485337
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] talk about what it was like to grow up in Muskogee [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't grow up in Muskogee--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she grew up in a number of places.  As I said, they came back to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] and lived there for a while, but my [maternal] grandfather was always looking for better employment; he really wanted to be self-employed, and he moved the family a, a, a number of times in order to get better employment, so my family then moved from Pine Bluff.  Their second child was born in Pine Bluff, but their third child was born in Texas, so my grandfather--and it was--then, he came to Nashville, Tennessee where he worked for the National Baptist publishing company [National Baptist Publishing Board; R.H. Boyd Publishing Corporation]; you know, the National--the Baptist church had its publishing in, in Nashville, and he worked for the National Baptist publishing company (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  And he worked for them as a builder; again, they were doing a good deal of building at that time.  And so it's in Nashville where my [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Wilson] died, and that tragedy was such that my grandfather then took his three daughters back to Pine Bluff to be with their maternal grandmother, and he then set off again, looking for better employment.  So that's when he went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and, you know, the children later followed him, so it--they moved quite a bit.
Speaker 1: So she grew up part, partly in Pittsburgh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in Homestead [Pennsylvania], in--you know, yes, exactly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Homestead, Homestead Grays.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Homestead.  Okay, all right.  Now, this is your grandfather Joseph [Joseph B. Wilson]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Joseph Wilson, I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 485338
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea of how he [Johnsons' maternal grandfather, Joseph B. Wilson] or who he was in contact with when he developed his interest in African American history and--
Speaker 2: Well, he got a lot of it from his family.  Apparently--and I say this because of his, his consistent interest in it, and all of the other members of my family also have this interest, so they must have gotten it from their own family.  You know, this is not something that is isolated with him; this was a conversation that went on in my family.  When other family members came to visit from Chicago [Illinois], you know, that was the ongoing conversation, was the--was what was going on with, with African Americans, in those days called Negroes (laughter), and what was going on in Africa.  I knew about Ethiopia, I knew about Liberia, I knew about the marvels of African history, although, of course, I didn't know detail, but I can recall that we simply ignored the Tarzan interpretation because that just made no sense at all, and was obviously so derogatory, and we just asked questions straight-forwardly about, you know, history and so on--went to the library, went--talked to our, our relatives and friends.
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, the books of J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] were out, some of Carter G. Woodson's work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and there are other works that go back to the 1800s even--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --where people talked about--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --the connection with Ancient Egypt--
Speaker 2: --with Ancient Egypt, that's right, exactly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) West African empires--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and empires in South Africa and so forth.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So that was the--that was the--those were the stories that I heard.
Story_ID: 485339
Speaker 1: The other thing you recall is that during the period when I was growing up, the Chicago Defender, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News]--those were all available, remember?  The other piece of this that's really important about why they were available is the story of Pullman porters because we had in our home--I have only one sibling [Wilson Robinson], but I've always lived in an extended family, and we had a large house, very similar to this one, and a Pullman porter, a friend of the family, came from Chicago [Illinois] every ninth or tenth day, and he stayed with us three or four days, until he made his rounds back to Chicago.  He brought all of the newspapers with him and, of course, the Chicago Defender and Pittsburgh Courier were available in, in Los Angeles [California]; they were available wherever there were large numbers of black people.  So remember that those were also wonderful sources of history and discussion, and that's what the conversation was at our dining room table.
Speaker 2: You know, Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] wrote a column for the Pittsburgh Courier--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Your History.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So that's why I said we had those sources, which were really very important sources in, in our lives.  Let me, just as I'm mentioning newspapers, talk about three others because they were so influential in my, in my growing up.  In Los Angeles in the '50s [1950s], when I was growing up, there were three weekly black newspapers, the Los Angeles Sentinel, the California Eagle, and the Los Angeles Tribune; those were very important newspapers and, imagine this now for a girl growing up, two of the three were published by women.
Speaker 2: Right.  I know California Eagle was one.
Speaker 1: Charlotta Bass and Almena Lomax, and Almena Lomax's son is now the head of historically--the organization of historically black colleges [United Negro College Fund].  So--Michael Lomax [HistoryMaker Dr. Michael Lomax]--so that is a story that is really very important in my life because Mrs. Lomax, Mrs. Almena Lomax, was a wonderful influence.  I didn't know anything, of course, about publishing, but she would talk to me about college; I was attending UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] at the time, and in fact she put my picture--when I graduated, she put my picture on the cover of the first page of the newspaper, and she was a wonderful person to talk to about careers and, and events, and publishing--just a fabulous, fabulous influence on my life.
Speaker 2: Now, now is, is Louis Lomax related to--
Speaker 1: That I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  That was a wonderful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Lomax--seem to be a lot of writers name Lomax and--
Speaker 1: Yes, and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there's another black writer named Lomax, too; that's--Louis Lomax was another one.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes; that I don't know, I just know--you know, this is all--remember I'm--oh, teenager during part of that time, but she--not but, and--and she and Mrs. Bass were at events.  Remember, this was the period when you, as a young child, were taken to events to hear people speak about African American issues, and that was another time when I had an opportunity to learn about what was going on in the community; not only in our local community, but what's going on in the black world.
Story_ID: 485340
Speaker 1: Your mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] lived in a number of different places--
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: --and--now, did she have a chance to go to college, too?
Speaker 2: She did in Chicago [Illinois] because that's where they finally settled in the--oh, I think they were there by like nineteen, nineteen--no, the end of that decade.  She graduated from high school--from Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School] in Chicago, and then went on to what was then called Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois], and she went for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Crane Junior College, okay, all right.  Now, did she have any stories about growing up in--or stories about Chicago in those days?
Speaker 2: Actually, her stories were more often about their younger years, about moving, you know, from one place to another and, and settling in.  It was, you know, it was really--it was challenging; there were three daughters and so, in some ways, that made it easier, but it was always a challenge, this process of, of settling in.  But what she told about Chicago is organization.  She remembered how black people organized themselves for political activity, that, you know, they sent--she would talk about the fact that they sent someone to [U.S.] Congress in the '20s [1920s] and, and they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yeah Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oscar De Priest, that's right.  So, they were very much a, a community of concern, of mutual concern, and she talked about that as a great influence on her life because people knew the importance of voting, knew the importance of collaborative activity.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was very dramatic, that election of Oscar De Priest.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very dramatic.
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty [sic.], I think it was.  He was a Republican (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and she talked about Los Angeles [California].  See, and that's about the--I mention that because that's about the time that they were moving to Chicago, so it would--it impressed her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was about twelve then, I guess, when that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --when that happened.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485341
Speaker 1: Let me get your father's information.  What, what's your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's full name, and I should mention that I've never lived with my father for any great length of time, so I'll talk about that.  My father's full name is Lonnie, L-O-N-N-I-E, Frank, F-R-A-N-K, Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N [Lonnie Robinson].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'd have to look up the--I have the information right here.  I wanna get the date in Feb- in September correct.  All right.  September 9th, 1905.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Tiptonville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Tiptonville, okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know less than--I know--as I said, I've been working on my mother's [Lillian Wilson Miller] side.  I do know that they also owned land in--early in the 1880s, and that they continued to own that land, and some of it may still be in the family, but I'm not absolutely certain of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any stories from that side about, you know, living conditions down there, or what happened to--
Speaker 2: Well, everyone talked about, you know, the challenge of living conditions, but one of the stories that, for me, was always very inspirational is his sister [Myrtle Robinson], my aunt who was the oldest of the children, and she became a teacher very early--when she was seventeen or eighteen years old, and she taught school for fifty-five years.  Now, I was always interested in becoming an educator, as long as I can remember--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --so that her story--and in fact, meeting and talking with her was very inspirational to me.
Story_ID: 485342
Speaker 1: What was your [paternal] aunt's name again?
Speaker 2: Oh, my aunt is--was Myrtle Robinson, M-Y-R-T-L-E, Robinson.
Speaker 1: And it's interesting that her name remained Robinson.  'Cause I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She never married.
Speaker 1: In those days, if you married as a teacher, you--I, I've heard you lost your job.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right.  And she continued teaching really until her death.  She taught adults who were illiterate, she taught young children, teenagers--everyone who wanted to learn.
Speaker 1: Now, did she operate in Chicago [Illinois]?  Did she teach in Chicago or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she was in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Tennessee, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so, your father [Lonnie Robinson] came from a pretty--a fairly substantial family--a teacher in the family and they owned property (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  Oh, absolutely.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Any other stories about that side of the family in Tennessee, and what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, they were always interested in education, both sides of my family; it's a traditional story.  We were always encouraged to get a good education, and the purpose of education was also discussed; it wasn't simply to make a good living.  The purpose of education was always the process of community-building--that the better your education, the more you could contribute to your community, and that's the way education was viewed on both sides of my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your father--when did he come to Chicago?  Did he--was he small when he came out there?  Was he grown when he came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, I think, a teenager when he came to Chicago, and he came because older siblings were there.  However, my parents divorced early, early in my life, I mean.  I was born in Chicago; by the time I was three, they were separated, and so my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] then took me and my brother to Lake Charles, Louisiana where her favorite uncle [George Wilson] and his family lived, and I spent three years of my growing up in--with my brother Wilson [Wilson Robinson]--and we should talk about him as well, in Lake Charles, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 485343
Speaker 1: I just wanted to follow up with the rest of your father's [Lonnie Robinson] story before we--so your, your father--now, now is there--what did he do for a living in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, he did a number of things.  He really--you know, this was during the period just following, and still in the Depression [Great Depression] really, and so he did whatever he could, but he was very good in mathematics and in languages, and so he could often get jobs that were related to that; he couldn't actually get teaching jobs but he could jobs that were related to that.  And he was, he was one of those extraordinary people who is able to do almost anything; you know, he was handy, he was able to repair cars, he understood physics, and so he understood how things went together, and that's one of the reasons why he could get jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did he stay in Chicago for the balance of his life?
Speaker 2: Most, most of it but not all; he, he went back to Tennessee and, and--but most of the time in Chicago, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't think there is a story--
Speaker 1: That's been passed down?
Speaker 2: --that's been passed down, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--well, at any rate they, they were divorced early--by the time you were, by the time you were, by the time you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, they were.  That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: --how old?
Speaker 2: I--by the time I was three.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did, did you have any contact with him?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I continued to--my brother [Wilson Robinson] and I continued to have contact with him, but it was very intermittent.  We moved to Los Angeles [California] and he continued to stay, you know, in the Midwest, so that we saw him occasionally but not frequently.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an incredible distance--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Even more-so in those days, without (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --people flying as much.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So--okay.  So, let me ask you now, you--from what you know of your father's personality and your mother's [Lillian Wilson Miller], and of course you know that well--and your [maternal] grandfather [Joseph B. Wilson], I guess, and other people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --like who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother, yes.  I have pictures here of my mother and me at about age seventeen, and it's a remarkable resemblance, and there are a lot of other resemblances, my relatives tell me--probably my mother.
Story_ID: 485344
Speaker 1: What is your early childhood mem- or earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is actually in Lake Charles, Louisiana where I was happy to join women on their porches who were quilting.  I would watch them and they would give me scraps from the scraps (laughter) and--for my doll clothes, and help me piece together doll clothes; those are some of my earliest memories of the great protection and comfort of women in the neighborhood in that regard.  And my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller], because she was then a single parent, was working full-time, so she did not participate in any of those kinds of activities; however, she was also very comforting and delightful because my mother read to me, told stories, took me for special--you know, down to get ice cream or down--she did those kinds of things.  There were always kind of special ways that my mother had of making my life delightful.
Speaker 1: Now, why did your mother move you to Lake Charles, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Because her father's [Joseph B. Wilson] brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh the uncle, okay.
Speaker 2: --and his family lived there and she--this was an uncle that she liked a lot--him and his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his name?
Speaker 2: George Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  George Wilson, okay.  So how long was the family in Lake Charles?
Speaker 2: Three years; a little bit more, I think.
Story_ID: 485345
Speaker 1: And now there I can tell you the story of how my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] and my stepfather met.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother's best friend came from a very large--comes from a very large family because she is still living, and on Sundays--frequently--my mother and my brother [Wilson Robinson] and I would be invited to this family's home for Sunday dinner which, you know in those days, was a really big event every week.  And there were fourteen children in the family, and of course it was a large gathering, and I was literally handed from lap to lap; I was, you know, three, four years old, and I just remember that being a glorious time--wonderful fun; there were other children as well.  I adored her brother--my mother's best friend's brother, whose name is--was Herman [Herman Miller], and my, my mother and he, you know, were friends, but I decided that he and my mother were going to marry, and I announced that one day.  So my mother said ever after that I chose my stepfather.  And indeed they did marry several years later, and at that time, we had returned to Chicago [Illinois]; my mother had taken us back to Chicago with her family there, and then he came from Lake Charles [Louisiana] to Chicago, and they married in Chicago.
Speaker 2: So, his last name is--
Speaker 1: Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right.  That's quite a story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Power of the young.
Speaker 1: The power of the young.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So--okay, so you--so now you're about five or six, or, or--
Speaker 1: When they married I was seven.
Speaker 2: Seven, okay, seven.
Speaker 1: I was seven.
Speaker 2: Okay, back in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Back in Chicago.  So she moved--she took us back, and we stayed with cousins there, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: How long were you in Chicago?
Speaker 1: About a year, a year and a-half, something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 485346
Speaker 1: Then you moved to Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Then we moved to Los Angeles and, and there again it had to do with opportunity.  We're now talking 1942, I believe, and there was lots of opportunity in Los Angeles for both employment and housing.  Well, not so much for housing, quite honestly, because people were moving there so quickly that housing was difficult to find, but education was the other big draw; my parents talked to us about that.  As I said, they always talked about education, and they said that--and I remember my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] saying this.  This is how, how significant it was in, in my growing up that the Los An- the California State public education system was the best, she thought, in the country.  I've never forgotten that, and of course I find--I ultimately went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the rates were low. Weren't they?
Speaker 2: Oh, very--they were just--for residents, they were very low (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think they were the lowest in the country.
Speaker 2: They were the lowest.  And it was an excellent system, and that's why Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] really competes with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Berkeley is public.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is about 1942 you moved to Los Angeles (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's right--
Story_ID: 485347
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, and I guess you have several different places to draw from, Lake Charles [Louisiana], Chicago [Illinois] and Los Angeles [California], but what are some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sunshine.  I really--if you had asked me about what is my favorite natural phenomenon, it is without any doubt, sunshine.  I can still recall, all these years later, coming out of the station--the train station in Los Angeles when we arrived, coming out into the sunshine of Los Angeles in 1942; I will never forget that.  It was just absolutely heavenly, and I always enjoy it, even with smog now (laughter).  It's not what it was; it was absolutely clear.  It's, it's like looking out now, and we could see--you know, streets in Los Angeles are very long; I--we lived on one that was four hundred blocks long, and you could literally look all the way--just look forever.  It, it was almost like living on the prairie in that sense, you know; you could just see for such long distances.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What other sights, and sounds, and smells?
Speaker 2: Beautiful flowers.  And I'm not a gardener, but I really enjoy flowers, and that was another aspect of it.  Also, houses with pretty colors.  See, I had never seen anything except brick or stone, or stucco, and so now suddenly I see houses that are--that have colors that are yellow and pink and so on.  And color is very important in my life, so that was another aspect of it.  The other thing is, I thought, beautiful people; people--seeing that range of, of human color for the first time.  You know that growing up in Los Angeles meant that there were African Americans and Mexican Americans and Japanese Americans and Filipino Americans and Korean Americans--all in my neighborhood.  So that was another one of the sights that I've always remembered is that wonderful array of human beings in all of their splendor and color and, and it's just a very--it's a wonderful, wonderful scene.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the neighborhood.  Now, think about that in contrast to an eastern neighborhood.  It's not that you don't see people, but they've often got coats on, you know; they're--you don't really see them.  This was a lot of outside living.  Oh, that was the other thing is the fact that inside--outside was inside.  Now, I don't know if I need to explain that.  Outside was inside.  In other words your, your living space goes out onto a deck, a porch, a patio; that's part of your daily living space--outside is inside.  And when I came here, the idea of being closed into a space and then having to put on garments to go outside, was just very strange.
Story_ID: 485348
Speaker 1: Was church a part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, every Sunday (laughter) and, and most of the day on Sunday that wasn't spent at home having dinner.  Yes, we attended Trinity Baptist Church [Los Angeles, California]; we joined as soon as we arrived in Los Angeles [California], and some of my best friends growing up were in that church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very active in Sunday school, BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], and, again, that was a community center for, for participants in the church, and so we went there for lots of activities; that's where the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] met and that's where my parents [Lillian Wilson Miller and Johnson's stepfather, Herman Miller] took us to hear very important people in black life so, for example, I heard Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., I heard Lena Horne, I heard Howard Thurman, and I heard Sue Bailey Thurman, who has also had a great influence on my life, although I was never close to her, but she has had a great influence on my life.
Speaker 1: That's Howard Thurman's wife?
Speaker 2: Wife--Sue Baily Thurman.  And incidentally, you were just at the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts]; that's who found that building is--Mrs. Sue Baily Thurman is the one who, who found that building after many years that it had been in different use; it was no longer used by the African American community.  It had been sold, in fact, for a synagogue--for use as a synagogue.
Story_ID: 485349
Speaker 1: You read a lot of newspapers; you were talking about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: A lot of newspapers came through and--
Speaker 2: --that's right, and I read a lot of books.  I was an avid reader, and went to the library--enjoyed going to the library; went to the library at, at least weekly, and sometimes two and three times a week because I had a wonderful, wonderful time at the library, and libraries have also had a great influence on my life because I've always enjoyed them.  I've always said that if--had I not been a teacher, I would have been a librarian, without any question.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now you started school in--I guess--school in Chicago [Illinois], I suppose.  Or in Lake Charles [Louisiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and that's an important story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started school in the segregated South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started school in Lake Charles, Louisiana, and that's important because I hadn't thought about that.  You know, when we talk about segregation and what it means, it was many years before I realized that I was part of segregated schooling; I just hadn't thought about it.  My mother [Lillian Wilson Miller], you remember, I said had two years of college [Crane Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois], and that meant that she had more education than many of the teachers who were teaching in that small town, black or white.  And when they needed a substitute, my mother would be asked to substitute--to be a substitute teacher, and she would take me with her; I was four years old.  So, she would park me in the kindergarten.  And, of course, I did what children do, I learned everything that everybody else was doing, so when the kindergarten class moved on to first grade, the teacher said, "She knows what everybody else knows, she should go to the first grade."  So, therefore, I was in the first grade two years early, and I remained ahead in that sense--graduated from high school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] at sixteen.  And my experience in school in the segregated South was a wonderful experience, and I think it's important to say that because we hear so much about segregation and, of course, it was dreadful that children were denied the same opportunities that white children had for resources--for books, for buildings, and so on.  What black teachers did in compensation, and because they were so clear about us as their future, should--we should be writing more books and documenting that because those teachers did a fabulous job.  I adored my, my kindergarten and first grade and second grade teachers.  And in fact, my kindergarten and second grade teachers were sisters.  And those teachers did everything they could to make certain that we knew everything we needed to know to move on from one grade to the next; they were protective, they were instructive, they expanded you in every way, they pulled you out.  You know, the, the original meaning of the word education--educare [ph.]--they really believed in, so it was an exciting place to be for a child because these were, were adults who supported you so thoroughly.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that first school at Lake Charles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm glad that you, that you asked; it was named Second Ward [Second Ward School, Lake Charles, Louisiana], but it was renamed when my first cousin [Ralph F. Wilson] died.  No, he was not my first cousin because he was--but anyway, he was my cousin and I played with him when we were growing up there in, in Lake Charles; he became principal of the school.  This is why I told you all of my family had this same desire for education, and he later became principal of the school and he died at thirty-nine, and they immediately named the school for him, so the school is now the Ralph Wilson School [Ralph F. Wilson Elementary School, Lake Charles, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 485350
Speaker 1: We need to go back to is your [maternal] grandfather Joseph Wilson's [Joseph B. Wilson] involvement in the Universal Negro Improvement Association [UNIA].  Was he--well, tell us about his involvement. When did he get started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, his involvement--well, he was involved very much in both Homestead, Pennsylvania and in Chicago [Illinois]; he was in the UNIA and, because I was very young, I didn't completely understand at that time, and I certainly wish I had asked him more, about the UNIA.  He simply talked about Garvey [Marcus Garvey] as a, as a leader; that was the part of it that I heard about growing up, is the--or were the ideals, the organization, the commitment to African American development that the UNIA involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he have a position in the UNIA?
Speaker 2: Well, that's something that I wanna research; I just don't know.  I think he did, I think he did in his community, you know, in his local UNIA chapter but I don't know, and I have to get that information researched.  Those are the, the kinds of files and documents that are difficult to find.
Speaker 1: And I wondered if he, if he had any official function in the UNIA in terms of setting up chapters, 'cause he moved around so much.  Or--these are interesting questions. When you mentioned it, I just wondered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I don't know.  You see, as a child, I didn't ask those questions; that's right.  Yeah, I would certainly now ask, but I didn't--
Speaker 1: I know there are chapters all over the country.
Speaker 2: That's right, and he, he probably was very much involved in each chapter that he--where he lived.  But whether or not he set up chapters, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I know there're strong chapters in Louisiana, Oklahoma, all those places (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Do you remember ever seeing the Negro World paper?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, but I may have.  You see, my grandfather read lots of papers and so, you know, we had--we have this on-going readership (laughter) in the family; and remember, not only in the family, but in the extended family, because these papers were passed around; they were brought by our friend who was the Pullman porter--additional papers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  At one time the Defender [Chicago Defender] was--rivaled the Negro World (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, they kind of competed for the top spot in the country.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 485351
Speaker 1: So you were at the Second Ward School, which is now the Ralph Wilson School [Ralph F. Wilson Elementary School, Lake Charles, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then in Chicago [Illinois], where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Betsy Ross.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Betsy Ross Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: On Michigan [sic. Wabash Avenue], yeah; around 61st [Street]--50--60th [Street] and Michigan, I think.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think so, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Betsy Ross Elementary School, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, you know, that was a year that is not remarkable in my memory because I think it was a year of transition, and I had come from this very protected environment.  In the southern school, you know, when you're a child you don't know that you're being protected, in part, from this horrible outside environment; you only know that you feel protected, secure in your own environment, and so that was--it was that kind of contrast, that parents cannot protect you as easily in the Chicago environment.
Speaker 1: Could you feel the difference in school?
Speaker 2: I probably could not; I probably--because I have a very warm and loving family so I, I probably didn't, but I can tell you (laughter) that everyone who knows me knows that one difference that I noticed immediately was winter.  Winter is simply not my favorite thing, and so--and, and partly because it's dreary, you know; it doesn't have the sunshine and the color and the brightness, so it's the cold, but it's also the dreary aspect of winter that I dislike, so I probably noticed that very quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Betsy Ross.  Now, were most of your teachers white at Betsy Ross?
Speaker 2: Truthfully, I wouldn't say that.  I, I was only there for a year, and I think that I had a black teacher during that year.  Remember, I'm in elementary school, so it's a single teacher.  I think I had a black teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So then you moved to Los Angeles [California]; where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: 36th Street School [Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], and that is one of my favorite memories.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was it about--36th Street School?
Speaker 2: There was a fourth grade teacher; she taught fourth, and then later sixth grade, whose name was Miss Bright [Birdielee V. Bright], B-R-I-G-H-T, and Miss Bright is a legend.  There are a number of us who remain friends, who were in Miss Bright's classes--her fourth and/or her sixth grade class, and we never get together when we do not talk about the marvels of Miss Bright's class.  She was truly an inspirational teacher who had it all together.  Miss Bright's motto was that if you were in her class, you would do well because you were in her class.  That was the beginning of each semester, and we were taught that all of us were responsible for all of us, and therefore, if you did well in geography and I did not, it was your responsibility to make certain that I learned geography, and if I did well in mathematics and you did not, it was my responsibility (laughter) to make certain that you did well in mathematics.  And she was serious.
Story_ID: 485352
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about Miss Bright's [Birdielee V. Bright] class and--
Speaker 2: Yes, the marvels of Miss Bright's class.  Miss Bright not only insisted that you be helpful to others, but she provided all the support each of us needed; everything, anything she could do to make certain that you learned, was done, and Miss Bright taught us the skills that we have carried throughout our lives in, in a number of areas; let me give one example.  There was no library in our local elementary school [36th Street School; Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], and so we were lined up and walked to the public library that was, I would estimate, let's call it, six or seven blocks from our school.  Before going to the public library, we had a library skills class that I (laughter), I have drawn on forever because Miss Bright not only taught us the Dewey Decimal System [Dewey Decimal Classification] and what it was and why it was, but she helped us to imagine interest that we didn't already have; we knew that we had specific goals for that library visit, but she would then let us think about, or influence us to think about, the Dewey Decimal System as a way of imagining all of the knowledge that you can examine in the world, and so therefore, her ability to capture your imagination and to take you inside yourself in a way that you could dream and reach was just extraordinary.  She did that also about our little garden in the back of the school; that was one of our science projects.  And so you were encouraged to learn about how things grow in terms of growth--your own growth, the growth of cities, changes in environments, so when I think about climate change now, I smile and I think about how Miss Bright would teach about climate change because everything she taught was done in this context of you and your development, and your development was connected always to the development of your family and your community, and your community was the world.  So she was just an extraordinary (laughter) human being, gifted in all kinds of ways--gifted instructionally, and I'm an educator and I know how important that is--but gifted motivationally so that she could literally inspire on a daily basis, and she did.  She was also a no-nonsense person.  You did not, quote, waste time in Miss Bright's class, and she said the reason that you don't waste time is that it is yours, and you don't waste what you have.  These are things (laughter) that we learned, as I said, in the fourth--and of course we were terrified of her--terrified.  We--I, I would visit her later on in Los Angeles [California], and I would tell her how terrified we were, and she said, "I would see you sitting there, all of you, quaking, and I thought, all right, now I've gotten their attention" (laughter).  So she had a marvelous sense of humor, she knew what she was doing, and she did it very well.
Speaker 1: Now, did she use corporal punishment where they--
Speaker 2: Occasionally, I think she did.  I think she rapped on some knuckles, but she was not a--an abusive human being in any way, shape or form; abuse was not what she was about.  What she was about was development of the human spirit, development of specific skills, learning in the traditional sense, and learning beyond the school house.
Story_ID: 485353
Speaker 1: Now, it seems to me that--and I guess you made it clear that she [Johnson's fourth grade teacher, Birdielee V. Bright] had a tremendous impact on your career goal of becoming a teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  She, I think, told us later, that there were nine teachers that came out of that one class--the one class [at the 36th Street School; Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  And all of us remained educators.
Speaker 1: Now did--had you projected yourself as a teacher prior to--
Speaker 2: I had, I've always wanted to be a teacher, but I had these wonderful teachers.  When people ask me, you know, "How did you decide you wanted to be a teacher?"  I said, "Some of the most wonderful human beings I've ever known are teachers," and that's why I wanted to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I've heard about the significance of your [maternal] grandfather [Joseph B. Wilson], Miss Bright (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my aunt [Myrtle Robinson]--
Speaker 1: --your aunt.
Speaker 2: Um-hm these were people who all taught me, and they inspired me to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's so many people we've talked to--women that grew up during that era--so many of them, you know, were pushed to become teachers--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and didn't want to be --
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I was not--
Speaker 1: --and you really wanted, you wanted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I, I loved it; I loved it because I wanted to emulate these extraordinary human beings.  I didn't know if I could ever be as good as any of them, you know, in this, this process, but I thought, thought that it was just something to aspire to, so it was one of those opportunities in my life, having Miss Bright, that I have recognized--and I think in some ways we even recognize then, although as I said, we were mostly terrified (laughter), but we also performed very well, and she just gave you praise when you performed well; I mean and, and often.  She knew--you were very clear in Miss Bright's class about expectations; you were very clear.  What you need to do is to learn library skills; you will be tested on them and you will be tested not only on a, you know, paper and pencil test, but you will be tested in terms of how well you do when we get to the library.  And you will be tested on the research project that you have, and we had a research project in Miss Bright's class.
Speaker 1: Now, what was yours?
Speaker 2: Mine was Christ of the Andes [Christ the Redeemer of the Andes]; I've never forgotten it.  I learned about the geography of the area (laughter), I learned about some history, and I've never been there but I certainly would like to go.  And the other thing is, remember how we all made those flower and water maps?  When you made the flower and water maps in Miss Bright's class, she helped you to find out about the scale, the actual height of those mountains, and what helped me in this--Miss Bright was serious; I mean she really was serious.  She understood how you capture knowledge and how you inspire children to think about themselves as, as able to in fact get knowledge.  You don't have to depend on only Miss Bright for knowledge; that's why I said that she's inspirational, because she helped you develop yourself and captured your imagination in ways that you would then be able to go and think about those mountains, not only in terms of, you know, what you're doing with this flower and water, but think about a mountain range.  And we'd come back from the, from a--you know--and, and again, we're talking about schools that did not have all of these resources, even though these were Los Angeles [California] schools but you didn't have a whole lot of resources.  She would then help us to think about geography in terms of how, how did mountains get here?  And we would kind of look at each other and think, you know.  But you would never say, "I can't find out."
Story_ID: 485354
Speaker 1: Now, what were, were some of your favorite books?
Speaker 2: My favorite books were books about children, and I'm trying to remember specific titles 'cause I read so broadly about children who did things that they kind of initiated; that was the general group of books that I really enjoyed.  But I moved fairly quickly to books about teenagers when I was, say, nine or ten; I was really reading about teenagers.  Now, remember, this is a period when there are not a lot of books about black children, but I can remember that Associated Publishers and others--Afro-Am Publishing [Afro-Am Publishing Company, Inc.]--had books that became available to us.  And then my parents [Lillian Wilson Miller and Johnson's stepfather, Herman Miller] introduced me to books that were not available even in the public library; I have one of them here.  Mrs. Sue Bailey Thurman came through Los Angeles [California] speaking about her book ['Pioneers of Negro Origin in California,' Sue Bailey Thurman], which was on black pioneers in California, and I have a copy of that book that I got from her, and I cherished it because it gave me a way of reading about, or seeking information about black people kind of in the interstices (laughter) of other books.  And what I mean by that is if you know that black people have been involved in certain aspects of development, you can then go and read about those aspects of development as they have been written about kind of in the mainstream, and then put the, the people in, or imagine how they flow through that.  So I used a lot of imagination with books; it wasn't that I accepted just the story that I got, but I kind of wove into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting concept because people who do know, if you do find the black history part, it's often outside of the context of school--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and you have to imagine.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  And that's what I did.  And so I imagined stories, and that's why I later wrote a story for my own children called 'Escape to Freedom' [Vivian R. Johnson], in which I take a--an escaped--an escapee, a man who's been enslaved in South Carolina, and I bring him to New Bedford [Massachusetts], and then I bring him across Massachusetts, stopping at actual Underground Railroad sites across the state, and that's because when I was growing up, I imagined stories like that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I made one up and, and had it published.
Story_ID: 485355
Speaker 1: Now, were you influenced very much by radio or movies?  Did you get a chance to go to movies much, or--
Speaker 2: I didn't go to the movies much and, and I liked the idea of movies; I'm not quite sure how to say this.  I liked the notion of being able to capture and to animate, you know; I, I was fascinated by that, but most of the movies were, I thought, pretty silly--Bugs Bunny and all that stuff.  I just thought it was silly.  And while we went on Saturday morning, 'cause that was what you did, for me it was mostly to be with my friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the dramas and such in those days?
Speaker 2: Now, that was, that was another aspect that I became much more fascinated with.  Let me quickly move on to the fact that not only did I have Miss Bright [Birdielee V. Bright], but we later--that's in elementary school [36th Street School; Birdielee V. Bright Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  In junior high school, we groaned because we were about to get Miss Bright's sister (laughter), and you can imagine as, as young children, we said (laughter).  We thought we were going to junior high school and now we would be, be able, you know, to sigh relief.  No, you're gonna have Miss Bright's sister in the seventh grade.  Miss Bright's sister taught English literature, and she brought into the classroom aspiring African American actors, and I wish I remembered the names of some because they later became well-known; I don't think any of them became famous but certainly well-known in some of the Hollywood productions.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was, was Fredi Washington one of them or, or--I'm trying to think of the early black people out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: Women, men?
Speaker 2: Men, and let me tell you why.  She brought them in to the portion of the class on Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] to do famous Shakespearian speeches, and I can remember hearing Mark Antony's speech and being absolutely enthralled.  No, that was, that was--it opened up a whole window for me.  She then took her Saturdays--and she was married and had a child.  She would spend her Saturdays taking us in groups, small groups, to the Shakespeare festival, and I saw Shakespeare productions, therefore, when I was in the seven--seventh grade--Shakespearian productions that were done in a Shakespeare festival.  It was absolutely captivating.  All of that language and costuming and, you know--in other words, it evoked an era; it was the first time in my life that an era was evoked in such a way that I could think about history in another way.
Speaker 1: Was it Canada Lee, or Rex Ingram?  Was that the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, Rex Ingram we certainly saw; I mean we--Rex Ingram is someone we, we saw in person and, you know, these were people who were around in the neighborhood.  I'm trying to remember who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lou Lipper [ph.], maybe--I don't know.
Speaker 2: I don't recall those names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, I was young and I would--names were not sticking with me.  And besides that, I wasn't that taken with the movies, even though I lived in Los Angeles [California].  I was much more interested in sets, and the whole idea of creating sets, and creating costumes; always been more interested in costumes and sets, even lighting, than I was in movies 'cause I thought most of 'em were really pretty silly; they just didn't--
Speaker 1: Well, you know the movies of black people that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, that, that was different.  We did see--oh, my goodness, what were the two most famous?
Speaker 1: 'Cabin in the Sky,' 'Green Pastures' ['The Green Pastures'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cabin in the Sky' and 'Green Pastures' yes, we saw those.  And many of those actors, remember, lived in the neighborhood, so we saw those people.  But again, I just (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 485356
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the neighborhood called that you lived in? What would it have been called?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was called West Los Angeles [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it's near--what people know now about that neighborhood--it's near First A.M.E. Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Los Angeles, California]--Faith; it's near FAME (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) FAME, yeah, yeah, I know where that is.
Speaker 2: It's near there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a neighborhood in which, you know, lots of people live who were connected to, to the film industry.  As I said, I just--and, and there's something I should mention here about growing up in this neighborhood.  My father--my stepfather [Herman Miller] who, who raised me and my brother [Wilson Robinson], had a small cafe for forty- six years (laughter), and it was right out in front of our house, and into that cafe came lots of people, some of 'em were in the--many of 'em were in the film industry, but lots of whom were neighborhood folk who wanted a very good meal, and my father was a splendid cook, and so it was like an extension of our living room.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: So that's where a lot of the conversation and a lot--there were some people who ate there every day for thirty years, you know--unmarried folk who decided this was, this was a great place to have breakfast and dinner, and they went off to work; after breakfast, came back (laughter) at dinnertime, and that's where they ate.  So we had a lot of neighborhood discussions (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I--we were interviewing Judy Pace [HistoryMaker Judy Pace-Flood] who grew up out there, and she was talking about Tim Moore being--living across the street from her--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the one who played Kingfish [George "Kingfish" Stevens] in (unclear) and some other people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, a lot of these folks--and, you know, as I said, I saw, I saw a lot of these people; I didn't know them, but I saw them growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so your stepfather operated a cafe, right?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he did--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --he did.  And my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] worked with him for many years, so that, as I said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of if?
Speaker 2: It was called Miller and Son [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  And that was, that was on what--what's the street?
Speaker 2: Western Avenue.
Speaker 1: Western, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's interesting today when you, you read the Easy Rawlins [Ezekiel "Easy" Rawlins] novels, you know, you know; he paints a picture of Los Angeles [California] in that era (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I know, oh, yes, that's right, and I know--you know, I recognize a lot of that, a lot of that, because I was, you know, the--growing up.  And one of the things that's important to mention about growing up in Los Angeles is that your geographic range is so, so broad.  I mean we thought nothing of going twenty-five miles to a, to a party, to going to Pasadena [California], going to Venice [California], going to Santa Monica [California], because we all started driving cars at sixteen, even in--you know, driving a car at sixteen wasn't as common in, in the East as it was in the West; we all drove, and so--and, and our parents allowed us to, to go those distances because they so frequently knew those other parents; I mean there was this very close community, and Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson] who is now in [U.S.] Congress, lived about three or four blocks away, and Diane's mother [Dorothy O'Neal Watson] was the person who knew where those parties were (laughter), and she just made it her business, and our parents would call her to find out, you know, "Well, I'm not sure I know Mrs. So-and-So; tell me about Mrs. So-and-So."  And she would tell other parents.  So, therefore, there was this community that was watching over us that extended really quite far geographically.
Story_ID: 485357
Speaker 1: Now, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Polytechnic High School [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California].  And that was also a very good experience.  In those years, partly because of my [maternal] grandfather's [Joseph B. Wilson] influence and, and my mother's [Lillian Wilson Miller] as well, I was going to be a mathematician; I always enjoyed math, we played math games at home, and I was good at them.  My grandfather, as I said, was not a licensed architect but he drew plans, and one of my most vivid memories of home is my grandfather's slanted table with the T-square on it in our living room by a window with a good light, and he would sit there drawing plans, sometimes while I was practicing my piano lessons, and he would turn and he'd say, "I think you ought to try that phrase again, Vivian [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson]--that note," you know.  And so math and, and things mathematic, were part of my, my growing up; as I said, we played those kinds of games.  My brother [Wilson Robinson] was very good at this.  We haven't yet talked about my brother because my brother was another influence in my life that I need to talk about.  My, my growing up then included this very great emphasis on, and real comfort with mathematics as a way of thinking and having possible career choices.  So, in those years, I really thought about teaching math.  I mention all of this because the high school, Polytechnic High School, had excellent math instruction.  There were, in those years, four high schools in the area; one was Manual Arts [Manual Arts High School, Los Angeles, California], another, Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], was the high school that was still dealing with a lot of, of agricultural subjects.  Los Angeles High School [Los Angeles, California] was the traditional--we would think of it as the kind of traditional high school with literature and the arts and, and so on, and Polytechnic High School was just that; it had an emphasis on the technical skills.  Now, that didn't mean that you didn't get the general, you know, literature and social studies and so on, but there were teachers there who really knew mathematics--physics--fabulous physics teachers, fabulous chemistry teachers, and so on.  Now, the reason that I mention that is that while I was at the high school, I had an experience that, again, inspired me, I realize, to become a teacher because it, it, it is very indicative of what I thought a teacher did.  I was taking a whole series of math courses, and I was called in by the head of the math department one time, who was a white male, about sixty-five; he was right at retirement.  And he said to me, "Vivian, I look at your program and you are not in line to take the next advance course."  I can't remember whether it was solid geometry, let's say--, "And so you need to take trigonometry, and there is no trigonometry course being offered this semester, so I'm gonna teach it to you in your free period."  And I said, "All right."  He gave me the textbook, gave me instruction and an assignment and sent me home, and I reported this to my family at dinner that night, and my mother said, "Excellent; I am delighted to hear that because that shows, first of all, that he's paying attention; secondly, that as a teacher, he wants to make certain that students get what they're supposed to get; and thirdly, that even this close to retirement he's willing to do some extra work."
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: So, it's a very important experience in my life, and I tell that; you know I've done teacher training in my own career, and I tell that to teachers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is another example of dedication on the part of a teacher that went way beyond (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly; that's right, way beyond, way beyond.  So I had a course all by myself in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it you were a good student in high school.
Speaker 2: I was a very good student; I loved school.
Story_ID: 485358
Speaker 1: Were you involved in school activities too or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lots of school activities; I loved school activities, and I was good at them.  And another teacher, inspirational teacher, was our English teacher who coached the debate team [at John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California].  I found out that I was good at debating--not as good as I thought I was, as my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] would say, but because that was another--I should mention that.  I found out about debate, and I came home and I said something to the effect of, "You know, there's actually a course, or a, a, a program to do what we do at home."  And what I meant by that was (laughter) that discussion, debate, and argumentation was what went on every day at our house; I didn't know that there was anything called that, I just thought it was something you do, and the reason that I mention it is that my parents taught me the rules of evidence; they would say to me--my mother would become the devil's advocate; she could become the devil's advocate on any issue, and she could literally run down the position and would challenge you to contradict her, quote, evidence.  She would say, "Is that evidence?"  So I learned that at, at home, and I didn't there was a--something called this until I got into this debate, and I came home and I said, "Guess what?"  (Laughter) You know?  So my mother smiled because of course she knew there--you know, about debate.  But I got into--on the debate team and did fairly well.  I come back to this teacher because, again, this is a teacher near retirement (laughter), who coached the, the debate group of black children because this was segregated activity, and I cannot remember the organizations; these were black men's associations, and it may have been, you know, the Urban League, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; I'm not sure who it was, that sponsored a yearly debate activity for high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 485359
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were talking about the debate team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and we were talking about it being segregated and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --explain the sense you mean in terms of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and that's, that's probably somewhat unfair because it conjures up things that really were not true.  What I mean by that is that there were in fact--because we lived in the, and live in a segregated society, there were activities that were confined to the African American community.  This teacher--I was really--you're talking about teacher examples, and this teacher went out of her way to find those activities so that she could in fact get those of us who are African American to participate in those activities; in other words, she didn't limit the activities of the debate team to either integrated activities or to white-sponsored activities, but she found black-sponsored activities for the debate team to participate in as well.  So I was really talking about the teacher and using the teacher example rather than, than trying to point out a segregated activity; it wasn't that, that it was legally segregated, it was that she went out of her way, and it's the going out of the way of teachers that I was really trying to talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay, trying to get the black students involved in something in the community, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, in the community.  And to find things in the community, you know, that she felt she needed to know about.
Speaker 1: Now you participated, you said, in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] debate?  Sponsored (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't.  I can't--not--and I've been trying to remember who sponsored those particular debates, and I don't recall, I just don't recall.  I--
Speaker 1: What was the sub- what was the subject matter?
Speaker 2: The subjects were the subject matter of the day, whatever were--you know, debate is usually, for students, around the topics of the day--should China be, you know, admitted to the UN [United Nations], and this kind of thing.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is nineteen--you were in high school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] from '48 [1948] 'til--
Speaker 2: Of '50 [1950], yes, to '52 [1952]; that's right, that's right, so this was around that period.  And it usually had to do with the Cold War, or with, you know, topics of the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The election--I guess Eisenhower's [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] election was in '52 [1952] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly, exactly, exactly, exactly.  The starting of the UN, you know; these were the issues.
Speaker 1: You know, Truman [President Harry S. Truman], I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Desegregation of the [U.S.] Armed Forces, I guess, is (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, that would not have been one, probably, that they would have encouraged us to debate, and for the obvious reasons.  We should have but, you know, those--remember those--we were in a much more constricted time, and it was constricted because power simply constricted it.  To get out of that, you really had to have the revolution of the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 485360
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a prom at school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California], and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: We did, and I certainly attended the prom.  I wanna mention that one of the things about the prom that I remember is the dress that was made by a woman--talking about being constricted--I think about this woman who was so extraordinarily talented, and if she--if there had been any fairness in the world, she would be as well-known as say Ralph Lauren because she had the capability of creating and designing clothing; she also made--designed and made cakes, and you will see on--she designed and made our wedding cake--gorgeous!  I mean she just had this skill, design, and execution, that really should have been rewarded but it was not; she worked for other people in limited ways.  So that's one of the things I remember about the prom was just how pretty the dress was because this woman was so talented.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Claudia Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Claudia Johnson, okay.
Story_ID: 485361
Speaker 1: Did you graduate [from John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] with, with particular honors and--
Speaker 2: Not particularly, no, but I graduated, you know, with good enough grades to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, all right, so, yeah.  I'm surprised now 'cause you--anybody taking higher math like that, and getting a special instruction. That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, you know, there's another thing that we should tal- point out here that while I was good, I was also with a group of very competitive students, and because I was taking those classes--remember this is the '50 [1950]--'40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  Girls--that's another reason why this teacher is so unusual; that's why I wanna put him into perspective.  Girls were not encouraged to do this.  My other teachers were not as encouraging always as this gentleman was.  Secondly, and this is an important thing to mention, many of the best students in the mathematics classes were Japanese, and other Asian students were also joining those, those classes, but there were very few females in any of the classes that I was in, and I was not so exceptional in math.  I mean we'll talk about that because I decided later on that this was just really not what I wanted to teach, but I still enjoyed it.  It was that this was a very competitive area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And it should have been, you know, I mean it's--and I'm glad it was because I was not the, the best student in that area, by any means, but I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the plan in high school was to go on to UCLA.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Oh, the plan had always been to go to UCLA (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we get you--
Story_ID: 485362
Speaker 1: --Go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before we get you there, let's talk about your brother a little bit; we haven't mentioned him yet. You said we got to raise your brother because he was a big influence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, oh, absolutely, ab- very big influence.
Speaker 2: Now, is he older than you?
Speaker 1: My brother was five years older than I, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what's his name?
Speaker 1: Wilson [Wilson Robinson], W-I-L-S-O-N, and that's important because remember my mother's [Lillian Wilson Miller] maiden name was Wilson, and there are several--he's not the only child who, in my mother's generation, was named Wilson because they--there were not many male children in my mother's generation; remember she had two sisters.  There were lots of females, and several of those females married--named their sons Wilson to carry on the, the family name.  And Wilson was a surrogate parent; he always thought of himself as my protector, and there were only the two of us, and he took on what he considered the opportunity, really, to make certain that my life was as easy as it possibly could be.  Now, what that meant when I was a teenager, I was not happy about at all (laughter) because it meant that my brother knew everyone who I dated--everyone--without exception.  And not only that, but every party I went to, either my brother or one of his buddies would turn up, talk to the parents, wave at me and then leave, and I was known by my brother's buddies--and there were a number of them--as Little Wilson (laughter), which I just hated, you can imagine.  But that was the way it was, and there was no getting--I complained bitterly; it just didn't change.  But I can never remember going to a party either in the neighborhood--as I told you, and our neighborhood went, went far--or anyplace else that one of my--either my brother; often it was he, and he would bring his date if that was re- you know, if he was out himself.  But he always came (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: It is (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, did--now, what did--did, did he go to college?
Speaker 1: He did go to college.  Now, my brother, talk about math, that's who was brilliant; I mean absolutely brilliant.  And would not--you know you've heard this story before--would not go to school, he skipped school; he could skip as many days as you could get away with, go in, take the exam, and get a C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And not only that, but in college--he finally did, you know, register for college; he went first to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and then to one of the local community colleges, and when he went, I can remember my mother pointing out to him that the plastic cover around a book had never been broken.  It was the end of the semester--this is a math class--this was the end of the semester, my brother went in and got a C on the final test.  And my mother and father [Johnson's stepfather, Herman Miller] were just so distressed that there seemed to be no way to get him to pursue education in this way--in the, in the normal way.  What happened is that my [maternal] grandfather [Joseph B. Wilson], of course, did not give up on him, and my brother went in and took the exam for civil engineering, whatever level the state exam; passed it, and became a civil engineer without graduating from college.  He also was--became vice president of student affairs (laughter) of, of Golden Gate College [Golden Gate University] in San Francisco [California], without ever having graduated from college.  My brother was phenomenal, just simply phenomenal.  And he was so bright that he would--well, as a teacher, I certainly understand, far better than I did then, how bored he must have been at school; I mean he was just bored to distraction.  Plus, he was dealing with a phenomenon that we know is not uncommon where teachers were not expecting much of him, and that combination just sent him away.
Story_ID: 485363
Speaker 1: Now he had a very pleasant disposition--very well-liked, great guy in the community, and mothers loved him because, you know, what he--the way that he treated me and, and his protection, and so they would hope that their daughters went out with him because they knew him and he was a gentleman, he always came and talked with parents and grandparents, and others in the family.  Now, he was a very congenial kind of person who was very, very well-liked, and he enjoyed people and, you know, he could, he could sit and hold conversations with grandmothers, and they loved him (laughter).  He always, he always had this kind of following--people who asked about him for years and years, and years--and he did this as a young boy; he just had that kind of disposition.  So, he never got in trouble in school in that sense, you see, because he wasn't doing--you know, wasn't fighting and he wasn't--but school was not serving him at all; it's terrible, it really is.  And that's why when I see, particularly young males, who are bored in school, I realize what I'm looking at.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That sounds like a remarkable--is, is he still alive?
Speaker 1: No, he isn't, and he retired, in fact, and moved to Kauai, in Hawaii, where he had always gone--well, for fifteen or more years, he and his wife had gone for a vacation, and so when he was able to retire, they moved there, bought a home, settled in, and he then databased a fifty-year jazz collection and became a program host on the local community radio station, and he did that for about four years.  When he was on the air, they put it on their website; they put the--his program on their website, so we would gather around the computer and listen to my brother [Wilson Robinson], and he had requests from all over the world.  He knew jazz backwards and forwards; he loved jazz, had taught himself to play twelve-string guitar when he was growing up.  I mean he's just a phenomenal human being, absolutely phenomenal.  So that--he was really, you know, my hero and model in terms of, you know, getting back to mathematics.  So I have to be honest and say that I never expected to be like my brother; I mean my, my brother was brilliant in mathematics and could have done anything.  I was always a good student; that was the difference, you know.  I worked hard, he worked very little (laughter) and did brilliantly all the time.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's how to do it, I guess--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --but--or maybe--well, let's, let's--he's an interesting person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Only if you have those kinds of skills.  But see, I often think what my brother would have done if he were really challenged.  I mean he just would have been phenomenal.  Can you imagine what achievements he could have had if he had been challenged in school?  That's one of the reasons why I always wanted to be a good educator because I didn't wanna leave anyone behind.
Story_ID: 485364
Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [John H. Francis Polytechnic High School, Los Angeles, California] in 1952 and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and went immediately to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was UCLA like in those days now?
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.  There were perhaps--let's say two hundred; I may--two hundred or two hundred fifty black students; we all knew each other, and [HistoryMaker] Bennett Johnson who is now working with Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] was one of those students.  We all knew each other, we were supportive of each other, we had fun together, it was a great experience.  And there are two aspects of it that I really wanna emphasize because they have been so important in my life.  One is that there was--is something at UCLA and--not something--an organization called the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California], URC; it's down on Hilgard [Avenue] now, and the URC had people in it who were very forward-thinking; think about the '50s [1950s] in this regard.  These were people who came together--first of all, the University Religious Conference itself was a place where there were offices for each of the religious organizations on campus, so the, the Presbyterians had an office and the Baptists had an office, and so on and so on.  They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it, did it span into other world religions as well, or just the Christian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not then; I would be very curious to know if it did now.
Speaker 1: Most of your different Christian denominations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them different Christian denominations then and--'cause this is the '50s [1950s], all right?  And they decided they would do programs in common, so it was the first ecumenical programming I had ever heard about.  I didn't--you know, I never thought about ecumenism; it wasn't something I knew about growing up, so here was a new experience.  And one of the things that they did was to buy a residence and start a women's cooperative.  There was no housing on the UCLA campus at that time, and this residence was envisioned as a place to support what was then called, brotherhood. Remember, this was the time of Brotherhood Week and, and so on and so on, so that was the, the terminology of the period.  And so they consciously selected eight white students, eight black students, eight Hispanic students, and eight Asian students; there were thirty-two of us in that residence.  This was very self-conscious on the part of the University Religious Conference, and there was a dorm mother--'cause you know, those were the days of the dorm mother--and we were encouraged, and of course it wouldn't happen naturally anyway.  We were encouraged to learn from each other, so this was a big radical step for 1950s.  My mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] knew about this dormitory; my mother was, as I said, very, very assertive with regard to education, and she encouraged me to live there, and it was really a very fortuitous move.  It broadened me in every possible way.  First of all, it was the first time, obviously, for any of us, living with people of other races, religions, ethnicity, circumstances.  And we had--we selected our own menus; we had a couple of students, in fact, who were in the group who were in nutrition studies, so they worked with us and, even back in those days, we were talking about good nutrition.  And we cooked our meals; they purchased the food, these nutrition students.  We cooked our own meals, cleaned up the place so we had, you know, chores to do, and we paid five dollars a week for room and five dollars a week for board, so it was manageable.  And Diane Watson [HistoryMaker Diane E. Watson], who is now congresswoman from the 33rd congressional district in California, was there.  I had known her, of course, in the neighborhood.  Other young people with whom I have had, you know, ongoing relationships, so it was a splendid college learning opportunity; just extraordinary.  So that's one thing.
Story_ID: 485365
Speaker 1: Now the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California] did two other things that I participated in.  The second is it had something called, the Panel of Americans. This is all part of this notion of brotherhood.  The Panel of Americans was made up of a Catholic, a Protestant, a Jew--remember, these were these religious offices.  A Catholic, a Protestant, a Jew, a Negro, and a second-generation American--usually, but not always, Japanese.  Now, it was instructed for all of us, if there was a Japanese participant on that panel, because remember this is after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], the Japanese had been put in what were called (air quotes) relocation centers, and the students, the Nisei with whom I was going to college [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], had been part of this experience, so they talked about being taken away as an American, and put in these relocation centers while their brothers, uncles, fathers--in some cases--were sent to fight.  It was a powerful, powerful presentation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even people my age remember seeing cartoons Saturday or, or in the afternoons; they come from the war period that depicted them as Japs, and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right, and a lot of them, oh, a lot of them.
Speaker 2: --you know, as the enemy, and more so than the Germans.
Speaker 1: Exactly, absolutely.  So imagine that someone who has actually been in one of those camps is now standing in front.  Now, the other thing--and this is--and when I think about--you know, University Religious Conference did some things that were really quite radical in this regard because we were invited to speak; they made sure that we got invitations to speak to the Lions Clubs [Lions Clubs International], and to all of those influential organizations that needed to hear these stories, needed to know what was really going on, because their worlds were so narrow.  So, the Panel of Americans was something that was all-volunteer, and when you had time in-between your classes, you know, there was, there were--I was not the only one who spoke; there were others, but I have pictures there of me with the Panel of Americans.  So that's another aspect of this University Religious Conference program that was significant in my life because, again, what it did for me is to, first of all, give me an opportunity to hear these other stories, you know; I'd never heard stories about, you know, discrimination against Catholics, for example.  I certainly did not know the stories of Japanese Americans of Nisei, and it also gave me an opportunity to find out about these influential white male organizations like, you know, the Lions and the, and the other organizations that were--where decisions were often made.
Speaker 2: Rotary Club [Rotary International].
Speaker 1: Exactly, Rotary was another one.  And, and sometimes these were church organizations, but church organizations at very high levels.  These were the people who ran church groups.
Speaker 2: Like Knights of Columbus (unclear).
Speaker 1: All kinds of groups like that.  So imagine now, I'm a, you know, freshman in high--in college, and I am beginning to find out how influence is really used and where it resides.
Speaker 2: Now you had exposure to Defender [Chicago Defender] and the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And you have a--I, I suppose--I would guess you had a keen sense of the sufferings of black people--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --through the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]--the lynchings and other injustices (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, the lynchings--that's all of that, you know.  Ida B. Wells is one of, you know, my heroines and, and you were asking me about my reading.  See, I read things that she had published; that's why I'm saying I had an early interest in our history in that way and it, it has really been very helpful to me in understanding the sociological conditions of this country, of, of us and, and then this experience now in college helps me to understand other people's sociological conditions 'cause see, I'm really very focused on my own, as well I should be.  But this was broadening because I began to understand what other people had, you know, gone through; what Japanese had just gone through it--so on, and so on, and it's been very, very instructive in my life, it really has.  So that's the second thing University Religious Conference did, so it's the housing, Panel of Americans--
Story_ID: 485366
Speaker 1: The third was really, in many ways, the Rubicon that I crossed.  Dr. James Robinson [James Herman Robinson], who was minister of the Church of the Master in Harlem [New York, New York], came to speak at the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California], and I went to hear him and my life was thereby changed.  Reverend Robinson had been visiting India; now remember, India receive--wrested her independence in 1948 [sic. 1947]--this is 1952, '3 [1953], and that was the first big de-colonialization, so we--all of our eyes were on India.  And Reverend Robinson talked about the connections to Americans of the Indian nation's achievement and talked about Mahatma Gandhi; it's the first time I really learned about Mahatma Gandhi.  And he brought illumination for me of the world stage as it was unfolding, and how that related to the black experience.  He was black, he knew exactly what my questions were, and it was just powerful; he's also a gifted speaker--just fabulous.  He had influenced students at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to come together and raise money to go to India, and so a group of students had gone in 1952 already.  A similar group was organized through the University Religious Conference, and competition, therefore, was possible in selection, and I decided to compete.  Now, I knew nothing about India before that time, but I was so inspired by this that I started reading everything I could get my hands on.  I read and I read and I read, and I--we had weekly gatherings where all of the, you know, competitors for this trip would gather and have a meeting, and it was fabulous.  I mean it was the first time that I am now discussing on an international topic.  I was selected, and so I went off to India; I was seventeen years old, had just finished my freshman year of college [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I had my eighteenth birthday in India.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: While we were there, we worked with Indian students on a series of social service projects.  My group built a one-room school house in a village outside Calcutta [India]; that project, that entire Project India program, became one of the models for Peace Corps.
Speaker 2: How was it sponsored through the--
Speaker 1: Ford Foundation [New York, New York], Hoover vacuum cleaner [Hoover Company] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Through the URC [University Religious Conference]--
Speaker 1: I will never forget; it was the first--oh, I'll tell you another thing.  You know how you learn things sometimes on the margins.  It was the first time I'd ever thought about the fact that Hoover vacuum cleaner would have a foundation and give money.
Story_ID: 485367
Speaker 1: So, age seventeen, college sophomore, you're on your way to India.
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did you stay?
Speaker 2: Six weeks.
Speaker 1: And how did you go?  Did you fly or--
Speaker 2: We flew, and there's a wonderful picture there of us standing in front of a TWA [Trans World Airlines] plane, the group from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], complete with our hats on; remember, this is the '50s [1950s] and young women wore hats.  So, we flew from Los Angeles [California] to New York [New York]; I think it was like fourteen hours then across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean], and from New York to Paris [France]; it was, of course, my first trip--it was really my first trip on an airplane--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --and this is 1953 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that was special in those days. Now are there any (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, oh, yeah--oh, exactly; that's right, 1953; oh, no.  No, I didn't, I didn't--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a plane ride, you're going in, and you must have really felt special.
Speaker 2: Very special, very excited, and very appreciative, you know, I really understood.  First of all, I should say that my father [Johnson's stepfather, Herman Miller] took on extra work so that he could, you know, provide me with the, the additional money that this, this cost, and I cannot remember exactly how much, but I, I'm thinking in the neighborhood of six hundred dollars which, of course, was a lot of money in 1953.
Speaker 1: Almost buy a new car with that.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so my family was very proud of me, I was very appreciative of this opportunity, and I should mention that by this time, my [maternal] grandfather was in Liberia.  My grandfather retired from his business--
Speaker 1: This is Joseph Wilson [Joseph B. Wilson] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is Joseph Wilson--and took a job with the National Baptist Convention Foreign Mission Board; he was not a--he was not a missionary, he was in fact employed by the National Baptist Foreign Mission Board, and he went to Monrovia [Liberia].  So I was very, very excited, and my grandfather wrote and congratulated me.  It was really a very, very important time in my life.
Story_ID: 485368
Speaker 1: Had you ever been to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I'd never been east of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, so New York--what did you think of New York?  Did you have a chance to spend much time there?
Speaker 2: Not much time, not much time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I was--you know, I was impressed but I was really--my eyes were really further east; I was really focused on India.
Speaker 1: What about Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: Well, Paris was (laughter)--Paris was interesting because one--incidentally, one of the members of this team was a woman that had been with me in the dormitory--in Stevens House [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] was the name of that dormitory, and had also been with me on the Panel of Americans.  I should show you a picture; there is a picture of the two of us--she's Japanese American; there's a picture of the two of us in an Indian newspaper that really is a very important picture for that trip, and she and I were the youngest members of the group, so we were not allowed to go with the rest of our group to the Folies Bergere [Paris, France], that I, I remember about (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Made famous by Josephine Baker; that's where she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and we were not allowed to go because we were too young; we were not eighteen yet, so (laughter)--that's one of the things I remember.  The other thing is that I just remember how really--I don't know how--which word to use, but just how fascinating it was to be in Paris and be able to walk up and down streets.  Remember, I come from Los Angeles [California] where you get in a car to go everywhere, so the notion that you now walk around and see things, engage in, in all kinds of activities where you just walk to them, was a, a new experience for me, and of course I thought it was beautiful, I really did.
Speaker 1: Did you meet any of the American expatriate crowd there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, we were literally passing through; we--you know, it was just a stop for us to get ourselves together and move on.
Story_ID: 485369
Speaker 1: Okay, so then you fly then from Paris [France] to--
Speaker 2: I'd have to think of where the next stop is 'cause there was a next stop, but we went from Paris to Bombay [Mumbai, India] but I can't--I don't think that was nonstop; I think we did refuel somewhere.
Speaker 1: All right to Bombay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paris to Bombay.  And there we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's now called--we call it now under a different name down there; it's--
Speaker 2: No, Bombay is still Bombay.
Speaker 1: Is it still Bombay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was wonderful, that was absolutely wonderful.  And let me tell you through the eyes of one of my white colleagues that--she said to me, "You know, I just never thought about the fact that most of the world probably looks like this, with all of this brown skin."  And it was an absolutely wonderful experience to be surrounded (laughter); it was the first time since that childhood experience in Lake Charles [Louisiana]--it was the first time that I felt that kind of experience, remembering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you surprised at all?  I remember as a kid looking in the textbooks and some of the travel books--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and books on race--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where they list the Indians as Caucasians.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that I thought about that, about the--about whatever people would call them; what I was doing is looking at the sights and sounds around me, and you know, some things are just self-evident; these are brown skin people, and light and dark brown, not--you know, but so are we.  So, therefore, you know, what it seemed like to me was this extraordinary experience of being surrounded by people who look like you.  Now, there was one exception to that, and that is the fact that I'm tall, and Indians generally are short people, and so when I announced on the day of my birthday--I was out speaking to a group of Indian students and I announced, "My name is Vivian Robinson [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson] and I am eighteen years old today," there was a gasp from the audience (laughter).
Speaker 1: They associate age with height (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly (laughter).  So it was wonderful.  We had--it was another one of those opportunities to just expand yourself in every direction.  Beauty--you know how I love sunshine and, and color, and the saris; I was captivated by the beauty of Indian women's dress.  It was all of that flowing silk and cotton, and all that array of colors; I was so happy (laughter), I didn't know what to do and I, again, I'd never thought about it.  It wasn't that I anticipated it, and then I can remember Indian sunsets.  We took train rides everywhere we went, and I can remember the sun setting over--way down on the horizon--huge ball of red fire from a moving train, I'm seeing this; it was incredible.  And then, of course, all the smells--all of those spices and cooking outside, so there's a lot of sensory experience in India that just captivated me; really was a wonderful experience.  And students were very smart; they knew a great deal about the segregation in the United States, they asked me about the condition of black people in the South, and I told them about the condition i n the North and in the West, and the Midwest, but they knew a lot of the--a lot of the news that they had read was about this segregation, this topic, so I had long discussions with, with Indian students who were very knowledgeable.  It was fascinating.
Speaker 1: Did you discuss the sort of parallels of the colonial segregation and the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, a lot of it.  I mean and they were really very astute about their own colonial experience, you know; they were, they were students in every sense of that word.  And there were coffee houses in India in those days, and I assume there still are, where students spent hours and hours and hours in discussion; that was what they did.  And of course that's what I had come from in my dining room, right?  So it seemed normal to me.  There were a lot of parallels there, in terms of family life, that I recognized immediately.  So it was a wonderful experience--just phenomenal.
Story_ID: 485370
Speaker 1: How was it programmed?  I mean what was your itinerary?
Speaker 2: Our itinerary was--there were fourteen in the entire group--the Project India group for my year, and the--there were two adults, and one--I mean two--when I say adults, I mean people from the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California], who went with one group of seven and one group of--the other group of seven--
Speaker 1: They were monitors basically or chaperones (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were the--they chaperoned and, and they were in charge of making certain that we got to the program, and so on.  Our itinerary was to travel to various colleges, for the most part colleges, and meet with Indian student groups to discuss the issues of the day--colonialism was one of the biggest ones, life in the United States was another big one.  And that's why I, I said that, you know, the University Religious Conference in that sense is--we're talking about an organization that really was much further ahead of its time.  When you think about a college campus, there were not a lot of organizations like this on a--on college campus, and it was really unusual, and it was ecumenical.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the question--who was the leader?  Or what was the--what were the names of the leaders over at URC [University Religious Conference]?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, there was one leader, and she was amazing.  Again, if this woman had been born a generation or so later, you would know her name because she was that phenomenal.  Her name was Adeline Gunther, and Adeline Gunther never married, was what we would think of as a social worker, but she really created a life for herself 'cause there was nothing for women to move into that she had in her imagination, so she just created a life, and what she did is to work at that University Religious Conference in their programs, and she worked on--she was the person that you went through for the Panel of Americans, there, there was also a camp, a university camp that operated out of that center, and she had something to do with that camp and she, and she mentored people--spent a lot of time mentoring, you know; it was very interesting that she did because that was not a term that we would have heard then, but that's what she did.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for that 'cause that--this is--you know, I'm sure this is gonna be important later on down the line to somebody who wants to--somebody, sooner or later, is gonna research her and write about her.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure, I'm sure because she really was phenomenal, and when we think about, you know, the--about women emerging as leaders, here was a woman who was clearly in a leadership position; she had figured out how to make that significant (laughter), but nobody was helping her, nobody was helping her.  And, you know, and she had some personality features that, that people didn't like, but when I think about them now, they had to do, to a large extent, with assertiveness.
Story_ID: 485371
Speaker 1: Are there any good stories from the meetings with the students there in India that you can tell?  Any surprising things?
Speaker 2: There weren't any surprises.  I think--
Speaker 1: Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] had passed by this time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and we were meeting officials.  Oh, there is a wonderful story, and this is--this has to do with meeting only one African American in the entire six weeks, and she worked for the American embassy, so when we got to Delhi [India] toward the end of the trip, we meet a woman who is working in the embassy and who is encouraging African students, who now remember the--India, at independence, invited some students from the African continent to come and study, and those students who were in Delhi were all welcomed at her home, and she had these gatherings.  Well, she--when she and I met, she immediately offered assistance to me in just, you know, female kinds of, of role model things, and she was a very helpful person generally, you know; she went out of her way, so everybody really enjoyed this, this person.  Well, the reason that this becomes even more important is that--that was 1953; around 1964, I am sitting in a meeting in Boston [Massachusetts] at a community center, and I look and realize that I know this person that I'm seeing but I don't know why, and you know how--what happens when people are out of context, we can't quite figure out why we know them.  She and I went up to each other after this meeting was over and we both said the same thing, "I know you but I don't know why."  To make a long story short, because it really is a very long story, she was that woman who I met in India.  We continue to be friends; Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I were out at her home for dinner about three weeks ago.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Her name is Lillian Granderson, G-R-A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.  And we visit her and her husband in Florida as well, so she is--
Story_ID: 485372
Speaker 1: There's another story and I tried to get her [Lillian Granderson] to, to really write about it because she went from there--because this story--I will tell the next phase of this story, and that is after she and I had been reunited, we were talking about those days, and she said, "You know, when I left India--when I finished my, my work there, I traveled in Africa to countries from which those students had come who I invited," you know, "to my house--the African students."  And she said, "And one of the people that I met in Malawi is a young woman who the young men told me really deserved to go to college, and only young men were getting the opportunity in that period, and could I do anything about this."  So she said, "So I got her into college in the United States," you know, "by telling her about the applications and so on and so on," she said, "but it turned out that she was very unhappy because she was in the Midwest and it was cold and always," (laughter); she was in some small school where there were no other Africans, there were no other African Americans, people didn't know who she was, and they asked her foolish questions, and so on.  And it was very cold, you know, physically very cold also, in the winter.  She said, "So, I called Professor Leo Hansberry [William Leo Hansberry] and asked if she could be transferred to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]."  Well, when she told this story, I jumped up and I said, "You mean Emily Maliwa?"  And she said, "Yes!  How do you know Emily?"  I said, "Because when you called Leo Hansberry, I was working with Leo; I was a scholarship assistant.  I was working with Professor Hansberry, and (laughter) getting scholarship assistance for African students through the African American Institute in Washington, D.C. [sic. Africa-American Institute; The Africa-America Institute, New York, New York]."  And I said, "When this student was transferred to Howard, Professor Hansberry came in and said, 'Vivian [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson], I've got a student who's come in who needs some TLC; take her home.'"  And I did.  I said, "She came to our house for Thanksgiving dinner, she then came to our house for Christmas dinner, and at Christmas, I was waiting for Caryn's [Caryn Johnson-Carter] birth, and Caryn was late."  So she said, "You know, in our--in my--with my people, a child who is a late arrival, if that child is a girl, it's given the name Lindani."  So Caryn's middle name is Lindani, and it means long-awaited, or sentinel, or it has that implication.  So, here again was another connection with this woman I met in India (laughter) that neither of us had known about.
Speaker 2: And the woman from Malawi, her name was Emily--
Speaker 1: Emily Maliwa, M-A, Maliwa, and Emily is now deceased.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was living in London [England] and she, she passed there.
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Speaker 1: Isn't that a story?
Speaker 2: William Leo Hansberry in this too, who many people don't know the name of; they know the name of his niece, you know, Lorraine Hansberry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly, but they don't know--yes.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was so important.
Speaker 1: And I was--and I met Lorraine Hansberry's sister [Mamie Hansberry] who lives in Los Angeles [California], and we were recounting that story again.  So it's really quite remarkable; that's why I said that, you know, one of the, one of the magnificent things about that experience is that it has come back to me as gifts in various ways.
Speaker 2: That, that's a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 485373
Speaker 1: --What else about India did you--did any of the Indian officials meet with your delegation?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Vice President Radhakrishnan [Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan]; I have a picture somewhere there with him.  And it was really a remarkable experience for us because in this country, we were--would not have been able to meet with officials, a vice president, and here we were meeting with a vice president; it was really powerful.  It was just--everything about it.  And also, you know, I can't even begin to give a name to the excitement that I felt being in a country that had wrested its independence from a colonial power; that was just extraordinary, and it was so inspiring for me because, of course, we were feeling oppressed in the same way in this country as black people, so to talk to people who felt that they had gotten themselves independent themselves, and to know that--when you were asking about, "What is there about this influence of, of Mahatma Gandhi?"  It was that feeling which people--which he generated; not only he, but the country generated, that you can yourself overcome your oppression.  That's what the feeling was--
Speaker 1: Now, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whatever the nature of that oppression is, you have the capacity to overcome it.
Speaker 1: Now, this is prior to the great liberation movements in Africa; they're all going--some of them are going on, but none of the--those countries are free at this point, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, 1957--no, they weren't, but 1957 Ghana wrest her independence from Great Britain, and that's another important fact for my story because that's when Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I met, and we married in 1957.  And so we just had our fiftieth wedding anniversary, and one of the things that we did is to acknowledge--yes, it was wonderful--to acknowledge the fact that an important aspect of our coming together was this common interest in the African continent and the fact that the year we were married, Ghana became independent.  So Ghana is celebrating her independence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this puts it in another perspective when you think about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause here's India, you know, and then here comes all those countries in Africa; fifty--fifty-two countries in succession, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, exactly, and that's why I said it's--you know, it's--that's right, and it's--and, and so--and we have heard about, you know, the stirrings in--not only in the South, but in Wichita [Kansas] and in other places; we've heard about that because that's the--one of the sources of, of that is the newspapers, remember, that we were all reading.  So by the time I graduated in 1956 [from the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], we now have those stories, you know, Montgomery [Alabama], Birmingham [Alabama] and those stories, as part of our lived knowledge and experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, nonviolent direct action being used as a major tool for black liberation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly.  That's right.
Speaker 1: --from Wichita to Dayton [Ohio], to Maryland to, to South Caro- to North Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Maryland, that's right, that's right; exactly, exactly.  So that's why I said it is of a piece with me, and when I think about those readings--remember I tell you, here I am in 1952 reading Mahatma Gandhi's writings, reading about India, and I'm saying, "Wow!"  Then I go, go home and I talk to my parents [Lillian Wilson Miller and Johnson's stepfather, Herman Miller] and I said, "Look, look at this!  This is what we've been talking about with regard, you know, to our--to, to being Negro in America, and here it is in India, and I'm gonna get a chance to go to India."  So, you can imagine my excitement.  I mean it was just powerful--absolutely.
Story_ID: 485374
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to--or what were your impressions of the condition of the people of India at that juncture?  I mean we, we hear about the overwhelming poverty in some of the places in India; I mean some--despite their victory over the British (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is overwhelming poverty, there is overwhelming poverty and there's no question about it.  What is, of course, remarkable about the human spirit is that people find ways to bring themselves above their condition, so these are people who are, are poor in their economic circumstances, but not necessarily in the way that they see themselves.  That's the thing about human beings, is that they may be imprisoned, they may be living in horrible circumstances, but their spirit is what governs who they are and how they think.  So, you would see remarkable people in your travels; people who had figured out how to make something of nothing.  So, one of the things we saw--for example, you know, if you've ever seen toys that children make of the scraps and of the leftovers in their environment, we would see these remarkable things.  And that--you know, you couldn't help but be just struck by a child who has taken something, you know, with a wheel and made a, a, a go-cart.  So we saw this emergence of spirit, despite circumstances, which is also a wonderful lesson; it is an incredible lesson.  So, yes, there is great poverty, and you see it on the streets; there's no way not to.  People are living in doorways and wherever, but that's not all you see, and that is not, you know, what your, your, your real sense of the place is; that's a reality, but it's not all a reality.  And that was a very important lesson for me to learn, and it was an important lesson for me to take with me to the African continent where I went very early; I went in '57 [1957] to Africa.
Story_ID: 485375
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, certainly.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Vivian R. Johnson, and my first name is V-I-V-I-A-N, and my last name is J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 24th, 1935 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a retired associate professor emerita from Boston University School of Education [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 11th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my home at 44 Norwood Avenue, Newton Centre, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And we are continuing an interview that we started in June of 2007 [sic. September 13, 2007], correct?
Speaker 2: I think it might have been even October; we may have done something in June, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, in September, September in September (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) September?  Was it September of 2000?  Yes, September of 2007, so that is a, a--yes, yes; lots of hap- lots has happened in, in both of our lives, I'm sure, since that time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 485376
Speaker 1: We left off on roll five, with you in India--on your way back to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], I think from, from India.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I continued at India--at UCLA, rather, with the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California], which was the organization that sponsored Project India, that I had been on in the summer of 1953, and I continued in another project they had called the Panel of Americans, and that project involved a group of students who would speak during what was then called Brotherhood Week, and then we would be asked to speak at various occasions, and there would be an African American, a Euro American, a Catholic American, a--an Asian American and a Latino American, a Jewish American; we would talk about our own cultural backgrounds and we would talk about life in our various communities, and that was the beginning of what is now called diversity and multicultural education.  I continued at UCLA and graduated in 1956, continuing to live in Stevens House, which was also a project of the University Religious Conference.
Story_ID: 485377
Speaker 1: And then in 1957, [HistoryMaker] Willard Johnson and I married, and we celebrated fifty years in 2007, and that was really a wonderful anniversary and gathering of our friends and family here in, in Boston [Massachusetts].  And also, I just wanna mention in relation to that, I had an extraordinary experience, and that was that during that year, our anniversary year, I discovered five marriage licenses for my ancestors in Arkansas, and those marriage, marriage licenses were from 1866 to 1872.  I knew about one of the couples, and that was why I looked up the licenses and then found the other four, and what I also discovered is that the parents of the couple that I was looking for--one, the parents of the bride married at about the same time, and I realized that they married because during their enslavement, they were not allowed to marry, so when their children married in 19--in 1866, they married as well.  And that was really a spectacular discovery during my fiftieth wedding anniversary year.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me ask you now, now tell us about Willard and how you met.
Speaker 1: We met at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] because we were both very active in student government.  I was the first African American woman to serve on the UCLA student council, and I served in 1956 on the UCLA student council.  Willard then ran for, and was selected--won the, the office of student body president in 1957, and we were both very active in student affairs.  And in 1957, in December--on December 15th, we married and later moved--we moved in fact, seven times in the first seven years of our marriage (laughter); we, we did a lot of moving.  We came to Boston early on, left, and then came back again.  And I really wanna talk about the time in Boston because it was such an important time of my life, but before I do that, I'd like to say that in 1960, our first daughter was born in Washington, D.C. where Willard was studying for his master's degree, and that's Caryn Lindani Johnson [Caryn Johnson-Carter], and then in 1963, Willard was carrying out research for his doctoral dissertation in Cameroon, and our second daughter, Kimberly Edeema [ph.] Johnson [Kimberly Johnson Ogadhoh], was born in Cameroon, so those are the most wonderful events of those years.  In 1965, approximately (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 485378
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you--and we always ask this kind of a question--who were some of your mentors at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], or were there any special instructors or teachers or, or, or people involved in the University Religious Conference [Los Angeles, California] that you mentioned?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting; there were, but one of the people who stands out because he continued to mentor us throughout his life, was Dr. James Robinson [James Herman Robinson] who is the man who, in fact, inspired Project India.  He was the minister at Church of the Master in New York City [New York, New York], and he also started Crossroads Africa [Operation Crossroads Africa], with which most people are much more familiar, and Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] was selected as a Crossroads Africa leader in 1961 and he directed--he led a group to Guinea in West Africa.  Incidentally, last September in 2011, every single member, fourteen members of that group, came back together in a reunion--a fiftieth reunion.  So Dr. James Robinson was really a very, very important mentor for me at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I just wanna make sure you mention (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  And also, also, one of the early African American graduates at UCLA was Mayor Tom Bradley, and Mayor Bradley was also a mentor; he was very, very conscientious in, in--I would say--watching over us and making certain that we knew that he was available for us for any discussion, or anything we needed.
Speaker 1: Now, what was his position at the time (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He was possibly on the city council by that time, or--he had been a, a policeman in, in Los Angeles [California]; very active in the community, ver- always very active in the community, and just a really wonderful person.
Story_ID: 485379
Speaker 1: Also, I just wanna point out that you attended Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right?  And, and you--did you--before you--before '65 [1965], did you finish your master's degree?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I started a master's at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] when, you know, I was there; I graduated in '56 [1956], did a year of graduate work to get a master's in '67 [1967]--in '57 [1957], but I didn't complete it; instead I, I married and we moved to the East Coast.  So I had all but finished my master's, and when I got to Harvard in 1972, they gave me credit for a master's degree; I had done everything.  And so I got credit, and just went into the doctoral program immediately, without any difficulty, and within a year at Harvard, I had the Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--I just wanted to make sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's what replaced the master's, and then I got a doctorate in education in 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then back to 1965.  Now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, yes, all right.  Now, in 1965, Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] had just started teaching at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I was a young wife in the Cambridge [Massachusetts] community, and I decided that I would go to the Cambridge Community Center [Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is in a predominantly African American neighborhood in Cambridgeport [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I volunteered to start a tutoring program in math because children were having a lot of challenges with math, and I did that program first at the Cambridge Community Center, and then at the nearby elementary school--the Houghton, it was then, elementary school [Houghton School; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And that is really part of my approach to education; throughout my career as an educator, I have worked to bring communities in closer contact with formal education because I really believe that formal education should serve the communities in--from which children come.  That sounds really quite simple, but in fact it doesn't always happen, and I think that accounts for much of the gap in learning for children, that the schools are simply disconnected from their communities and from their families, so that my work formally, in fact, has been family, school, community, partnership, and I have joined three other colleagues in writing a book about that that was published in 2007; that book is titled, 'Beyond the Bake Sale' ['Beyond the Bake Sale: The Essential Guide to Family-School Partnerships,' Anne T. Henderson, Karen L. Mapp, Vivian R. Johnson, and Don Davies], and it has been a very successful book.  But let me go back to 1965, the work that I was doing in Cambridge that connects, again, with that idea of family, school, community, partnership.  As I said, I started the tutoring program, and I got tutors from the black students union at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they came over and tutored in that, that program.  We--I then saw the need for a Freedom School to help children understand the Civil Rights Movement, and to give them a sense of who they are, and what was going on at that time that was really so critical to an understanding of progress in America.  So that the Freedom School--again, students from the black student union at Harvard and MI- Harvard and, and Radcliffe joined in helping with that Freedom School, and we had a very successful group meeting at the Cambridge Community Center monthly, and the children--we served them supper and had presentations about African American history, as well as the current Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Now this is modeled after the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Schools somewhat; I'm not, I'm not--not, not a copy, but I mean just modeled somewhat after the SNCC (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the inspiration; there's no doubt about it--that is the inspiration; those schools were going on in Mississippi and we all read about them and knew about them, we were very excited about them, and I realized that children in the local community did not know that was going on and didn't know the history, so we put the history component into the Freedom School here in Cambridge at the Cambridge Community Center.  So that was 1950--'65 [1965], '66 [1966]--those years.
Story_ID: 485380
Speaker 1: And then I began work in the Roxbury community in Boston [Massachusetts] in 1970, and that work was connected to an organization called the Circle Incorporated [Circle Inc., Boston, Massachusetts]--Circle Associates it was known; a group of African American men came together during those years, and Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] was one of those men, and he was asked to take a leave from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in order to become the director of Circle and he did.  They bought several buildings and did training in community development and in business management, and they needed an educational component, and so I became the director of their educational component.  My office was at 124 Warren Street, which was another building that the Circle owned, and I opened there a resource center and put into that resource center five hundred of the one thousand books that I had listed in a bibliography.  I had been working on that bibliography since the early '60s [1960s], and by the time we opened the resource center, I had published the one thousand annotated listings of books about African American children for kindergarten through twelfth grade.
Speaker 2: Now this is a monumental undertaking, and you started this in the late '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was.  I started in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: I started in--and it's interesting because I started that bibliography when I took my, my daughter [Caryn Johnson-Carter] to the Cambridge Public Library [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  We lived literally down the street from the Cambridge Public Library, and I took her every day, and she played on the playground at the Cambridge Library, and then I took her in to read her a story in the library and I asked the librarian to put aside any books that she saw where the children had brown faces--that's just what I asked; she did that, and I would pick up those books because I was there every day.  I would read them, I would discard some of them, you know, in terms of recommendations because some of them, some of them were dreadful, but the ones that were good I would write about on five by seven cards, so I began collecting those five by seven cards around 1962, and continued to do that every year until I published that bibliography in, in 1971.
Story_ID: 485381
Speaker 1: Did your interest in black history start in L.A., in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Started in my family around the kitchen table.  I think I probably said in, in our first interview, I grew up in a family that was always interested in African American history, and we learned it at the kitchen table and in the living room, and my parents [Lillian Wilson Miller and Lonnie Robinson] took me to hear every African American who was notable who came to Los Angeles, so I heard Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], I heard Dr. Howard Thurman, I heard Mrs. Sue Bailey Thurman, and I have a book that she wrote about black pioneers of California ['Pioneers of Negro Origin in California,' Sue Bailey Thurman] because she talked about that book at our church [Trinity Baptist Church, Los Angeles, California] on a Sunday afternoon and I--everyone who came to Los Angeles--Walter White--whoever came, my parents took us to hear, and that was part of our discussion at home, so I can't remember any time when I didn't know black history,  And my family read the Chicago Defender, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] every week, and there were three African American weekly newspapers in Los Angeles when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Eagle [California Eagle] and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel], the Eagle, and those--and two of them were published by African American women, so it was, it was a vibrant and really very promotional communities; that's the word I use, and I say that because the adults were very enthusiastic about supporting us.  We always felt that the adults wanted the best for us and that they were behind us.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about two people in Los Angeles that I know were the root of, you know, really agitating for black history and culture, and one is Alfred Ligon.  Did you know him in those days?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) the Aquarian book store center [Aquarian Book Shop, Los Angeles, California] in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's, that's later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That's later.  See, by that time--remember 1957, Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I moved away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: By 1958--we had moved away from Los Angeles; we never lived there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure when he, when he started--
Speaker 2: No, he must have been in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And then, and then [HistoryMaker] Mayme Clayton, who I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I know Mayme Clayton and her, her enormous collection, yes, I'm certainly--I, I certainly know about that; I do indeed--yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Did you know her when you were living there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think I did; I--she probably was collecting, but I just didn't know about her, but one person I did know is Mrs. Vassie Wright [Vassie D. Wright], who started the Association for the Study of African American Life and History [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History] chapter in Los Angeles in the mid-'40s [1940s], and my mother made certain that I met her, and I was at an association meeting in--I think in Cincinnati [Ohio], and the--that Los Angeles chapter was given an award, the Vassie Wright chapter, and it just took me right back to my childhood; I must have been about eight or nine years old when I met her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That, that meeting in Cincinnati was when, in '72 [1972] when they changed the name?
Speaker 2: No, this is when I went to the Association for the Study of African American Life and History; that's the Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, that's what I--
Speaker 2: We were just there--well, they had their annual meeting there about--what, two years ago?
Speaker 1: Oh, just recently (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Cincinnati.  Oh, yes, recently in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I was at the '72 [1972] one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes; oh, yes, yes, exactly, yes.  No, but they were there recently, and we were just at their national seventy--what is--the ninety-seventh annual meeting in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] the last weekend of September, so we were just there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I just wanted to ask you about the, the background now; this is--'cause this is a time period when a lot of black people didn't think it was any use in looking at black people--for what, you know; they would say, you know, African history, or the history of people dancing around a fire or something, and you would hear those kind of comments, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So--but, but what you're doing is--was pioneering.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, but as I said, I had so much support from family and friends; our friends thought it was wonderful, so maybe I just didn't know the people who were making these negative comments; I, I, you know, heard some of those, but I just ignored them and kept going.  And, as I said, what we had, which really is so important, is the support of adults in the community.  We really had that support.
Story_ID: 485382
Speaker 1: All right, well, back to Cambridge [Massachusetts], the Freedom School.  So, 1965 you start working to develop the Freedom School, you got support of the students from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], yes, indeed, I certainly did.  And then, as I said, in 1971 I'm now in Roxbury in Boston [Massachusetts], and I open this resource center.
Speaker 1: I think--can you tell us a little bit more about the Circle Associates Incorporated [Circle Inc., Boston, Massachusetts]?  Now, this is, this is--sounds like an incredible organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was.  A group--I would say as many as thirty African American men came together and they wanted to do community development, and they raised funds in order to do that development, and they needed a director of the organization and they asked Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] to take a leave from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  By that time, he--he started MIT in 1964, and this is about 1970--'69 [1969], '70 [1970], and he took a leave for a couple of years and became the director of that organization.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna zoom past this, but your, your husband Willard, now what did he do (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a professor of political science for thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: All right.  So that's, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's really--that's why we came here was for him to finish his Ph.D. at Harvard, and then he immediately started teaching at MIT in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So I just wanted to establish that.  So he becomes the director of Circle Associates Incorporated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and he is a HistoryMaker, so his story is in the, in the archives.
Story_ID: 485383
Speaker 1: Now how do things progress now (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, with that resource center--this is still a resource center connected to Circle Associates [Circle Inc., Boston, Massachusetts]--I hired a consulting team in order to respond to requests for teacher training throughout the Boston [Massachusetts] area, and that team included specialists in each of the disciplines, so we had Bob Hayden [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], who is certainly a HistoryMaker, who was doing the science and, and math, we had Maxine Byrd [ph.] who was doing literature.  In other words, for each of the subject areas, there was a specialist, and we would go--I think as--to as many as thirty-three communities in the Boston area and provide teacher training programs, and we did that over about a five-year period.  In addition, we had groups from the community come into that resource center using the resource center, perusing those books.  Remember, I had five of the thousand annotated listing bibliography; five hundred of those books were in the resource center, and many parents and teachers, and other community people who came in, said they had never seen that many books with children with brown skin in their lives in any one place; it was really ground-breaking in that regard.  And I found out later that we were purchasing those books from Drum and Spear [Drum and Spear Press] in Washington, D.C., and that [HistoryMaker] Judy Richardson was one of the founders of Drum and Spear, so that's another part of the story.  Parents came to that resource center, and one group of parents were in what was called in the educational programs--parents whose children were in the Title I program.  And those parents were concerned that their children were not getting adequate reading instruction at school; they were very concerned, and they were very happy with the books that I showed them, and one of the parents said, "But you know, my problem is more fundamental.  I have a fourth grade son and he can't read any of these books.  Is there any way you can help me with that?"  Well, we did.  I went to the Carnegie Corporation [Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York, New York] and I got funding--wrote a proposal, got funding to create a training program, and that program was designed so that people who interacted with families on a regular basis--people from Union United Methodist Church [Boston, Massachusetts], in fact, were trained to go into those homes, work with parents so that the parents actually tutored their second, third and fourth grade children.  The program was very successful.  We used Action Reading by George Cureton; the program was called, Reading is Yours to Keep, and monthly, we would come together for a presentation--all of the family members--any family member who wanted to come.  We had dinner and a program, and the program was children showing what they had learned since the last gathering.  It was an absolutely splendid time together, and it was again this reinforcement of the idea that formal education should be connected to children's culture, to their families, to their communities.  And so, not surprisingly, the children learned very successfully; those skills that they had not learned in school, they learned at home.  Incidentally, it happened by pure coincidence that the Boston Public Schools were being desegregated; this is 1974 and our program ran from '73 [1973] to '78 [1978].  So, in '74 [1974], many of those children who were in our program--and incidentally, there were fifty families--and many of the children who were in the program were being moved from one school to another, from one reading program to another, from one type of instruction to another; the only consistent reading instruction that a number of those children received during that year was at home--from their parents.
Story_ID: 485384
Speaker 1: Now this is the age of the busing--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) in Boston [Massachusetts].  This is, this is--the country focused on this--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People were overturning buses and some of the white mothers had organized themselves to, you know, disrupt the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, to stop the buses--stop the busing--absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: A lot of our--Ted Landsmark [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] was a--was attacked with an American flag (unclear) in Boston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right; absolutely, absolutely.  And during that period, we continued with consistent, quality reading instruction in the community; this was an, an absolutely community-based program [Reading is Yours to Keep], and very successful.  So we just calmly went through all of that; it was really a wonderful time for these parents to know that they were capable of instructing their children despite all of the chaos.
Story_ID: 485385
Speaker 1: Tell that story.
Speaker 2: I was in my office on Warren Street, and while the terrible, terrible behavior in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] particularly, was being exhibited against African American children, I sat in my office and watched white children calmly walk down Warren Street; they were going to the high school up the street--no problems whatsoever, so there was not retaliation on the part of, of people in the neighborhood, and I don't think that made the news.  The fact that on the one hand these children on the buses were being attacked in South Boston, but the children from the white communities who came to school in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] were going without any problems whatsoever.  So that's another piece of that story that I think it's unfortunate that people don't know that, that there really was calm in the African American community and people were treated civilly.
Story_ID: 485386
Speaker 1: I wanna talk about the fact that the, the--one of the results of that successful program with the fifty families is that some of the children in those families who were preschoolers were learning those skills; you know, they were doing the family around the dining room table, in the kitchen or wherever, and the little ones heard it, and just as they pick up jingles from the television ads, they were picking up the skills in the reading program, and so I sent my reading specialists--I had a reading specialist who had a degree in reading from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--superb teacher and, and wonderful administrator as well, and she went in then and did a pre-test for all of the preschoolers in those families because we suddenly realized--the parents were telling us that the preschoolers were beginning to pick up the skills.  Well, that resulted in my going to The Boston Foundation here in, in Boston [Massachusetts], and getting a grant to work with five preschools in the area because the preschool directors and teachers and parents wanted to learn those skills so that they could tutor their own children at home.  So preschoolers were getting the advantage of that program as well; that was the expansion of the Reading is Yours to Keep program into preschool.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, the program lasted until 1978 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Til, 'til '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 485387
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what happened in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Well, two things happened; one was that I tried to put that program [Reading is Yours to Keep] into the Boston Public Schools, and that was really one of the most distressing experiences of my career, and the reason that it was distressing is that I provided a full-time teacher with benefits; in other words, I paid the salary of the teacher who was supposed to go into a school and work with parents in order to, to develop a program like ours, and the principal gave that teacher that I provided all Asian American students, none of whose parents could speak English; therefore, my teacher could not work with the parents, and that was obviously the idea.  It was a, it was a sabotaged act that was so distressing; I have never had an experience like that, where someone purposely sabotages a program, and that's exactly what happened.  So then I was never able to get that program into the schools.  Now, those were the years where there were--there was a lot of tension between the Boston Public Schools and the African American community.  Busing was in full swing and people were very angry, and that was what happened; there was all kinds of, of sabotage.  So that's what happened.  So, the program--the idea of the program, when I got it funded in the first place, was to do a demonstration of what parents who were well-trained could do with their children, and to then encourage schools to do that kind of training; that was the whole idea.  I didn't wanna just stop, you know, with this--with these fifty families.  So, once we had demonstrated what the families did, then we thought we could get it into the public schools; no, I'm afraid not.  So I was really in distress, and at that point, I had the opportunity to do other work, and I went on with that other work.  And eventually--I did a lot of consulting--and eventually, in 1980, I started my work at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]; now I remained at Boston University in one way or another with a, a brief break, until 2003 when I retired from Boston University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanna point out that you were telling me before we started that--I think it was Carnegie [Carnegie Corporation of New York, New York, New York] funded the, the reading (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  The reading program was completely funded--the program for the fifty families was funded by the Carnegie Corporation; the program for the preschool was funded by The Boston Foundation [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 485388
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980] you started--
Speaker 2: In 1980, I was asked by Dr. David French [David M. French] at the Boston University School of Medicine [Boston, Massachusetts] to become his campus coordinator, the backup person at Boston University, because he was conducting a primary health care training program in twenty countries in West Africa, and he needed someone who would run the office at Boston University because he had his office established in Abidjan in Cote d'Ivoire, Ivory Coast, and he needed to have a coordinator who would take care of all of the administration of that program back at Boston University.  I began doing that in 1980 and continued until the program ended in 1986, and it was really a challenging and very interesting experience.  The program required that nurses be given additional training, and those nurses were brought to the United States, and if they were English-speaking, they went to the Boston University School of Nursing [Boston, Massachusetts]; if they were French-speaking, and many of them were--incidentally, there were fifteen francophone countries and five Anglophone countries--they went to Montreal [Canada].  So I was in fact paying the expenses--all of the, the fees and, and all of the expenses for nurses in two universities for six years, and those nurses received their training, went back to their countries, and were then able to open clinics in other parts--more--in remote parts of the country.  They had come from the urban hospital centers, and now they were trained to work in the remote areas.  The program was very successful; it had been requested, incidentally, by the twenty ministers of health of those countries, and it was requested of World Health Organization who in turn requested funding from our state department--from the U.S. state department [U.S. Department of State].  So the program had, in that sense, many people who were interested in and enthusiastic about it, and what David wanted was someone who would report to most of those actors so that he could get on with the program, and that's what I did for six years.  I also got all of the equipment out to the field because the U.S. Congress requires that we buy American equipment; also that we fly over the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] and Pacific [Pacific Ocean] on American-owned carriers, so that all of the arrangements for travel, the arrangements for vehicles, the arrangements for computers had to be made in this country and all those things shipped to Abidjan.  I went to Abidjan about once every three months, and literally connected the office in Abidjan, including office management and benefits, with Boston University; it was a very complex and unusual arrangement.
Speaker 1: So this is, this is every, every three months for six years.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And--now, you were telling me you had, you had to deal with about twelve boxes of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right; I had to take--
Speaker 1: --papers.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I had to take office equipment material--remember, this is the Boston University, so it's gotta have Boston University stationery; it is a Boston (laughter) University office in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.  So, in order to make that office act like a Boston University office, with all of its procedures and regulations and so on, we took materials--I took materials actually on the plane, flying from Boston [Massachusetts] through Paris [France] and, and then to Abidjan, and I took about ten or a dozen boxes with me every time.  And the miracle is that in six years, I never lost a box--not even delayed.
Story_ID: 485389
Speaker 1: Now, there were some unusual items that you had to bring along with you, too. Could you talk (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did.  Dr. French [David M. French] requested that I get personal computers for each desk in Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire]; there were five desks, and I got five Apple IIe computers.  Now, I didn't know a lot about computers; that was 1983, and I got those computers and I got them out to the field.
Speaker 1: Now, these are some of the first desktop computers, the first.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  In fact they--there were very few offices; I don't think there were any other offices in, in Abidjan that had desktop computers at that time; no, it was really very unusual.  Another part of this story that's really very interesting, and I think very important, is that there were those who were not absolutely certain that that was a great idea that, that Dr. French brought those computers into West Africa, and they wanted to know, "Well, how are they gonna be maintained?  What's the maintenance process?"  Well, he would turn to them and smile.  He had hired an African who had his own computer business in Abidjan; he was a Ph.D. from the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France], and had done his postdoc at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in physics.
Speaker 1: So that's the answer (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's the answer (laughter).  And he did the maintenance on those computers.  So that was one of the wonderful stories about that experience.  There were many wonderful stories about that experience.  But that's what I did from 1980 to '86 [1986].  And then, the last year of the program--Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I understood that it was winding down; in fact, the twenty ministers of health said that they had accomplished what they wanted in terms of the nurses who had come out of that training and gone into the rural areas and supervised, and they now had a training, a training program in place to continue training nurses, so it had really accomplished--it was a ten year program; I worked for it for six years, but it was a ten year program.  It had accomplished its goal.
Story_ID: 485390
Speaker 1: And then Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] got a Fulbright [Fulbright Fellowship], and the two of us went to Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire] and lived in Abidjan eighty--'86 [1986] to '87 [1987], and we did the research for a book that we then wrote and published together, and that was a book on volunteer development organizations.  What we call NGOs, they call VDOs, volunteer development organizations.  And both Willard and I have been very active.  I was on the board of Oxfam America [Oxfam America Inc.] at that time, and Willard was on the advisory board for the 'We Are the World' organization, and we were very interested in the work of NGOs--international NGOs on the African continent.
Speaker 2: These are non-governmental organizations.
Speaker 1: That's right, but we were more interested in, in local--what they call volunteer development organizations.  In other words, we are very busily going there, and yet there are organizations right on the ground--local organizations that are doing the same kind of work.  So we were really very interested in learning more, and there hadn't been much written about those local organizations.
Speaker 2: Now local organizing can be--I mean it's tricky to move in on a territory of someone that's already organizing something; there could be resentment and there could be a clash or--and competition for resources.
Speaker 1: Exactly, but that's why we were interested in learning about these organizations because in fact there was a lot of collaboration with the international NGOs, but there had been very little written about that, and there had certainly not been anything done on the local organizations working alone, without the, the international NGOs.  There happened to have been, in that year, the first continental meeting of volunteer development organizations in 1986, and Willard and I attended (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is on the African continent--?
Speaker 1: It was held in, in--I think in Dakar, Senegal.  And Willard and I attended that meeting and we interviewed volunteer development organization leaders who also attended that meeting.  And then we selected six countries where those organizations seemed to be very vibrant, and we began doing interviews in those six countries, and we later wrote a book, published in 1990; now that was in 1986.  We published in 1990 a book called, 'West African Governments and Volunteer Development Organizations: Priorities for Partnership' [Willard R. Johnson and Vivian R. Johnson].  Now, we were very fortunate to get a scholar-in-residence opportunity at Bellagio, Italy where we spent the time writing that book.  So we carried out the research in a year in Abidjan in 1986, we then went to Bellagio in '87 [1987], if I recall, and completed the book there, and it was published in 1990.
Speaker 2: Now, I've heard that writers like to go to Italy to write, and is it really that nice to write in Italy, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it's always nice to write in circumstances that are very beautiful, very comfortable, and removed from your day-to-day obligations; that's really what it's about, you know.  You don't have to think about all those things that you are forced to think about if you're at home, and that part of Italy is spectacular--it's, it's absolutely beautiful, and it's a wonderful place to write.  We were very honored because, you know, there have been very, very famous writers who have been at Bellagio.
Story_ID: 485391
Speaker 1: I guess you're, you're still writing the book ['West African Governments and Volunteer Development Organizations: Priorities for Partnership,' Willard R. Johnson and Vivian R. Johnson] when--or still in some stages of the book's development when you did some consulting for the--a proposed African American history museum [American Museum of Negro History; Museum of African American History] in Boston [Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, you know, I had been associated with that African American history museum since its beginning. Let me go all the way back to 1958 and Mrs. Howard Thurman.  Remember I told you that she is really one of my mentors because when I was a child, I heard Mrs. Thurman--I heard Dr. Howard Thurman; Mrs. Sue Bailey Thurman is her name.  Mrs. Sue Bailey Thurman came to our church [Trinity Baptist Church, Los Angeles, California] and she talked about her work in California.  You know, his church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples] was in San Francisco [California] in those years.  And she talked about her work doing research on black pioneers of California.  Now, remember I, I'm in a family that talks about black history all the time, so I was fascinated that she had done this research, and she was in fact the first person that I can recall who talked about doing research on African American history.  You know, it--those have been stories within my family, books within my family, but I had never talked to a researcher before.  So I'm about, I don't know, eight or nine years old, and I hear someone talk about going into the archives and going into primary source materials and, and doing research on African American history; it was thrilling.  I can remember that now.  So, when we came to Boston, my mother [Lillian Wilson Miller] called and said, "Dr. Howard Thurman is dean of the chapel [Marsh Chapel] at Boston University [Boson, Massachusetts]."  So Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I went to services and we saw Dr. Thurman again and, and Mrs. Sue Bailey Thurman, and she took me under her wing because I continued this interest in African American history, and she was at that point identifying the location of the African Meeting House on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]--that's 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay, so had the, the identity--I mean the location had been lost?
Speaker 2: Well, not lost so much as--by that time that building was occupied by a Jewish synagogue, so what she had to do is to go back and make certain this is the building and, and--you know, in other words, it's not lost so much as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --you gotta now document that this is in fact the place.
Speaker 1: It was out of our historical consciousness.
Speaker 2: That's right, and you gotta get all of the back--we're back to primary source materials, saying, this is the place and this is how it came into existence and this is how it was used.  So when I said lost, I don't mean in, in the sense that no one knew about it, but in the sense that she is now going back and getting all of the necessary information to in effect reclaim this building and reclaim that entire Joy Street neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Which has been done (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, that's why I'm saying--I take it back to 1958, and so it was so thrilling to attend the 2010, I guess it was, reopening of the African Meeting House--
Story_ID: 485392
Speaker 1: I think I would be--and people would probably cry watching this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --if, if--I mean if I did not ask you more about Sue Bailey Thurman.  Many--there, there have been so many references to Howard Thurman, the great mystic preacher--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --but, but what about his wife?  Now, where, where was she from, and what do you know about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, she--well, I've been--I'm glad that you asked because, you know, I've been, I've been working on my own family history in Arkansas.  Sue Bailey Thurman was born in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and I had been trying--I say, the next time I go to Washington, D.C., I'm going to go into the Library of Congress materials and get more information about her.  But let me just say this; she is from a family of educators and people who were very interested in learning about and documenting the African American experience, and she continued that throughout her own life in a number of ways, both organizationally and personally.  She was a beautiful person, just an absolutely gracious, charming, brilliant woman, and for--think about this; for a young girl--I was eight or nine years old, and then I meet her--when I first met her--and she was charming at that time and very gracious to me as a little girl.  And then I see her again when I'm now a young wife in Boston [Massachusetts] in 1958, so I now have another opportunity; she took me under her wing and explained to me the work she was doing in Boston.  I was simply thrilled, abso- I can't even tell you how wonderful that coincidence was for me to now have the opportunity.  I'm an adult, and I understand even better the importance.  I still have the book, incidentally, that she wrote--'Negro Pioneers of Boston' [sic. 'Pioneers of Negro Origin in California,' Sue Bailey Thurman]--I still have the signed copy of that.  And she then explained to me about the African American experience on Beacon Hill in Boston.  So she was always in the process of uncovering and sharing that history.  And let me say that right as we speak, there is a project--there is a Howard Thurman Papers Project, and there is a component being written of res- several researchers, on Sue Bailey Thurman, and I have talked to one of those researchers recently.  So I am very interested in learning more about Mrs. Thurman, and she was just such a wonderful mentor to me.
Story_ID: 485393
Speaker 1: There's a lot of history there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, just--
Speaker 1: --I mean the history of Boston [Massachusetts] in those days--of Joy Street, the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts]--I mean it's--
Speaker 2: Right.  That, that entire community, that entire community.  And let me say that the other person who has continued, and who was written about that community is Dr. Adelaide Cromwell [HistoryMaker Adelaide Cromwell] at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], who was also a mentor of mine and Willard's [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson].  And Dr. Cromwell has continued and, and has that material now of, you know, the--of the Brahmins in a book ['The Other Brahmins, Boston's Black Upper Class 1750-1950,' Adelaide Cromwell] so you can read about the experience on the Hill [Beacon Hill, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And those, those experiences that I had, both in growing up and learning about African American history, and then in coming here and seeing so much history that is available to you to see, has just always been a source of great enjoyment for me, it really has.  And I'm continuing that work, I am; I'm very interested in that work.  That's what I'm doing now, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you continue to work with the museum as a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I have.  I've continued--I was on the board of the museum in the early days as, as it was really in struggle.  I was on the board in the '70s [1970s]--in the 1970s, and then I was the person who started the archeology program.  The first dig on Beacon Hill was at that museum--at the African Meeting House in fact.  And the way that that started is that I was working here in Newton [Massachusetts] on a curriculum project for the Newton Public Schools, and the sixth graders were doing archeology as a part of their sixth grade history project, and I began to learn about archeology, met the chief archeologist at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], and I didn't know that he is one of the most famous archeologists in the country--Dr. James Deetz, D-E-E-T-Z.  And Dr. Deetz and I had a conversation and he learned about the African Meeting House and he was very excited, and he said, "Well, do you think we could do a, a dig at the meeting house?"  I said, "Well, let's talk to [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing," and we did, and the rest is literally history because there has been an enormous archeology project that was carried out at the African Meeting House--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --and there were things that have been written about that archeological dig, and so on and so on.  Lots of, lots of shards and, you know, things that were found; so it's been--that's been very exciting.  So I've had various kinds of relationships, and I continue my relationships with the Museum of African American History [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 485394
Speaker 1: Now, in 1989, you served as a research director for the Institute for Responsive Education.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That is an organization that is literally devoted to family, school, community, partnership.  Remember, I told you that I have really worked in a number of ways to promote family, school, community, partnership.  The Institute for Responsive Education was founded by a dear friend of mine, Don Davies, with whom I worked at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He founded the organization around 1973 to promote family, school, community partnership; that's what it was, and I became its research director in, in 1989.  Now, later, he and a number of us who were researchers around the country, a total of about twenty-five researchers interested in that topic, prepared a proposal and received funding from the U.S. Office of Education [U.S. Department of Education] for a center--a national center--on families, communities, schools, and children's learning.  And all of us then carried out research through that center.  My research was on parent centers, and in fact I, I did the initial work, the baseline study, on parent centers--twenty-eight schools in fourteen states; I, I did.  That was the first research that had been done on parent centers.  Later, I prepared a kit called the parent center kit, and that was a, a kit that included a video for case studies from those twenty-eight schools, and a how-to manual.  So I've always been doing work on parent centers, and some of the work that I did again in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], later on, is working to develop a parent center at one of the local elementary schools.
Story_ID: 485395
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when we were here in 2007, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Dr. James Comer--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and is he--what is--he's--I know he has a similar focus--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, and he is another of, of my mentors.  In fact, when I was doing my dissertation, I met Dr. Comer for the first time when I was at the Harvard Ed School [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I thanked him and I said, "Dr. Comer, you have really been such an inspiration to me as I tried to find material about this topic because people don't always get it" (laughter), and he was so clear, and his work in New Haven [Connecticut] was so brilliant.  He has continued to really be an inspiration in this field.
Story_ID: 485396
Speaker 1: The NGO book ['West African Governments and Volunteer Development Organizations: Priorities for Partnership,' Willard R. Johnson and Vivian R. Johnson] was published in 1990, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And--now you joined the faculty of Boston University School of Education [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1989, I guess?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And, and, and let me just say that in my teaching, I continued to work on this connection, this partnership, among families, communities and schools, and so I taught a course, for example, that I very much enjoyed, and the students said they did too, called the Social Context of Education, and that course was required of all undergraduates, and I taught it with one of my best friends and closest colleagues in education, Karen Boatman.  Karen and I designed that course so that students would have the opportunity to examine communities in which schools are located and to find out about the cultures operating in those communities, and we would actually take students on buses, and take them to various communities in Boston [Massachusetts]; we took them to, to Chelsea [Massachusetts] as--to Central Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts], to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], to Jamaica Point [sic. Jamaica Plain, Boston, Massachusetts].  We took students to communities so that they would begin to get a sense of what it meant to actually be an educator concerned with the community in which your school is located.  So that was one of the classes that I taught for a number of years.  Another class I taught was called, Community Analysis in International Settings, and I taught that class for more than twenty years, and that's one of the opportunities that I had to work with students from all over the world.  I worked with students from more than forty countries in the course of my career at Boston University.  And the idea of that class was, again, for students, no matter what their own country and what their own community, to develop an analysis of the community and its relationship to formal education.  So that was what Community Analysis in International Settings--and we had a--the students had a project in which they demonstrated their understanding of communities, and that was also a very exciting course for me; I enjoyed it immensely.
Story_ID: 485397
Speaker 1: I also had the opportunity to work in Portugal over a period of ten years.  I went to Portugal every year from a week to as long as six weeks.
Speaker 2: Now when did this (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was from 19--essentially from 1990 to 2000.
Speaker 2: And this was done through BU (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Through Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was part of my work at Boston University.  And here's what happened.  Boston University trained professors for, I think, fifteen new polytechnics in Portugal, and the Portuguese decided that they needed to have institutions that had three components--teacher training, business administration, and computer science, and they called those polytechnics.  Boston University trained the, the teachers who were working on teacher training in each of those polytechnics, so they would come to Boston University--professors from Boston University would go to, to Portugal and train them.  After that training ended, there were requests from a number of those professors for additional consultation regarding certain topics, and one of the topics that they were most interested in was multicultural education.  There was nothing even remotely like multicultural education in their training at home, and so they wanted someone to come and work with them.  Secondly, they wanted someone who knew about the African continent because many of the migrants into Portugal were from the former Portuguese colonies in Africa.
Speaker 2: Angola, Mozambique--
Speaker 1: Guinea-Bissau and, and Cape Verde.  So, the families--now again, we're getting back to families, communities and schools.  The families that they were now receiving in these schools were families from those countries, and they felt inadequate to work with those families and students.  So I'm back now--families, communities and schools--doing the same kind of work, this time in Portugal--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: --so I did teacher training, I worked with the professors at the polytechnics, I worked in some of those communities in, in Portugal; that was wonderful work, and I did that every year for ten years.
Story_ID: 485398
Speaker 1: Now, in 1991 you received a Fulbright Summer Seminar award [Fulbright-Hays Summer Seminars] for Indonesia, so you went to Indonesia?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I both went to Indonesia during that summer, and each of us had a project.  My project was to look at, again, families, communities and schools.  I was curious because you know there's--Indonesia is an archipelago, and I wondered with about two hundred languages and islands how do you carry out multicultural education?  I was really very, very intrigued by that.  I did research during that Fulbright period and wrote an article about that experience, and it really was a wonderful opportunity for me to learn about how educators work on multicultural education in a very multicultural society.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had a--you know, you've had a, a--quite a few experiences in, in other countries, you know, to--
Speaker 2: I have.
Speaker 1: --to do the same kind of work, to look at it in different ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: -- I mean does it, does it really roll out differently in every country in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what's very interesting to me is that it does and it doesn't, and what I mean by that is that if we look at the issues surrounding formal education in a given community serving that particular community, we find that often the issues are the same, but because there is such a thirst for education in most other countries, there is much more willingness on the part of parents to say to their children what we were told a generation ago, "You go and do what the teacher says," because it's really then about competition.  Those children are trying to be the best in the class in order to move to the next level, so they're much more concerned about that than they are about community analysis in that sense.  But that doesn't mean that the issue doesn't exist--it does.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these people in other countries are more focused on education?
Speaker 2: They're more focused on achievement and, and competition because they have less opportunity for either, you know.  In other words, when you have forty-five, fifty children in a class, there is a great deal more competition among those children to be the top of that class, so when you, when you then are able to pass the exam--and don't forget these are usually places where there is an exam to pass to get to the next level; you don't just automatically go from elementary to middle school, you have to pass an exam.  So that's what the focus is on, is on passing that exam.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, in the United States, a lot of school districts have adopted that kind of plan.  Do you have any thoughts about how that works here, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that we still have--you don't have to take an exam to go from elementary school to, to junior high school.  In other words, you could get into junior high school no matter what.  In many of these countries, you will not go beyond elementary school if you don't pass that exam at a certain level--that's the difference; that is a huge difference.
Speaker 1: Is there an option in these countries?  You know, usually, if you don't--say if you don't, is there a, another way?  I mean can you come back and then do it later, or when you make up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In some cases yes, but very often it's that you go into a vocation, whatever that is--any vocation that is available to you, and there's competition for those vocations as well.  In other words, we have a system that is essentially free through high school, and you can get into and move through, and graduate from high school; in many of these countries, that is not possible.  You have to compete to go from elementary school and finally, you know, graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you're not focused on academics, you're not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, you're not going to, you're not going to get to the next level.  And that doesn't mean that these other issues don't exist, it, it just means that the focus is on getting to that next level.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I just wondered if you thought it was a good idea for here to do it that way, or--
Speaker 2: I think it's more complicated than that.  I think that we, we are very fortunate in having a broad system of education with a lot of possibilities.  Where I think we've got to focus is on making certain that those options, those possibilities, those opportunities are available to all; that's really where we need to put our focus.
Story_ID: 485399
Speaker 1: So we were talking about your experiences in Portugal I think, and the ten year experience in Portugal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and I made many friends and was really very privileged to have the opportunity to learn about changes in education in, in Portugal.  They were expanding their educational system in many ways the way we expanded in the '60s [1960s], and so it was exciting to be there at a time when they were in this process of expansion.
Speaker 1: Now, when you go to Portugal or Indonesia or, or even Cote d'Ivoire, I mean how do you do with the language situation?  I know you speak some French (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I speak--yes, but you know, in Portugal in, in particular, I always wanted to try out my--not very good--Portuguese, and they would just immediately switch to English or French because they wanted to practice English in particular.  And you know, we are the country where people are reserved about language learning.  People in other countries learn two or three languages; they just do--it's part of what they do, and as a result, they were just very, very gracious to me.  When I gave presentations--and I did give major presentations in, in Portugal, they would simply have simultaneous translation.  And incidentally, that's what happened later on in, in Brazil; they--there is grace with regard to accommodating us with language; I am really very impressed.  But also, I mean I do speak enough French so that I get, get along, and I have a wonderful story that I, I would like to inject because it, it really does show the grace and hospitality.  I made a presentation one afternoon, and a woman came up to me and she said, "I want so much to ask you questions about your work.  Would you come to my home tonight for supper?"  And I said, "Certainly."  She said, "I'm writing out all the instructions, you know, in Portuguese for you to give to the cab driver; I don't think you'll have any trouble.  Here's my phone number," and so on and so on.  So I had no trouble.  I got to her apartment building, and the cab driver graciously waited until I had gotten inside; he wouldn't leave until he was certain that I was in safely, and when I got there, her sixteen year old daughter spoke impeccable English.  Now, the woman, who is a colleague in that sense--she's a sociologist, an educator--speaks French but not English at all, but her sixteen year old daughter greeted me at the door and said--this was 1990, incidentally--she said, "Professor Johnson [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson], come in quickly, quickly.  Mr. Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] is winning in New York City [New York, New York].  We're watching CNN," she said, "and you should see it" (laughter).  It was amazing.  And I went into their home, sat down, she continues talking about Mr. Dinkins and others who were in, in the campaigns, and it was just amazing, hearing this sixteen year old whose English was absolutely wonderful, whose interest in the United States was such that she was keeping up with the elections.  Her younger sister, a little one, about six or seven years old, came and sat next to me on the couch while this was going on, and she said to her older sister in Portuguese, "Tell her that I'm gonna sit next to her at dinner because she's the reason I can stay up late," (laughter).  So, the little one, the little six or seven year old, was anxious to, to be next to me and wanted to talk to me, so she would say things in Portuguese, her sister would then translate to me in English, I would reply in English, and so on.  And so the sister served as a translator for her; that's a sixteen year old in Portugal.  I really was the guest at a number of homes in Portugal, always with grace and just delightful gatherings, and it was really like being with home folks in this country--just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Incidentally, I was able to, to share that story with, with Mayor Dinkins some years later (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 485400
Speaker 1: You consulted with Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.] during this period, right?  Now--and you worked with the--in '93 [1993] and '94 [1994] you worked with Vitamin A Technical Assistance Project.  Now, what is this?  And you were an advisory board member with Helen Keller International [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was part of the work that I had done with the Strengthening Health Delivery Systems program [Strengthening Health Delivery Systems Project]--the twenty country program in Central and West Africa.  I was invited to be on that advisory board because they were doing training, and because I'm an educator, they were really very admiring of my knowledge about training programs and training of trainers, and I was therefore asked to provide advice about training of trainers programs, even though the content was not something that I knew a lot about; it was the technique, it was the--in that sense it was very interesting because they would often invite me as what they called an educationist.  It was very interesting.  That's what that was about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What is the best way to train a--or is there, is there any best way to train a trainer?
Speaker 2: Well, I think probably so, but it is very much dependent on the results you want to achieve so that, for example, if you're training someone to be able to work with a number of people who already have a very good grasp of content, you know; they already know the content, but they do not have techniques for passing on that content--then what you're doing is providing a lot of information about instruction, and in that sense translation, to another person.  How do you make certain that another person gets the content that you're trying to give them?  If you're working with people who do not have a good grasp of content, you gotta do both; you gotta work on both content and technique.  So that's why my answer is yes there is, but it depends entirely on the circumstances.
Story_ID: 485401
Speaker 1: Now, you were on the board of directors for the Land Trust Alliance, right?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, but that really grew out of my board of director work with something called the Trust for Public Land, and let me talk about the trust because I--it's an organization that I greatly admire; I admired Land Trust Alliance as well, but the Trust for Public Land started in Northern California in the early years, and the idea was that there needs to be citizen action to protect land so that it does not get in effect gobbled up by whoever can pay the most money.  There are some pieces of land that need to be protected, and if you drive across the Golden Gate Bridge, you notice that there is an area that does not have any housing on it or other buildings; that's because it's protected land.  And the idea was that as people sell their farms and other places where there's large acreage, they might want some of that protected for public use in perpetuity, and so the Trust for Public Land was set up to be able to help people to make those arrangements, and then came the idea that this could be done in urban areas, and so what about that piece of, of land?  What about that vacant lot down the street where some folks have been doing some public gardening?  And the soil needs tending to, you know; we need to make certain that this is in fact good soil, and that it's not contaminated, and could they in fact hold onto a public garden and not have that piece of land sold to the highest bidder?  So it, it was that kind of citizen concern about land which led the Trust for Public Land to develop its skills to be able to help people in urban areas as well as rural areas, and what we think of as pristine areas.  One of my favorite Trust for Public Land stories when I was on the board is the following.  There is a community garden in what's called Hell's Kitchen in New York City [New York, New York], and of course the city owned that land, and they were about to sell it to the highest bidder, you know, millions and millions and millions of dollars for such a piece of land in New York City.  Well, the citizens who had been using that for a public garden for years and years, perhaps a generation, came to the Trust for Public Land, and the trust decided that they would sell inches for ten dollars, and bring in a lot of high-profile people to buy inches.  Now, to make a long story short, they had some actors--high profile actors from Hollywood come, buy inches, highlight this project, and the next thing you know, the city decided, "Well, maybe we could allow that to be a public garden."  It is still a public garden--a community garden in Hell's Kitchen in New York City.  So that's what the Trust for Public Land does.  It also--oh, one of my other favorite stories, during the time I was on the board, a--Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] wanted to buy several of the houses nearby--the Martin Luther King birthplace [Atlanta, Georgia], where he was born, and those houses came up for sale and she didn't have the funds at that time; the trust bought them and kept them in trust until she could develop what is now the Martin Luther King, Jr. area [Martin Luther King Jr. National Historic Site, Atlanta, Georgia], you know; there are several houses in that area now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Auburn Avenue area, right?
Speaker 2: That--the trust helped with that; they held those houses in trust until she could do what you now see.  So that's why I was interested in the Trust for Public Land, because it's done that with a number of places.  It did that also with the, the school [Monroe Elementary School, Topeka, Kansas] in--oh, my goodness--in Kansas, in--the 1954 decision; my goodness--it's--
Speaker 1: Oh, the name of the school I don't remember, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right; that little school was--that school was gonna be torn down, and the trust arranged to hold that building in trust, and it's now a museum.
Story_ID: 485411
Speaker 1: Just kind of give us a summary of some of your activities during the '90s [1990s] leading to your retirement from Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very full period because I was working as a researcher with the Center on Families, Communities, Schools, and Children's Learning, I was supervising dissertations for a large number of students, and I was also doing community work of various, of various types, so it was a really very busy and very active time for me.  And incidentally, as part of the work for the center, and the research that I was doing, I was traveling, so I did a lot of traveling during that period and went to San Diego [California], for example, where I was doing case studies on family centers.  I also went to other cities where I was talking about family, school, community, partnership, and how to develop parent centers, so it was a very, very active time.  And I began my work, also, with the National Center on African American--National Center of African American Artists [National Center of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts], and I am now co-chair of the board of that organization, but that's work that I began during that period and, and I've just remained with the National Center.  Incidentally, we have--back to community development--the National Center has a project that is the vision of Miss Elma Lewis [HistoryMaker Elma Lewis], and it is a very large project about--oh, I think it's up now to around $370 million.
Speaker 1: Well, what is the name of the project?
Speaker 2: It is called--my goodness--Tremont Place, and this is a project that will--let me just get a couple of notes here because I think it would be better to talk about the project in terms of what it, what it's designed to do.  It is--it's--I'm sorry, it's--Tremont Crossing is the name of it; I, I think I said Tremont Place.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's Tremont Crossing.  And what we have is a cultural center, office space, a residential component, a retail component, a public plaza, and there will be an eleven story tower for the residences; we're hoping to have more than two hundred rental units (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is new, this is new--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is, this is a proposal that is now in its initial stages of development, meaning that we're looking at all of the things like traffic and sewerage and lighting and all of those kinds of things that have to be determined, you know, before you actually break ground.
Speaker 1: Now, it sounds somewhat like the piano factory [Chickering Piano Factory; Piano Craft Guild, Boston, Massachusetts] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's, it's larger than that because piano factory is one kind of, of cultural, you know--for artists.  This is a multiuse; this is on about eight acres in, in Boston [Massachusetts], and it's a piece of land owned by the city that will be developed by the National Center of African American Artists through its offshoot called the Elma Lewis Partners [Elma Lewis Partners, LLC], and it is a huge undertaking.
Story_ID: 485412
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis always envisioned a cultural center in the midst of the community that was endowed by the community, and that's what this will be because it will have retail and office space, and all these other centers--all these other components, and the museum, which is now located on Walnut Avenue, will have another location as well; it won't give up the current location, but it will have a second location, and at that location, it will have a--be a broader cultural center, it will also have performance space--about five hundred seat performance space, and it will be able to then partner with other arts organizations in, in the city to do a much broader program.  It's a huge undertaking (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now I need to move to Boston [Massachusetts] and tell all my friends, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, we hope to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is really a--
Speaker 1: --we hope to break ground in 2015.  Yes, it's really very exciting.  It's been, it's been coming for a long time, that's why I mentioned the '90s [1990s]; it's, it's--Miss Lewis envisioned this a very long time ago, even before the '90s [1990s].  She has always wanted to have, as I said, the cultural component be in fact part of the larger community component, so this development includes all of that; it will have a public plaza, it will have an educational component--all of that is included in this.  And, as I said, it's on a, a, an eight acre lot.
Speaker 2: Sustained by the community.
Speaker 1: Sustained by the community, sustai- and endowed in that sense by the community.
Speaker 2: Now that's wonderful, and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Isn't that wonderful?  So that's what we've been working on, and I've been connected with the National Center [National Center of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts] and I am now the co-chair of the board; that's why I said my community work has really been consistent again bringing education into a community context.  In this sense--in this example, it's arts education.
Speaker 2: Now, who's providing the leadership for this right now, this project [Tremont Crossing]?
Speaker 1: The entire--the board and, you know, that's what we've been working on.  As I said, it has been a long time coming.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: This is something that we worked at for more than twenty years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a major, major project.
Speaker 1: It is--major project.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And I started it in the '90s [1990s] is what I'm saying; you were saying, "What else have--did you do in the '90s [1990s]?"  That was when I started, you know, with my--as a member of the board, you know, in those years.
Story_ID: 485413
Speaker 1: Now what else at, at--anything else at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, but--in fact, it, it's something that continues.  I will, this year, December, give my twenty-first presentation on education for the twenty-first year to the current class of Hubert Humphrey Fellows [Hubert H. Humphrey Fellowship Program] at Boston University; I have done that for twenty years, and this is the twenty-first year, and it's something that I'm very proud of because it has brought me into contact with students who are in this country for only a year in the Hubert Humphrey Fellows Program, and those students are from all over the world.  And I have the great honor of giving the annual lecture on education in the United States, and this will be the twenty-first year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is the kind of work--you've been doing this kind of work for so long--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --this is--didn't you work with The African American Institute [The Africa America Institute] in Washington [sic. New York, New York] at one time?
Speaker 2: That's right; I worked with The African American Institute in Washington, and I worked with the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] program bringing African American students to universities--worked with that program as well.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Bringing African students, not African American--African students to, to--it, it was a consortium here at Harvard University, and I worked with that consortium.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know Dr. Hansberry?
Speaker 2: I worked for Dr. Hansberry--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in Washington; that's who I worked with at the African American Institute in Washington.
Speaker 1: Dr. William Leo Hansberry--
Speaker 2: William Leo Hansberry is a wonderful man, just a wonderful man--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --absolutely marvelous.
Speaker 1: The founder of African studies in the black colleges [HBCUs] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's really--and he took an interest in every one of the students that we brought; this was a scholarship--I was a scholarship assistant those years, and we were bringing students to this country, and it was just extraordinary because Professor Hansberry took a personal interest in each one of those students.
Speaker 1: Now this is in the early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1959--
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Story_ID: 485414
Speaker 1: I don't wanna skip over too much, but--now you retired from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in ninet- in 2000, right?
Speaker 2: In 2003, in fact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand three [2003], okay.
Speaker 2: --and when I retired, I was just so pleased.  Former students got together and raised the money to have a room constructed on the floor where I'd had my office, an additional room that they donated in my honor, and it is a, it is a room where students can go and, and use their computers and study, and so on, and that was dedicated in my honor when I retired in 2003.  I was just thrilled--former students did that.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: (Pause) And I had wonderful students; I should, should really talk about what an extraordinary experience I had with students at Boston University because they were eager, interested, hardworking, and I learned a lot from my students.  I really have very remarkable students.  Incidentally, I went back--I was invited back to Boston University to teach a class in 2009 (laughter), and I did, with my colleague Karen Boatman, and this was a class from--for very advanced students who were looking, again, at social context of education, but doing it at the graduate level, and we were--we had them look at African education from traditional education, through colonialism, to contemporary education and, and each one had selected an African country, and it was really quite remarkable.  The other thing I did with Boston University after retirement in 2005, I taught a course in Geneva, Switzerland for Boston University, again, Social Context of Education.
Story_ID: 485415
Speaker 1: I didn't mention your work with WGBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]. You worked with WGBH (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, as a matter of fact, I just worked with WGBH this past year.  Last year, you know, they screened the 'Freedom Riders,' and I prepared some of the teacher training material for them.  I had worked with WGBH on the civil rights project; they did teacher training materials and I worked with them then as a senior consultant, and I was a senior consultant on the 'Freedom Riders' teacher training materials as well.  I did that just this past year.
Speaker 1: Hm, okay.
Speaker 2: So I have continued my work with WGBH.
Speaker 1: Okay, which started way back in the '60s [1960s], I believe, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 485416
Speaker 1: Now your, your book was published in 2005, am I right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007].  This is 'Beyond the Bake Sale' ['Beyond the Bake Sale: The Essential Guide to Family-School Partnerships,' Anne T. Henderson, Karen L. Mapp, Vivian R. Johnson, and Don Davies] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is 'Beyond the Bake Sale,' yes.  And it has been very successful, incidentally; it is one of the bestselling books on education, and continues to sell in 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is--this book was translated into Portuguese and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Brazil.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you and your colleague went to Brazil (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went--the three of us; one of the authors could not, could not go.  There are four authors and three of us went to Portug- to Brazil, and we were asked to make a presentation about the book to about four hundred educators from around Brazil.  They are really moving in education to try to include those who had been left out of education in Brazil, and many of those, of course, are people of color who are among the poorest, and they are now saving places, they're doing affirmative action, saving places at colleges and universities, they are offering to poor families child care six a.m. to six p.m.; the state is offering it free for--and the parents then can receive training, have further education (unclear) formal education, and vocational training while their children are cared for six a.m. to six p.m.
Speaker 1: Now, Brazil has the largest population of Africans outside of the continent of Africa.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, and they are beginning to turn around their education system in order to expand opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why they were interested in our book, because our book brings those who are left out into the formal educational structure by developing partnerships with communities and with families.
Speaker 1: Now we, we often hear this back and forth between teachers and the community about who's to blame for falling test scores and the children not succeeding in school.  How can schools and families build trust instead of blaming each other?
Speaker 2: That's chapter four, I think, in the book (laughter).  The way that, that that is done is for the adults to decide that they are going to find ways to work together.  When the children are given the opportunity to see the adults in their lives--those people in their family, those teachers and other educators--come together, and we have suggestions, taken from the experience that we've had in schools around the country where people have done this successfully, and we have aggregated those experiences, and make suggestions based on those experiences about how adults can come together, and stop blaming each other, and each take responsibility in a way that promotes education for all children.  And it can be done; we've seen it done in schools all over the country, it's just that those schools are not well-known and they are not in the majority.
Story_ID: 485417
Speaker 1: In 2000, you started working with the Young People's Project [Cambridge, Massachusetts]; that was a--this is an offshoot of Bob Moses' [Robert Parris Moses] Algebra Project (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Algebra Project; that's right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: It's an absolutely wonderful project, and it's a project that I am so honored to be asked to be part of an advisory group.  The young people started this project really in Mississippi as they--as, as Bob's children watched what he was doing and began tutoring with him, and they went on to raise money--after school funds and, and other sources they found, and to train other young people, so they do a magnificent Training of Trainers program, and they now have about thirteen hundred young people who have been part of this in over the past fifteen years, because they've been operating for fifteen years and they now have ten cities across the United States in which this project is operating.  The way that they do it is to train college and high school students to become math literacy workers; that's what they call them--math literacy workers.  They receive training, and they in turn work with usually third through fifth grade students in after school programs, and very intensive summer programs as well.  The math literacy worker training, that intensive program is usually in the summer.  And it's been very, very effective because Bob Moses, in the Algebra Project, has really--you gave an example of how he works with young people, and he has developed algebra skills in a manner that everyone can understand them, and you really begin to move through algebra in a way that is comprehensible.  In the Young People's Project, what is added to that is the enthusiasm, the knowledge, the experience, the inspiration that young people give each other, and therefore, they are running their own project, which is an outgrowth of the Algebra Project, but is in that sense separate from it because they raise their own funds, they carry out their own training, they do their own tutoring; this is indeed a young people's project--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it is really very exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay, it is.  So, so you continue to serve on the board of--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm in, an--in an advisory capacity, and I'm happy with that because they really do inspire me and give me the opportunity to discuss with them the ideas they have that they are developing.  Because I'm a friend of the family, they treat me just like that, and they call and they say, "Vivian [HistoryMaker Vivian R. Johnson], you know we'd like to talk to you about some ideas we have, just to, to get a--have you be a sounding board, to have you listen to us, have you give your thoughts about this," so it's a wonderful, wonderful privilege.
Story_ID: 485418
Speaker 1: Now, we always this question, and you addressed it on some level already.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, let me talk first about the good news because there really is good news, and I think sometimes we overlook it.  Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] and I just had a great good fortune to go to the ninety-seventh annual conference of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.  Now, you and I remember the Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] discussions as we were growing up, and this organization has managed to continue Carter Woodson's work for ninety-seven years; it's about to have a centennial meeting.  That is so exciting to me to think of that achievement--ninety-seven years!  There were about one thousand people in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at that conference.  It began with a plenary in which [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon and [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez had a conversation.  It was an absolute gift.  It ended with Shirley Sherrod as the speaker for the final banquet.  Now, you and I know how important it is for our young people to hear Bernice Johnson Reagon, Sonia Sanchez, Shirley Sherrod, and many of the attendees at that conference are young scholars from around the country, most of whom are African American.  A young man on the panel on which I gave a presentation has gone through--a young scholar--has gone through all of the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] ex-slave interviews, and he has found those interviews in which women talk about how they resisted slavery, and that's what his work is on--the resistance of women as they described it in the WPA ex-slave narratives.  That's wonderful scholarship.  And in another panel young people, undergraduates, were talking about their work in African American archeology, and in fact, one young woman was talking about her, her work connecting African archeology and African American archeology--magnificent scholarship.  Throughout those meetings, I was absolutely inspired because what I heard are serious young people who are going about their work, using the opportunities that they know have been hard won, and they are expanding Carter Woodson's magnificent work.  The journal that is published by the association is an award winning national journal, and at the last meeting we went to, several young contributors to that journal were receiving awards.  So that really gives me a good feeling that all is not lost.
Story_ID: 485419
Speaker 1: On the other hand, like anyone my age, I realize that we have not done what we should have done in protecting young people against the really terrible inconsistencies of our public school system.  And when I say protecting them, I mean that.  In our segregated schools, young people were protected because their African American teachers gave the best of themselves knowing that they were preparing young people for a very difficult world.  In our sometimes integrated, but sometimes still segregated, public school system, we have not managed to maintain that level of quality for all children.  Some children do get it, but we have not maintained it for all children--we just haven't, and that's my greatest concern.  And I believe that the only way we're going to get that level of quality is to bring families and communities into partnership with the schools where they are all monitoring what goes on in the school on a regular basis; not in a contest--not in a contestation, but rather in a manner where there is trust developed between families and schools, where the adults are working in harmony to benefit children.  If we don't do that, it is not gonna get any better.
Story_ID: 485420
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  You have two daughters, right?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters, and each daughter is married to a wonderful husband, and each has two sons.  Our daughters are absolutely extraordinary; we have been blessed.  Our first daughter, Caryn Lindani Johnson [Caryn Johnson-Carter], was born in Washington, D.C. at Howard University in fact, in 1960, and she has gone through school, scored brilliantly on her SATs--800 in the math--I can't remember the name of it--that you take in addition to the SAT, but anyway, she made a perfect score on that, and went on to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and studied computer science at Yale, then came back to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter), and did art at MIT, and people say, "Isn't that backwards?"  And she said, "No, not really" (laughter), because it's the way she wanted to do it.  But in any case that's, that's what she did.  And she has gone on to be a hardware designer for computers; she did that for some years, and then decided that she really wanted to stay at home and homeschool her two sons [Daniel Johnson-Carter and Jared Johnson-Carter], and she has done an absolutely brilliant job of that.  At the same time, she continues to do some of her own personal work and, for example, she designed a course at Rhode Island School of Design [Providence, Rhode Island] in which she taught students what she called design science, and then trained people at Rhode Island School of Design to continue that because she did not want to continue to teach there; she wanted to go back and work with her own children, and that's what she does.  Incidentally, her son, her older son who has been homeschooled all of his life, decided that he wanted to get a lab in biology, and homeschooling did not afford that, and so he registered in the local community college; he was fourteen, going on fifteen, I think, at the time, and they said, "Wait a minute, how old are you?"  And they--he said, you know, "I'm" let's say "fifteen," and they said, "Well, you're gonna have to come in and be tested because you haven't even graduated from high school and this is community college."  Well, he went in, he was tested, and they said, "Obviously, you can handle this work."  He did very well in testing.  So he went in to a course in community college in biology, and got 100 on the first exam, with eighteen, twenty, twenty-five year-olds, and he was fifteen.  So he's obviously doing very well.  Second child is coming along, excited about some different kinds of things, and she works with both of them in a homeschooling community; not just by herself but she is in a community of, of homeschooled children.  That--her husband [Jeffrey Carter] is the Boy Scout leader and the Cub Scout leader, and takes their sons and other boys on all the Boy Scout and Cub Scout kinds of activities that you can imagine, and they all went to Switzerland because her son plays the drum and fife with the Drum and Fife Corps [sic. William Diamond Junior Fife and Drum Corps] in Lexington [Massachusetts], and you know what that means in terms of the reenactments and, and--excuse me--Revolutionary War activity.  So, in any case, he plays the drum and fife, and they went to Switzerland for an international drum and fife gathering.
Story_ID: 485421
Speaker 1: Our second daughter, younger daughter Kimberly [Kimberly Johnson Ogadhoh], and her husband [Shem Ogadhoh] live in Beaverton, Oregon, just outside of Portland [Oregon], because he is a researcher at Intel [Intel Corporation], and that's where the Intel campus is.  And she worked for Nike [Nike, Inc.]; she has her own consulting business and she worked for Nike as the--to help them develop an international program for girls.  Her degrees are in child development and, and women's development internationally, she has two master's degrees in international work, and worked for Save the Children England [Save the Children UK, London, England] when she lived in England; they were there for about five years.  Her husband, who is from Kenya, got his Ph.D. from the University of London [London, England] in chemical engineering, and while he was there, she worked for Save the Children England, and then continued to work for them when she came back here--for Save the Children--and then decided to develop her own consulting, and for Nike she helped develop their international program for girls where they support girls in several countries--in Ethiopia and other countries--by supporting athletic activities.  They keep girls in school by doing that.  This was an international program that Nike does, and she helped them develop that.
Story_ID: 485428
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, too.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  One of the great advantages I've had, I have in part made for myself; there's also been very good fortune and, and blessings.  The part that I have done for myself is that I recognized early on that I always wanted to be an educator and I wanted to be an educator working in the way that I wanted to work, so I have rarely gone through the system in the usual way; I've always created a path, and that path has given me the opportunity to work on these projects of family, school, community collaboration 'cause that's what I cared so dearly about, and that path has also given me the opportunity for some flexibility, to be able to work with my husband [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson], to be able to take our children--and that's one of the things I do wanna talk about.  We took our children out of school in 1976, from January until September--took them out in January, right after Christmas, and we went to twelve countries on the African continent and three countries in Europe, and our children got the best possible education, being out of school, for nine months.  They--that's one of the reasons why our daughter is so enthusiastic about homeschooling because she in fact experienced it.  And in those nine months, the four of us were together a good deal of the time--much more than families often are here, you know, with parents off to work and whatever.  And we made decisions about whether or not we would have a large meal for lunch or for dinner because the, the finances were such that we had to make those choices, and we made that decision, all four of us together.  And we also had an opportunity then to each discuss the other's work, and that was fabulous because our children had special projects that they were doing for--let me give you an example. The science teacher here in, in Newton [Massachusetts] was wonderful in developing a project for our daughter Kimberly [Kimberly Johnson Ogadhoh].  She was interested in how rice and coffee are grown in various countries in Africa, so when we arrived in Liberia, we found out that there was a rice development project, and we took her to that project, and the man who ran it was absolutely wonderful; he was so excited that there was a fourteen year old who really was interested in this, he took her through the entire project, showed her all aspects of it; she was taking notes quickly, and she learned a lot about upland rice, as compared to other kinds of rice and how you grew it; then when we got to East Africa, to Kenya, there was a rice development project, and they were in fact putting residences on that land and giving people the opportunity to grow rice as part of their community development.  She then learns about both community development and rice production again, and compares it to rice production in West Africa, and they allowed her to go through all the files at the department of agriculture; it was absolutely amazing.
Speaker 1: You once lived in Lake Charles, Louisiana which is the largest rice growing region in the country.
Speaker 2: Well, you have a very good memory.  I started school [Second Ward School; Ralph F. Wilson Elementary School, Lake Charles, Louisiana] in Lake Charles, Louisiana, and that's why--I actually started school in the segregated public school in, in the South; that's where my education started, and I had devoted teachers--absolutely devoted.  As a matter of fact, my kindergarten and second grade teachers came to our wedding in, in Los Angeles [California], all those years later.  So, we had devoted teachers.  And you're right; I began to learn about rice production in that way, and here's my daughter getting the opportunity to learn about rice production at a national level, and she's fourteen years old.
Story_ID: 485429
Speaker 1: I have to tell you one other aspect of that story which is really very funny and we still laugh about it, and that is that we were in Cairo [Egypt], at the American University in Cairo, trying to figure out how we were going to get the--her paper photocopied so that we could send the original back to her teacher so, you know, she could have her project in on time, and someone came up to us, heard us speaking American English, and it turns out he was the dean of the school at the American University at Cairo, and said, "Oh, come on in my office, I'll get the, the papers photocopied for you and we can get them mailed so she'll get her project in on time."  Fast forward to the teacher here in, in Newton [Massachusetts], and Kimberly [Kimberly Johnson Ogadhoh] found out that her, her friends in her class were really very mad at her because apparently, when Kimberly's paper arrived from Cairo, other students had asked for an extension of time to complete their projects (laughter), and he said, "If Kimberly Johnson can get hers in on time from Cairo, surely," (laughter)--he then gave them the extension, but he had to use that as the example.  So, anyway, she came back and people were mad at her.  But it was--it's one of those funny stories that we carry with us.  But the point is that that opportunity for studying, that was so amazing, and I must add this, this piece of it as well.  Our older daughter, Caryn [Caryn Johnson-Carter], had a project to read newspapers in French so that she would improve both her French and her, her understanding of how things are reported in the, the local community, about the line of the dam.  The hydroelectric dam was down because we were there just after their--the drought that had affected those countries below the Sahel but, of course, was not as devastating.  So the hydroelectric dam level was down, and she was reading about that concern--the, the national concern about water--in the local newspapers, and she was it in French.  When she was at the national library, working on that project, she met a woman named Dr. Jeanie Toongara [ph.]; we just saw Dr. Jeanie Toongara at the meeting in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at the end of September.
Speaker 2: So--and you had your children in Africa and Europe in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976], okay.
Speaker 1: Twelve countries.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We spent six weeks in each of three countries, and then we went through the others fairly quickly, but Willard [HistoryMaker Willard Johnson] had a big project; he was, he was on--working on a project on development, and he made the arrangements for us to stay in each of those countries where he had to spend a good deal of time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It seems to me that you--what you've done is the epitome of what you advocate--parents being involved in schools.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 485430
Speaker 1: Tell me, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who has been very privileged, and who cared very deeply about providing that opportunity for everyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
