Story_ID: 18237
Speaker 1: State your name and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Jesse Louis Jackson, Jr.. March 11th, 1965.
Story_ID: 18238
Speaker 1: What I want to ask you is what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've got a number of favorite foods, but I'm a connoisseur of chitterlings, always have been.  You can order them on the Internet now.  They come clean.
Speaker 1: That's very good.  Okay, I haven't had that one (laughs).  What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay. Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't really have one.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Keep the faith."
Story_ID: 18239
Speaker 1: I want you to describe your childhood.  You know, what--you came from a very esteemed, you know, some people would say, you know, the maybe--our first family in terms of African American family. So I would just like you to sort of describe, you know, what your, you know, childhood was like and share maybe some of your earliest memories.
Speaker 2: A normal childhood.  I don't know what it's like to not have a normal childhood.  My parents did their very best to ensure that all of their children would have as normal a childhood as they could possibly have under the circumstances.  I think when you look at all of my brothers and sisters, from my sister Santita, who's the oldest, to my little sister Jackie--there're five children in total.  Each of us reflect a dimension in our parents' lives that they were going through.  My sister Santita and I reflect a lot of the early struggles that our community was going through in the early part of the '70s [1970s]. My brother Jonathan  is kind of the transition child from those early struggles to more contemporary involvement; the economic struggles, the fight for parity and fairness for all Americans in the, if you will, not the civil rights arena, but in the "silver rights" arena.  And my little brother Yusef and Jackie are business entrepreneurs. They are--they define themselves fundamentally in the "silver" economic justice terms and not in the civil rights. So there's a--it's safe to say that my brothers and sisters, based upon how we are chronologically reared that we reflect the combination of the tradition of civil rights, but also the new tradition of silver rights.  My earliest recollections of being a student at John J. Pershing Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], normal.  I knew that many of my friends knew who I was before I knew who they were. And that has been my dilemma my entire life, and I don't know if it's necessarily a dilemma.  Oftentimes, children have to spend a lot of time getting to know their various classmates.  Usually my classmates know me before I knew them, "That's Jesse's boy."  "Those are Jesse Jackson's children." However, I found that this experience to have been one that's actually healthy.  In that almost all of my life, I have had people who have had extremely high expectations of me. Oftentimes their expectations were higher of me than they were--than my own expectations were of myself.  I wanted to be a doctor, or if I wanted to be a doctor, that wouldn't be enough.  People in my community expect me to be [U.S.] Surgeon General. If I wanted to be a lawyer, that's not enough. Why not aim to shape the justice system and shape justice for everyone?  From people on death row, to police brutality, to fairness for all Americans, "You should be on the [U.S.] Supreme Court, not just a lawyer."  Oftentimes many young people strive to be something, and they confront a community's expectations that say, "You'll never be bigger than the community.  You'll never be bigger than the neighborhood."  And yet they keep struggling and they keep trying. I think my rearing was fundamentally different because of the kind of parents that we had and the care that they spent with us.  Our expectations were, "Of course, we can be." And, "Of course, we expect you to be." And, "Never live beneath your opportunity. Never live beneath your privilege. Run twice as fast and twice as hard."  Oftentimes in our society just to be equal. I considered and interpreted this very early on as healthy expectation. From John J. Pershing [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I attended Le Mans Military Academy [called Le Mans Academy, closed in 2003] in Rolling Prairie, Indiana.  I was there for four years, along with my younger brother Yusef.  It's a Catholic military school, quite an experience getting to know different people from different cultures.  Some basic discipline that young people, I think fundamentally need, and one could also make the argument they fundamentally lack today.  From there, I went to Saint Alban's [School, The National Cathedral School for Boys] Episcopal High School in Washington D.C., where I was an average if not less than average student academically.  But certainly was exposed to people who had tremendous economic wherewithal but also academic potential.  They were the children of the ambassadors, and the children of members of Congress.  I had this sense at Saint Alban's that I could be--I could be more than I was.  I left there, and I attended North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical] State University [Greensboro, North Carolina].  And from A&T State, to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois], and then on to the University of Illinois College of Law [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Story_ID: 18240
Speaker 1: I'd like you to tell me, you know, what you know of your parent--your--like your mother's mother, and you know, and that side of the family.  That history and then your father's [Rev. Jesse Jackson Sr.]. The same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well my Grandmother Gertrude is still with us.  And she is--she graduated from college at age sixty-eight--after having raised seven children of her own.  So she serves as quite an inspiration to all of us.  When I was in Washington [D.C.], my grandmother Gertrude, along with her husband, Grandpa Brown, who's now deceased, used to come pick me up on weekends, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.  And on Saturdays I would be fishing in Hampton, Virginia with my grandfather.  And that is some of the more memorable experiences. I'm going fishing soon.  And while I'm fishing I'll be thinking about my grandfather on my mother's side of the family.  But interestingly enough, my grandfather on both sides of my family were both fishermen.  But they also both worked for the post office.  And they didn't know each other until our parents met in North Carolina at A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical] State University [Greensboro, North Carolina].  So in two different parts of the country, Virginia and one in South Carolina, both of them worked for the post office, and both of them loved to fish.  And so no matter whose relatives I was with, my father's--I think I kicked this light--no matter which side of the family I might have been visiting on any given occasion, some of the great lessons of life I learned from my grandparents.  But on my mother's side--I think our energy, I think our zeal for more information, our zeal to study comes from my mother's genealogy.  She's a very careful and a very thoughtful person, who genuinely desires to be behind the scenes and not in front or videographed.  Her interest is in thinking through policy and trying to determine the appropriate direction to go.  Now my father's side from Greenville, South Carolina, from Haney Street, the housing development that my father grew up in is now titled Jesse Jackson Homes.  And my earliest recollections were visiting Grandmamma Helen, Grandpa Jackson, and Grandma Tibbie, in Greenville [South Carolina] on Haney Street.  Where, whenever we would do something wrong, Grandmamma Tibbie would go take a switch off of a tree.  As a matter of fact, she would send us out to the tree to get the switch.  She would make us pick the switch that she was gonna whip us with.  And she'd say, "Now go get my switch."  And she would get it. And she would grab it, and she would pull all the leaves off of it, form a little flower, and she'd throw 'em. And then she'd start wagging her tongue around as she started pursuing us.  These were the summer trips when my parents, I guess, wanted to have some time to themselves.  They would send us to someone's grandparents, either my mother's or my father's.  And that's what we would do for the summers.
Story_ID: 18241
Speaker 1: You were really a child of, you know, the North having been raised in Chicago [Illinois].  What did you--what were your feelings about going south to, you know, to see your grandparents? Or was there--it didn't really matter.
Speaker 2: I knew things moved slower in the South.  I knew it was God awful hot down there when I went to visit.  I knew that when we would visit, Grandmamma would feed us 'ad nauseum' and that there was something much slower about the South.  It wasn't until I got elected to [United States] Congress that I fully began to appreciate the depth of the nation's history and what the South represented and still represents in terms of being a fundamental barrier to making progress for the entire nation. I mean the South is unnaturally conservative when one considers the condition of the poor blacks and poor whites in the South.  It's still, in terms of soil, the richest soil in the nation.  And yet it's still in terms of people the poorest people in the nation.  Its education system far lags behind that of the Northern industrial states.  And yet most Southerners hold on to a history that runs fundamentally contrary to the understanding and the experience and the expectations of African Americans.  But I hold out that if, in fact, the coalition--the economic coalition between African Americans and whites in the South can be built around those issues of common interests that the country is fundamentally redeemable.  Right now that is not necessarily the case.  Those African Americans and those southern whites find most of their issues to be fundamentally juxtaposed and opposite what they should be.
Story_ID: 18242
Speaker 1: You're the oldest boy, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're the second child.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was there any expectation of you, you know, as the oldest? I mean and your father's [Rev. Jesse Jackson] namesake.  Was there any expectation?  Did you feel that, you know, coming up, or--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No expectations except to do my very best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my parents would have supported whatever avenue I would have chosen to express myself.  There was a strong tendency in my family to encourage public service.  But that didn't necessarily mean elective service.  And that's one of the reasons I went to the seminary, to try and sort out for myself what it was that I wanted to do and I couldn't find a better place to do that than a seminary.
Speaker 1: Now I still wanna go back to, you know, the early years.  Do you remember--'cause you must have had a lot of people coming through your house in lots of ways.  And I just wanna know what was life like in many ways? You know, and who, you know--what was it like, you know, living in the Jackson household?
Speaker 2: Well it was--I wish I could compare it to someone else's household, but this is the only home that I know.  So what might be considered exciting in someone else's household became commonplace in ours. I remember when Sammy Davis Jr. [entertainer] one day was sitting on our couch at home, and he had lost one of his many chains somewhere at the couch--and I--on the couch. And he called back from the Ritz Carlton [hotel], where he was staying downtown.  I must have been nine, maybe ten years old at the time.  And I found it.  And I asked my mother if I could take it back to him, and they had someone drive me down there to give Sammy Davis Jr. back his bracelet.  My next door neighbor right across the street was Ramsey Lewis [pianist].  We live at 6845 Constance [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Ramsey Lewis lives at 6851.  So Earth Wind and Fire [music group] and jazz musicians would regularly frequent the Lewis home and also frequent the Jackson home just by virtue of our proximity to the Lewis's.  I'll wait for the phone to stop ringing.  So at Rev. Jackson's dinner table and Mrs. Jackson's dinner table the president of Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega has sat.  [South African President] Nelson Mandela has been there.  Michael Jackson [singer] and the Jackson Five [music group] have been there.  The Brothers Johnson [music group] have been there.  A number of--Donny Hathaway [singer]--the piano that sits in my mother's living room to this day is a piano that was given to her by Donny Hathaway and Roberta Flack [singer].  They gave it to my sister who was interested in studying piano.  And my sister subsequently became a background singer for Ms. Flack.  So we have a number of experiences in that home that are--I would consider them normal, but one might consider to be quite unusual considering the caliber of people who have been there.
Speaker 1: And was there anyone that visited or anything--I'm just trying to get you to share memories That was very good just now.  But was there anyone that visited or anything that happened that, you know, that you often tell about? Or, you know, or--strikes--you know. You have fond memories of or someone who was different than what you thought or--?
Speaker 2: No. No. Everyone that came to our house was real. We had dinner one night with the Spinners [music group], and I mean that night we went to Arie Crown [Theater, Chicago, Illinois] to watch them perform.  And right in the middle of their show they stopped and had the (unclear)--and, "We wanna thank the [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] family for our Thanksgiving dinner."  And they had us all come up on stage, and that was a wonderful thing. But people that we've met in the context of the social struggle have been real.  They've understood the kind of discrimination whether they were black or they're white that we have long since fought against.  And to that extent we've kind of emerged as a family that people see as having the courage, regardless of the industry that they're in, of people who will fight for them.  And so no matter how high and how mighty or how popular or how famous someone is, at some point and time there's always this call that Rev. Jackson or Mrs. Jackson receive about help that they need in their profession because of some ceiling that they confront.  And that became commonplace amongst the rich and the famous in our home.  And to understand that is to understand America.
Story_ID: 18243
Speaker 1: When you were shipped off to military school [Le Mans Academy, Rolling Prairie, Indiana, closed in 2003] was that--how old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Sixth grade.  So how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't consider it being shipped off to military school.  When I went to military school--first of all it was a Catholic military school.  This is not reform school, this is not boot camp.  There are significant young people today who are sent to boot camp because they have very serious discipline problems.  This was a very high-caliber educational institution.
Speaker 1: (Laughs, unclear) I knew it.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Let's stand up for the record.
Speaker 2: And I actually found out--actually one of my good friends, Sean Payton, this was Walter Payton's [football player] cousin--was--his cousin was attending Le Mans [Academy].  And so he invited us up for a weekend, and I went up for the weekend; my mother went up for the weekend. Who--my mother's friend was Sean's mother.  They were really good friends.  And Sean showed me how they--how the school functioned.  And we would come home on the weekends.  And I think what my parents probably recognized very early on was that they had given me this name, Jesse Jackson.  And unlike their other children, people were coming to me, people were confronting me, people knew me before I knew who they were.  And they said, "He deserves an opportunity to develop himself and to be his own person without all that we create for him, and all that we are doing in our lives that can further complicate his youth and his childhood."  They felt that that experience would be good for me.  And to this day I think it was--it's probably one of the proudest experiences of my life.  One of the things my father [Rev. Jesse Jackson] used to always say was that he learned very early on that you cannot love all of your children equally.  That most parents who do that, they make a fundamental mistake. He says, "Children must be loved adequately."  That is, you'll find that when you have a number of children, that some children need more attention, more time, more care, and more help than other children that you have.  Others will be a lot more independent.  And so to compensate, for example, I had this big name, Jesse Jackson.  But I never had a Big Wheel [children's tricycle toy] or a go-cart or a mini bike.  My brother Jonathan did.  Because when people would walk in the room, they'd walk up to me, "Oh this is Jesse Jr." And then they would begin to see little light bulbs going off in Jonathan's eyes, because people weren't necessarily working their way to Jonathan.  So my parents compensated.  They would do things for Jonathan that they wouldn't do for me and they put me in a position where I had to have a better relationship with my brother Jonathan, if I wanted to ride his go-cart or his mini bike.  If you follow what I'm saying.  My mother often says that, "One way to measure--if a mother had five children and three pork chops, does she conclude that she has two excess children?  Or does she take three pork chops and make gravy and create--put onions in it, and make three pork chops magically become enough to feed five different kids?"  She said, "That is how parents have to compensate and keep their families together."  So these are some of the lessons that I learned from them.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  So did you enjoy your experience at military school? Because every--you know, that's the stage--you were there from sixth to what? Eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Ninth.
Speaker 1: Ninth, okay.  What things do you think you learned in that experience?
Speaker 2: Discipline, respect, honor, patriotism, merit.  I learned how to make up my bed, how to clean my room.  I learned the study of discipline.  We had to study carrel, if you will, every night. That's what we called it, study carrel.  We got demerits for things we did wrong.  We got promotions for things that we did right.  I learned, I think, in military school that everything has order, and everything has a place.  And this has stuck with me.
Story_ID: 18244
Speaker 1: How was the decision made that you were going to Washington D.C. to school?
Speaker 2: About this time, I must have been approaching high school.  I repeated high school.  I repeated the ninth grade when I went to Saint Alban's [High School, The National Cathedral School for Boys] in Washington D.C.  I didn't have certain academic qualifications necessary to compete, so they held me back in the ninth grade.  And at this time, my father [Rev. Jesse Jackson] had then established Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] in Washington, D.C.  So Monday through Thursday, maybe even Friday, Reverend [Jesse Jackson] was actually spending more time in Washington D.C. than he was in Chicago [Illinois].  So my parents in furtherance of their--my ability to spend time with my father, my mother felt that I was approaching the age where access and proximity to dad was necessary--made the determination that Saint Alban's would be a great place where I would see my father more there than I would if he were--if I were at a public high school here in Chicago.  My younger brother Yusef also attended Saint Alban's High School in Washington D.C. And my brother Jonathan who had the option to go to Saint Alban's decided he wanted to hang around Chicago with his friends and went to Whitney Young High School here in Chicago [Illinois].  So that's the decision behind that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now how did you find--did you like the whole Washington D.C. experience? And I mean you said, you know, you were around--it was academically challenging and you were not a stellar student, but at the same time you were around, you know, a lot of--you were--were you around people you hadn't been around before? Not really.
Speaker 2: Not--I was around people who I had not been around before in terms of my peers.  And that was relieving.  But I also found that I was less than an average student.  I mean if I could get a C-, I was excited at Saint Alban's.  But what I did know, and what I do believe is that it is also possible to learn by osmosis, just by talking to people and hanging around people and sharing their experiences, and exposure is also a significant part of education. And so regular visits to Capitol Hill [U.S. Congress], getting to know senators, congresspeople whose parents had children at Saint Alban's.  I met [U.S. Commerce] Secretary Ron Brown, while a Saint Alban's student.  I was dating his daughter Tracy--who was at our sister school, The National Cathedral School [Washington, D.C.]  And maintained a wonderful relationship with their family up until the time--and even now that the secretary himself died in Bosnia.  So some of the personal relationships that I've developed that I'd like to think had made me more effective in what I presently do, have their roots in that experience.  I also have to admit that as a result of that exposure, I got used to some things and to being around people that has taken a certain excitement out of meeting famous people, powerful people, and big name.  I've seen very powerful people go into rooms with even more powerful people and literally melt down and become butter.  That is, they forgot what they wanted to talk about because they were in the presence of someone that they revered.  Well I've long since lost that.  When I enter into a meeting with the President of the United States, or a senator or congressman, I tell him what's on my mind, what I've--and I try and seek real answers to real questions, in part because of my exposure as a high school student. And so I basically go right to the point.  I have long since stop accepting invitations to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and to the Vice President's mansion to hobnob with people if it's--if I consider it to be a sincere waste of my time.  But that came from having been exposed to it.  I know a number of people in the Congress of the United States that I serve with right now who are not only not African American, but those who are African American, who when they receive an invitation, it's an opportunity to go buy a new dress, a new gown and to be there.  Well, I've long since, even at age thirty-five, I've long since exhausted the need to be in the same room with somebody powerful.
Story_ID: 18245
Speaker 1: Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] has served a great role in the black community and I was wondering if you could share even your first remembrances of, you know, being at Operation PUSH.  And that whole--
Speaker 2: I can share with you my first remembrances of speaking from the podium at Operation Breadbasket.  There's a picture that hangs in my office today of someone holding me up at Operation Breadbasket delivering a speech.  And I don't remember the content of the speech, but I certainly remember having walked across the theater to the podium and delivered my first remarks, and I have a picture of it.  When PUSH then moved from--when Breadbasket then moved from the theater to its present location. And some of my fondest memories of childhood stories and development, from playing hide and go seek in that building, to trying to help organize voter registration drives, to boycotts with the Reverend George Edgar Riddick [sic., George Edward Riddick], who was a brilliant researcher, who is now deceased.  To listening to Jack O'Dell--Hunter Pitts O'Dell [civil rights activist, aka Jack O'Dell], who was the International Affairs director for Rev. [Jesse L.] Jackson, who was also a significant aide to [Dr.] Martin Luther King Jr., who now lives in Seattle, Washington. He was the director of International Affairs at Operation PUSH.  To Mabel and Eileen Walker and to being a Cub Scout at Operation PUSH with Major Walker, who is now deceased.  I was a Webelo [Cub Scout rank] at Operation PUSH.  My first martial arts course and class was taken at Operation PUSH in the Community Hall. December of this year [2000] I will get my black belt in Tae Kwon Do in part because of my very early experiences there at Operation PUSH are also part of the discipline that I developed.  But I could name people who made a significant contribution and had their development that has come out of this organization.  And the unselfish service that they gave with the last full measure of their devotion, to make a difference for our community.  And to grow up in the shadow of that and to watch that.  And now to have my own staff, and to try to start organizations myself.  And to see a new generation where everyone wants to be paid, where everyone wants to get ahead. Everyone wants a car.  Where these guys would literally, if necessary, stay in the organization itself, miss payroll and wouldn't miss a beat.  Wouldn't expect any more from the organization having missed a payroll.  Having fed the hungry, having gone to Cook County Jail [Chicago, Illinois] every Christmas for thirty years now.  To spend Christmas not under a Christmas tree opening up a new toy set, but with inmates at Cook County Jail, which has become regular practice for us, are part of the very foundation of who I am.
Story_ID: 18246
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Jessica [Jackson's daughter].
Speaker 1: (laughs) Jessica, oh that's so cute.
Speaker 2: I told my wife not to do that to her. My wife said, "The only problem is one day God willing, we have a boy. I don't want this girl to develop any inferiority complexes about who her grandfather [Rev. Jesse Jackson] was, or who her father was.  She can be Jesse Jackson, she can be Jessica Jackson. She could be whatever she wants to be when she needs to be it."
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: "To do whatever she's trying to do.  And why should all the boys have all of the wind at their back?"
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh.
Speaker 2: And I said, "Honey, I never thought about it that way."
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So she's right.
Speaker 1: Right. That's--okay. That's cute (laughs). Well congratulations.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Thank you.
Speaker 1: Really that's wonderful.  You know, fathers about their daughters.  They can be--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You got that father look on you (laughs).
Speaker 2: Right. Correct.
Story_ID: 18247
Speaker 1: What do you think the significance of [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] is, you know--.
Speaker 2: I've always looked at American history in essentially three phases.  I use the metaphor of an earthquake.  The first phase of American history where I refer to it as the "tremor phase" of the nation's history.  The next phase, the Civil War, from 1861 to [1865] '65, I refer to it as the "great quake."  And from 1865 until the present, everything from that event forward has been an aftershock.  The death of [President] John F. Kennedy, the death of Bobby [U.S. Senator Robert F.] Kennedy, the death of [Dr.] Martin Luther King Jr., all of their life and times.  All that which SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and PUSH has attempted to do to broaden the scope of democracy for all Americans has been in the "aftershock phase" of the nation's history.  I think this is instructive because this generation of Americans looks back upon the role that the '60s [1960s] has meant in popular culture, and political culture, and in changing our society.  But the generation of the '60s [1960s] --or at least the leadership of the generation of the '60s [1960s] never looked to itself as the answer to its own self's problems. We looked to the '60s [1960s] as if, "They did it and now we're the beneficiaries."  But the '60s [1960s] looked more comprehensively at the "great quake" itself.  They looked at the explosion and the issues surrounding the explosion. That created--all of this is an outgrowth of that explosion that created the Democratic Party and the Republican Party.  In response to, "How do we deal with these Negroes that are newly freed?"  One group of--
Speaker 1: It's the fax--
Speaker 2: It's the fax machine.
Speaker 1: Are we picking it up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. In response to, "What do we do with these newly freed slaves?"  Liberal economic thinking--theory emerged.  Where they said that, "The government should spend more money."  Then modern thinking, "Let's spend money, but only for a limited period of time."  And conservative economic thinking emerged from those Southerners that said, "Let's not spend any money.  Let them pick themselves up by their own bootstraps."  From that "great quake," we had two social theories that emerged.  Liberals argued that, "Blacks and whites should be together," although few of them argued it. Conservatives argued, "Segregation now and forever.  Keep the races separate."  So today, all of us in some way, shape, or form defines ourselves as a Democrat, as liberal but moderate, or as Republicans who's conservative on social issues but moderate on economic issues, or conservative on economic issues and conservative on social issues.  Today the race debate is actually that which we define as normal, but is actually an outgrowth of the historical legacy of that problem.  And Dr. King and that generation looked at that problem objectively and said, "That that paradigm of Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative, moderate has failed to produce something for every American."  And what we have seen through Operation PUSH, through the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and through these organizations, is an effort to try and lift up those Americans, that that paradigm has fundamentally not helped since the "great quake."  The unfinished business of that great war has to be education for all Americans, health care for all Americans, housing for all Americans, regardless of their race, sex or class.  As a matter of fact, the right to education, the right to health care and the right to housing should be fundamental rights in America. Now in America the right to have a gun is a fundamental right.  It is in the [U.S.] Constitution.  But the right to an education, the right to health care, and the right to housing is not in the Constitution.  And therefore, raises significant questions about whether or not we consider these fundamental American rights.  I happen to think that the right to education, the right to housing, and the right to health care, is a more fundamental American right than the right to have a gun.  But the right to a gun is there, and so these organizations in this period are reshaping how this debate and dialogue is seen.
Story_ID: 18248
Speaker 1: What would you see is Operation PUSH's [People United to Serve Humanity] legacy?
Speaker 2: If I have to sum it up in just a few words, it kept hope alive.  It didn't let it die.  It allowed a generation of young African Americans and young people in Chicago [Illinois] to grow, to mature to be able to tackle and wrestle some of these fundamental issues.  It's been consistent for thirty-five years.  It has focused on critical issues and critical problems, and it's provided a forum that would not have existed without its existence, for political expression for African Americans and people who have been locked out in the City of Chicago.  Imagine Chicago with no PUSH.  Imagine Chicago--imagine our country with no national voice having emerged.  Even a National Action Network under Reverend [Al] Sharpton in New York.  Imagine it.  Imagine relying on the only independent voice in Chicago--black ministers.  Imagine hoping one day that they'll be mad at the mayor when they all attend the mayor's annual breakfasts and dinners and are honored to be with the mayor.  And I told you, I've long since attended enough dinners and banquets that the idea of the invitation no longer moves me.  Imagine if we had grown up--I'm thirty-five now [2000], and my generation--imagine if we had grown up in Chicago tempted by political consultants whose full-time job is to find a way to get us to come to the event.  And to become a part of the mayor, and give us a piece of the mayor's table and a piece of this deal and co-opt us into doing it the way the mayor wants it done.  In any given city, imagine what the absence of that political expression and the impact it would have had on our generation of youth in terms of their unwillingness to even think beyond the paradigm that they would have been exposed to.  So to have this figure, [Rev.] Jesse Jackson, wedged between the church and between political activism and still a minister, not competing with churches on Sunday, but doing direct action on Saturday has freed a whole generation of people like me who know what to ask for.  Some people are fighting for affirmative action, and I'm a affirmative action supporter.  But I spend half of my time fighting for majority action.  Let white guys fight over subcontracts.  When are we going to be the major contractor?  Let them fight over something.  Let them experience what affirmative action is like.  Once the majority contract is awarded to the sister, or to the Hispanic.  Let them get a feel for what it's like fighting over a few crumbs from the table.  Why are we always in a position of fighting for the crumbs?  When are we gonna be fighting for majority action?  Not just something affirmative?  A carve out.  And I handle enough money in the [U.S.] Congress now--$1.7 trillion comes through my committee--to know that fighting for, you know, a hundred million dollar carve out in a $1.7 trillion annual budget that's on its way up to $2.1 trillion, doesn't approximate how much money the government--that's the federal government--spends on issues.  But none of these guys or those guys are fighting for affirmative action.  They're expected to be the majority action beneficiaries. So I mean, if everything is fair, then we should have our fair share and fair shot of the big ballgame.  That's what [Operation] PUSH has done, if it's done nothing else.  If after the cumulative total of all of PUSH's budgets and all of their executive directors and all of their movements and pickets and boycotts and all the thousands of people who've come through Operation PUSH and have spoken. And all the preachers who preached.  If all--if the cumulative work of all of them is one Jesse Jr., or one [Mayor] Harold Washington or one [U.S. Congressman] Gus Savage, or one [U.S. Congressman] Bobby Rush or one [U.S. Congressman] Danny Davis--if the cumulative work is a freer and independent African American making a case that not only helps African Americans, but benefits all Americans, if the--then this has been time well-served.  Because that is so far--it's so difficult to find someone with those qualities I think.
Story_ID: 18249
Speaker 1: Can you tell me how the Saturday breakfasts and the Saturday platform developed?  How did that even come about?  Do you know about that?
Speaker 2: Well Rev. [Jesse L.] Jackson met with Rev. Clay Evans many years ago, and I have only heard this upon historical reflection.  And shared with him while at the seminary--after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had asked Rev. Jackson to come north and work on Operation Breadbasket [economic advocacy organization].  Reverend [Jesse Jackson] wanted to have a forum where clergy and churches could participate, but did not compete with the church.  So if he did it on Sunday,  well Reverend [Jesse Jackson] by now would have a very large church in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  But the way to get ministers to participate was not to have a church that competed with this Baptist church or that AME [African Methodist Episcopal] or this COGIC [Church of God in Christ] or this denominational setup.  But it was to create a forum where all of them would be participants in a Saturday direct action thing that did not undermine the sacredness of the church.  And that is the genesis of the--of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] and the Breadbasket Program.
Speaker 1: Were there other days of the week that were important?  Were Friday nights? Did they have any special role?  Or any other days besides, you know, Saturday morning?
Speaker 2: There were a number of activities that took place at PUSH during the early '70s [1970s].  And during the early '80s [1980s] from the PUSH-Excel [Operation PUSH for Excellence] program.  The number of students that came there and actually took classes in the building on a number of different subjects.  There have been many different programs and activities that have taken place at PUSH.  But I'm not--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: The best one to help.
Story_ID: 18250
Speaker 1: You know, it's [Operation PUSH, People United to Serve Humanity] very identified with your father [Rev. Jesse Jackson].  What do you think will be necessary for it to survive, you know, in absence of your father?  You know, when that day would occur?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, this is a complicated question in that PUSH is Jesse Jackson [Sr.] and Jesse Jackson [Sr.] has been PUSH.  They are one and the same and almost Siamese twins.  And the idea of separating them becomes a complicated surgical procedure that could threaten the life of one of them.  The key from--at least my perspective to PUSH's survival is its relevance--its relevance not solely on issues of race, but if I had the race coin in front of me, and this issue is heads side of the race question and the other side of the issue is the economic question.  And if the economic issues are interpreted in a way that all Americans can hear them, all Americans and more Americans would be participating in PUSH's mission.  I believe this message is necessary in order to build an organization going into the future with PUSH.  I don't believe that it is necessarily possible to expect anyone to duplicate the work of Jesse Jackson. I don't think that it is doable or the organization would be survivable if a Jesse Jackson substitute or duplicate of Jesse Jackson were to emerge.  I'm not even so sure if the Jesse Jackson paradigm, that is, the way Jesse Jackson himself does things, is survivable.  I think that he has been so visible, so vocal, so ever-present for so long that the community itself might not allow such another figure to emerge on so many different issues.  There may be a kind of reaction to that because he represents such an enormous figure, that his absence would also create such an enormous void on so many different issues and so many different places, and no one person who could conceivably address them all.  So you have this kind of popular icon figure who is ever-present.  From Wall Street [New York, New York financial district] to LaSalle Street [Chicago, Illinois financial disctrict], to Decatur, Illinois to Kosovo, on his way to Sierra Leone to get the UN [United Nations] troops out.  Just--helping [South African President Nelson] Mandela get out of jail.  I mean just--I'm not so sure that it's accomplishable.  I'm not so sure also that the Democratic and Republican forces and powers that be would have an interest in allowing such another figure to emerge.  I'm not saying that our community doesn't generate leadership.  It's just that they have a way of localizing a person, or turning off the media and keeping them in New York, or keeping them in Chicago, and never letting them emerge on issues bigger than their neighborhood.  So if there is a movement toward the localization of our leadership, it becomes very, very difficult for an African American to emerge in that context.  Now on the other hand, white men in Washington are all national leaders.  The Jesse Jackson Jr. from Chicago is a local Chicago [United States] Congressman.  So [U.S. Senator] John McCain is a national leader and [former Vice President Albert] Al Gore is a national leader, [William "Bill" J.] Clinton is a national leader--obviously elected President of the United States.  But they're [African American polticians] senators from their states.  They're congresspeople in their states.  But when they're [white politicians] on television they don't carry with them a local burden.  They're speaking for the country when they speak.  'Cause they're, you know, they're supposed to be speaking for the country.  But of course, when I talk, I'm supposed to be only talking for black people.  I don't mind it though.  I mean--great to have a base.  So this is a significant dilemma for the organization going into the future that it will have to address and come to terms with.  I think however, that if its focus were on the broader economic issues--the Bible says, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all things else will be added to you."  I can't begin to tell you the number of public education forums that have taken place at PUSH since its inception.  But I've never heard anyone say that the Constitution of the United States needs to be amended to provide every American with the right to an education of equal high quality.  Let me tell you what that amendment would do.  First of all, in order to amend the Constitution of the United States, you have to have three quarters of the states fighting for such an amendment.  Well to put a PUSH/Rainbow [Rainbow/PUSH Coalition] chapter in three quarters of all of the states is already a very large organization.  Just on the principle of an education of equal high quality for everyone.  'That means that state legislatures and Democrats and Republicans have to wrestle with an education of equal high quality when they're running for local offices.  And so local Rainbow/PUSH people have to hold candidates accountable to that mission in three quarters of the states around in this union.  Well imagine just on the issue of education.  If we "seek ye first the Kingdom," how big the organization would be on that question.  Let me tell you what the amendment would do.  South Side schools in the City of Chicago have been historically under-funded and inferior.  We've been waiting for the state of Illinois to fix its funding problems, but it won't do it.  While the Northwest schools continue to get taxes and benefits associated with business, to help prop up their school system.  So how do we fix it?  Well, we can hope Democrats regain the [state] senate.  We can hope Republicans do right.  Or the Illinois state funding formula can be declared unconstitutional under our constitutional amendment. And therefore the federal government strike this funding formula down as unconstitutional, because South Side children are being denied their equal protection of rights like North Side children are getting them.  That has implications where all fifty states in the union.  If we're "Seeking ye first the kingdom of God."  And guess what, it means blacks and whites are fighting for that.  It means poor blacks, middle class whites.  All of us are fighting for a new American ideal for which our progeny will all be the beneficiaries of.  But I've never heard of all of the educational forums, "[former Chicago Public School's CEO] Paul Vallas isn't doing this."  And "Gery--Gery Chico [former Chairman of Chicago Public School board] needs to fund that."  And, "If [Mayor Richard M.] Daley would just take his foot of the school board--." No, no, no.  An education of equal high quality for all Americans.  In the last generation, such a constitutional amendment might have meant desegregate the schools.  Of equal high quality in the last generation might have meant not just bussing, but if there's a nice school here, build a nice one over here.  And you have to do it by federal court order.  Of equal high quality in this generation means fifteen students in a class room and a well-trained teacher. And in this generation, of equal high quality means that every student should have a laptop and be on the Internet.  Of equal high quality in the next generation might mean something else.  So it's up to each generation of Americans to interpret what "of equal high quality" means.  That means that we emerge as founding fathers of the nation.  Because constitutional amendments--well Democrats and Republicans and federal jurists, all have to react to that.  The right to health care, the right to housing is such a right and such a movement that can build a coalition amongst all Americans who would agree that these are fundamental rights that they--and protections they fundamentally lack.
Story_ID: 18251
Speaker 1: You finished high school.  And you're now making decisions.  It's what 1987, or '6 [1986]?  You're making decisions about where to go to college.  How did you end up?  You know, one would say, you know--and at this point in your life that, you know, you're getting ready to embark on--you've decided to go to your parents alma mater [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At this point in my life, as a result of St. Alban's [High School, Washington, D.C.], I ended up liking rock and roll more than I did rhythm and blues. So when I would come home from St. Alban's, my brothers Jonathan and Yusef  hardly would recognize me.  They thought I had developed and adopted a new culture.  My parents kept telling me that it was very, very important that my brothers and I became the best of friends, and that we were able to work and live together because we would only have each other's for the rest of our lives.  I had gotten a number of scholarship offers to play football at several Ivy League schools which would have only enhanced and encouraged me to become a stronger supporter of rock and roll--which I am not opposed to.  But Jonathan and I agreed that our parents' case was more compelling--that we needed to like each other.  And it wasn't that we didn't like each other as brothers.  It's just that culturally, Jonathan had been to fourteen funerals by the time he graduated from high school, 'cause he was in the inner city school.  So he knew the real deal.  I had been to St. Alban's [School, Washington, D.C].  I don't think anybody dead yet from St. Alban's (laughs).  It's just that everybody went back to their home country, that everybody went on to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or whatever.  And they just do whatever they do, work on Wall Street [New York, New York financial district] and ride their bikes to and from school.  I mean work or whatever they do.  So I agreed that I was missing a kind of cultural thing that was very (unclear).  So we agreed to go to my parents' alma mater.  And it was the best decision of my life.  Because that which I was missing during those formative years when I was mostly influenced by our community, by the fraternities and the sororities and by people who were much more intelligent than me but couldn't afford to go to St. Alban's or couldn't get into St. Alban's and probably could have performed--I told you I was an average student--probably could have done better at St. Alban's.  But didn't have the blessing that I had to go to St. Alban's.  So I began to meet within our own community different people from different backgrounds who were as different as any group of people--we were not just one group, one monolithic group of people.  I mean there was some conservatives, there was some liberals and they're all black.  And everybody had their own opinion about how something in the world needed to change or be done.  And I was like, "Wow! Everything I thought I had at St. Alban's I had right here in my own community."  I had began to make those adjustments.  And, you know, I was taught by African American professors whom I had never seen at St. Alban's, and whatever notions that black folks couldn't teach that might have been in my mind, were completely eliminated by Dr. Howard, Ph.D. in finance and he wore real thick glasses but took no mess. By African Americans who were teaching at [North Carolina] A&T who graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and other historically black colleges.  During these formative years, we had our own SGA [student government association] president.  It wasn't like we were at a white school hoping to get somebody on the student senate, or fighting to get a little piece of the homecoming pie.  No, we were running the budget there, so we were in charge of it.  And to leave there and to be able to come back, you know to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois] and then law school [University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois] and then to be able to come back and to speak to people in Englewood [South Side Chicago neighborhood].  Speak to people in South Shore [South side Chicago neighborhood]  and not have that little, you know, "I went to here to a certain kind of university on my chip.  Now therefore, you should be with me.  Because I'm everything that you've ever voted for.  And everything that we've hoped for was to be able to send one of us.  So we could come back and lead you right to where we're going."  Nonsense!  Nonsense!  A&T checked all that.  And helped me--I think there are guys who would say today, "A&T helped me keep it real."  Right.
Speaker 1: (laughs) That's cute.  You'll--you're making me laugh.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: That's cute.
Speaker 2: It's the truth.
Speaker 1: It's true though, really.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It's the truth. They keep it real.  Right.
Speaker 1: So you gained a lot of appreciation for the black universities, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no doubt about it.  Now I'm on the [U.S. House of Representatives] Appropriations Committee for Labor, Health and Education, and it's my responsibility to make sure the black colleges get their money.  Two hundred and thirty million dollars a year for Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and other universities around the country.  And I'm the only African American on that appropriations committee.  So you've got to imagine how full circle this is for me.  And to this day, those universities graduate more African Americans than any other--than all of the other colleges in the country and universities combined.  So historically black colleges are responsible for the black middle class.
Story_ID: 18252
Speaker 1: What came into the decision to go to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, I went one day--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You're come--you've decided you're gonna come back to Chicago right?
Speaker 2: Right, right. I went one day and met with my father [Rev. Jesse Jackson] about what I wanted to do.  And I really wasn't sure.  And he was encouraging me to graduate school.  I thought I really wanted to go to law school.  But he told me that--about the idea of this seminary education.  To give me an opportunity to kind of find myself.  So I said, "Okay.  I'll give it a shot."  I went over and met with Dr. Kenneth Smith in Chicago Theological Seminary.  And Dr. Smith said that--expressed my case for wanting to be a--in the ministry.  And I told him, "I don't know if I've received a calling or anything like that. That I don't, you know, necessarily define--I'm trying to find myself.  And if I find myself, I happen to think that I can help a lot of people.  But I gotta be sure about myself first."  So he said, "You know, I appreciate knowing your honesty.  A lot of people come here to get a degree to preach.  And some'n, some'n."  So as I was walking out his office he said, "But there's only one thing."  He said, "If you start, will you finish?"  'Cause my father started but didn't finish.  As a matter of fact, my father's about to get his degree next month.  "Are you going to finish?"  I said, "Sir, I finish everything I start." So I actually got a three-year degree in two years.  I mean academically.  I'm not so sure I necessarily found myself in terms of what I wanted to do.  And I was dating my wife [Sandy Jackson] at the time.  And she was like really worried.  Like, I mean, "Are you about to become a preacher on me? (Laughs). Am I about to become a church wife?"  Not that that's a bad profession, don't get me wrong.  But we were young and fresh out of college, and we were dating.  And she was like, "Well what are you about to do here now? Are you about to start wearing a collar on me (laughs)?  Quoting scriptures every day."  So I said, "No honey it's not that.  I just wanna do this."  I went there and I graduated.  And that's the why of Chicago Theological Seminary.
Speaker 1: What do you think you learned from that experience?  Was it different?  I mean--you weren't sure what you were getting out of--you know, gonna get out of it.  But what were things that you got--every experience has its own merits.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, but at points did it seem long?  Or were you thinking, "What did I do this for?"
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  My--well my teachers--[Dr.] Michael Eric Dyson [cultural critic] was one of my professors at Chicago Theological Seminary.  Matthew Johnson.  These guys were twenty-eight, twenty-nine years old with their Ph.D.s.  Exposure to [Dr.] James Kohn and [Dr.] Cornel West [cultural critic] and [Dr.] Henry Louis Gates [cultural critic] who these guys all were obsessed with.  These black thinkers who--Cornel West at the time had just written a book called 'Prophecy Deliverance.'  And so I was really being challenged to think critically and to raise questions in my own mind's eye.  God became a god of the oppressed and not a god of the status quo while at the seminary through their teaching and through their work with me.  And for that matter, He became a person of color.  And that was a significant theological shift for me at that time.  Well as a result of that theological shift, I think I have firmly rooted that which I do in who we are and what we are trying to accomplish in our community. That occurred there, and that's a big shift.  That's a really, really big shift.
Story_ID: 18253
Speaker 1: At that point the decision was--was the decision about law school, you know, brewing?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Or what--?
Speaker 2: I decided since my now fiance had tolerated me at the seminary, I decided that I would follow her [Sandy Jackson] to law school.  She had just entered her first year at Georgetown [University Law School, Washington, D.C.]. And I was crazy about her by this time.  And decided I was gonna follow her to law school, or lose her to somebody in law school.  So I convinced her after her first year in law school to come to Champaign, Illinois.  Where we went to law school together there [University of Illinois College of Law].  And we got married shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: So you got married while you were in law school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  So you fell in love?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. (Laughs).
Speaker 1: That's nice. Okay.  Now describe your wife.  You know I've heard--I've always heard very good things about her.  Her name is Sandy right?
Speaker 2: Very jovial.  Wonderful personality, wonderful spirit.  She's a beautiful person.  I mean she lights up a room when she walks in.  And beautiful. Inside and out.
Speaker 1: Why do you think she's a good complement to you?
Speaker 2: She's my best friend.  And we became friends before we became lovers.  And I liked her.  She was someone I could talk to, and we could talk about anything.  She's very bright.  She reads the newspaper everyday.  She knows what's going on all around her.  She has a sense of community, a sense of spirituality.  I felt that if something ever happened to me, she could raise my children.  That my children would have a certain value system, a certain grounding.  And that, you know, was obviously very determinative in picking a mate.  So, you know, if I could make all the other little details work, oh, this thing was gonna happen.  So I just had kinda set my sights on it.  And I just made one deal with her.  And that was that if a big decision ever came along that I had to make it.  And I've been in a marriage now for ten years. And I've been waiting for a big decision to come along.  And so far, every decision she has made.  And I'm just waiting for the big one to come. Maybe around twenty years or thirty years and then I'll make it.  But so far one hasn't shown up yet.
Story_ID: 18254
Speaker 1: So you finished law school. What are--what are your thoughts at that point?  Are your thoughts that you want to go in and save society? 'Cause you come from this theological background, you know, and you're rooted in--or do you wanna be a corporate lawyer?  Do you want to be a trial room lawyer?  I mean what are your thoughts at that point?
Speaker 2: Well my thoughts--I was an average law student.  Maybe even less than an average law student.  But my thoughts during law school--at the conclusion of law school, is that this nation has a fundamental structural problem here.  And that race is central to that fundamental and structural problem.  Not central for the purpose of beating someone over the head and saying, "Hey, you're a racist," or "Hey, race is an issue," or "Hey, you've got to respect me as a black man."  No, race is a problem, in that most Americans fail to see American history through the prism of this experience.  You and I see it through the prism of this experience, but not all Americans see it through the prism of this experience.  Now the prism of the experience of women, for example, while it's a tumultuous prism through our nation's history, it does not explain the formation of the federal government.  It doesn't explain allowing one free state and one slave state into the union at the same time. The prism of working men and women in this country--or labor, while it is a tumultuous experience through the period of slavery and through the "great quake" and through the "aftershock" and through the draft riots [Civil War draft riots].  And through, you know, many of the great boycotts that led to a broader middle class in our nation, including the passage of--but the history of labor does not show why the states came to this union over these questions. Only the history of race shows this. Only the history of race shows liberal--how liberalism, conservatism and moderateness came into play.  Only the history--so the nation has a structural problem from its beginning.  And one way to move all Americans regardless of their color out of this dilemma is to adjust the structure of the nation, to provide every American with the fundamental economic security that they need so that we can--can't blame women and can't blame blacks and can't--for things that we don't have.  Because every American will have that minimum security.  And I think that minimum security comes in the form of the right to an education. The right to health care, and the right to housing.  This is fundamental minimum security that all Americans, regardless of their color and class, have been denied through the entire nation's history, and if they have them as a matter of constitutional right, then every American is in a better position to grapple and deal with the fundamental race problem.  Which now calls itself Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative, and moderate.  And whatever you are, a Democrat who's liberal but moderate.  A conservative who's Republican but liberal.  Whatever you--the sum total of however they mix up the pie, they never have enough money at the end of the day to provide everyone with education, health care and housing.  So we need to get to the point.  Health care, education and housing for everybody.  And that comes by amending the Constitution of the United States.  And that's why I'm one of the few people in [U.S.] Congress who you'll ever hear talk about amending the Constitution of the United States.  Because every one else at that level is part of the historical legacy and the problem.
Speaker 1: So you wanted to help.  You wanted to-- You came out of law school wanting to help, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now what was your first job out of law school?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Rainbow Coalition.
Speaker 1: That's right, okay. By this time was your--?
Speaker 2: And the Hotel Employees and the Restaurant Employees [labor unions].
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh.
Speaker 2: The hotel and restaurant employees hired me and assigned me to the Rainbow Coalition to do field organizing around the country.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn from that experience?
Speaker 2: Well that--well that a lot of--that it's very difficult to organize people politically. That political--or that organized minorities are political majorities.  In other words, it doesn't require everyone to follow you, that if you could organize a small group of people that that is a political majority.  For example, if I had to build an organization for political power, should I build it in California? Or should I build it in Montana?  One might argue that if I build it in California, I'll have more people that I'm responsive to.  But because of the way the nation is set up, if I--it's easier to build in Montana.  Because even though California has thirty or forty million people in it, and Montana may have less than a million people in it, the reality is Montana has the same number of U.S. senators as the state of California with forty million people in it.  So in terms of political power, it's easier to organize in Montana, considering resources and other things than it is to organize in a state the size of California.  So to have access to two U.S. Senators who can stop any bill they want in the Congress of the United States is a factor in that.  Now to conclude that an organized minority is a political majority is also seminarian in that it didn't require Christ to move everyone.  He just, for a short period of time, had to convince twelve people.  Who in the end lied, denied on it--sold Him out.  A whole lot of other things.  But in the final analysis He was by himself.  So the idea that an organized minority is a political majority is something that I'm--that I learned during this period.
Speaker 1: And then what was--when was the decision made that you were gonna run for--you--at that point and time when you are doing field organizing for [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], you're what age at that point?
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight, twenty-nine.
Story_ID: 18255
Speaker 1: At what point was the decision that you were going to run [for U.S. Congress]?  And how did the decision come about?
Speaker 2: This was my wife's [Sandy Jackson] idea.  She worked for [U.S.] Congressman Mickey Leland.  And was chief of staff for [U.S.] Congressman Cleo Fields.  And had Washington experience, knew Capitol Hill.  And she thought that I was--even though academically I was less than average intelligence that intellectually she thought I was above average intelligence.  She thought I was superior intelligence.  She said, "She had worked for congressmen and she knew that I could do the job." So it just happened that my congressman [U.S. Congressman Mel Reynolds] here was embattled, and had a number of issues of his own, and wasn't likely to be in Congress very long. So we talked about the idea.  And, you know, over time she was able to convince me. I tried to convince my father [Rev. Jesse Jackson] that I could run for [U.S.] Congress after my wife had convinced me.  And he said I should start in the state legislature,  that I had no political experience--I shouldn't be in Congress.  And I went to a couple of my other friends who had experience.  And they said, "I wouldn't take a name like Jesse Jackson and use it for state legislative race.  If I were gonna use a name like Jesse Jackson or Kennedy or Cuomo [well known American political families], I mean I'd use it statewide. Or I'd use it for [U.S.] Congress or something big, not that."  So my brother Jonathan then convinced me that if I ran, "Well one thing for sure, you'll be better known after the campaign even if you lost, than you are right now. So, you know, give it a shot."  Well when Mel went to jail, our congressman.  The Governor [of Illinois, Jim Edgar] declared a special election.  It was a twenty--a seventy-five day campaign.  A seventy-five day campaign to [U.S.] Congress, a special election.  And there were enough people in the race, plus we had registered in the first forty-five days of the campaign enough new voters to--actually eked out a victory, literally by the same number of voters that we registered. By five thousand votes on Election Day.
Speaker 1: Why--what--Why were you successful do you think?  Was it your name appeal? Was it--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Name was a factor.  But name alone is not enough.  Name can also work against you.  You're just running on your daddy's name.  I know a number of young candidates in my own district who have tried to run since I've won on their dad's name, but didn't have the intellectual tools, the capacity, the sensitivity.  Didn't know how to talk to people.  Didn't know how to relate to people and they were unsuccessful.  So name is a big factor.  It saves you a lot of money.  Because one thing that money does, is it buys candidates for public office, name recognition.  But people already knew our name.  And they associated that name with service, with having helped people.  It wasn't associated with anything other than that.  So they figured that, you know, this kid can't be all that bad, in terms of name recognition. But also technology, we used a significant amount of technology to target voters in our district and to reach out to voters in very scientific ways across our district. We also used good strategy.  I set up my campaign headquarters in the political strength of my strongest opponent.  So I forced him to stay home.  And if he had to stay home in a seventy-five day campaign, because I was getting my petitions and doing a lot of work in his area where he's strong, then it means that he couldn't come out here to Homewood, to Flossmoor, to Matteson and to other areas [south suburban Chicago, Illinois neighborhoods].  It's a 256 square mile district to become better known.  So I had my name already out here, because it was a big name.  He had to stay home and try and preserve his name 'cause I was fighting him in his political strength.  Then he, for the course of seventy-five days, wasn't spending time in other parts of the district becoming better known.  There's also a resistance in the City of Chicago to electing candidates who are part of the mayor's [Richard M. Daley] political apparatus.  You know, this tradition in history long having served and worked with Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity].  So people want independent representation.  They want someone who will speak about their issues, their economic interests.  Address them with fervor and without a sense of control from the established political leadership. All of these things I believe came together and people fundamentally wanted a change.  And we've tried to be that change.
Story_ID: 18256
Speaker 1: Who were the people you were running against?  You had one mate.  But who were--?  You said that--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I ran against [Illinois] State Senator Emil Jones, [Illinois] State Senator Alice Palmer, [Illinois] State Representative Monique Davis, a gentleman by the name of Lionel Pittman, who was a very bright candidate. He was a local--I think he's a plumber, a local worker.  But a bright candidate, a really, really solid guy--and a few other candidates who were in the race.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was your most formidable candidate?  You--I mean I--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The established--the established elected officials, Mr. Jones, Ms. Palmer and Ms. Monique Davis.  They had already held public office, so they got to run on their records and their reputations.
Speaker 1: And what was your strategy?  What was the strategy going in?  Besides, I know you talked about using new tech--you know, technology.  And you had to make--.
Speaker 2: One strategy was we--I looked at State Senator Alice Palmer's senatorial district, and I found out that her senatorial district--and where she lived--only a small part of it was in the 2nd Congressional district.  Which means over seventy-five days she would have to have gotten--known over most of the Congressional district, and most people did not know her.  She was better known in the 1st Congressional district.  Which is where her--most of her senatorial district is. Monique Davis has been a champion for education issues in Springfield [Illinois] for a long time. Her state representative district overlapped the northeastern end of the Congressional--northwestern end of the Congressional district.  But she would have to raise a significant amount of money to be known.  Plus most constituents in our district see her associated with essentially issues that are African American, African American only. 60 percent of our district is African American, 40 percent of our district is not African American.  State Senator Emil Jones clearly had more of his senatorial district in the Congressional district than anyone else.  Which means there were people who had voted for him five out of the last five elections, four out of the last five elections, three out of the last five elections, and so forth.  He had the most loyal constituency in the Congressional district.  So it was very, very clear early on that Senator Palmer was not a factor in this race. And Monique Davis was not a factor in this race.  And this was before I had even announced--I knew that no matter how many times I debated them, and no matter what they said about me, that I could not during the course of the debate, say anything about them that would make them bigger than they were. That my biggest opposition was Senator Emil Jones.  And I liked Emil Jones. Emil Jones will be the President of the [Illinois State] Senate if the Democrats regain control of the senate.  Here's the problem.  Emil Jones is about sixty-six years old.  And the constitution says to be elected to [U.S.] Congress you have to be age twenty-five.  And Congress has a seniority-based system.  Which means once elected to Congress, you start at the bottom of the totem pole.  The day you're elected to Congress, you become Congressman number 435.  And over time, you become Congressman number 400 and number 350, on your way up the seniority pole to leadership.  If we send someone to Congress at seventy years old, there's no way they can be in [U.S.] Congress long enough in order to be able to do anything for the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] and south suburbs.  So point number one--we need someone who can serve in Congress long enough who can deliver for all of us.  And Senator Jones is not that guy.  Number two--and I have enormous respect for Senator Jones.  He's doing a great job in Springfield [Illinois].  He's a senate- almost the president of the Senate.  He's just in the minority.  If he were in the majority, he would be the President of the [Illinois State] Senate.  So if Emil Jones stays in Springfield, not only can we gain a young guy in [U.S.] Congress who can gain seniority.  But we already got a senior guy in Springfield who can do something for us right now.  So then I said--and this was my brother's idea.  That, "Jesse, you have to run your campaign by building a team.  And you gotta tell everyone you wanna build a team." This was the [Chicago] Bulls [basketball team] winning season.  Michael Jordan's [basketball player] near last season, I believe.  And this was the season that B.J. Armstrong [basketball player] had been traded.  So Jonathan called me one day.  I said, "Listen, this is what I want you to say. We need to build a winning team.  It's time that the torch be passed from one generation to the next generation.  And the way to build a winning team is to do it this way.  Michael Jordan, who left basketball to play baseball, needs to stay in basketball.  M.J. needs to stay in basketball.  B.J. shouldn't have been traded."  Everyone in Chicago felt that B.J. Armstrong shouldn't have been traded.  So it went like this, "M.J. needs to stay in basketball. We liked him when he played baseball, but we love him now that he's back in basketball.  B.J. shouldn't have been traded.  E.J.--Emil Jones--needs to stay in Springfield.  And we need to send J.J. to Congress."  And that was it.  He never recovered from the rhyme that went all across the district.  People were walking down the street saying, "M.J., B.J., E.J., J.J. M.J., B.J., E.J., J.J.  We're gonna build a winning team.  Emil, you stay in Springfield.  Jesse Jr.  We're sending you to Congress." That way I protected his reputation, I protected mine.  And I've been continuing to work without destroying him or making him less effective in Springfield 'cause he lost to the young guy.
Story_ID: 18257
Speaker 1: How did you feel the night that you were elected?
Speaker 2: Probably like Eddie Murphy [comedian, actor] felt in the movie that he starred in, the night he was elected ['The Distinguished Gentleman'].  Not knowing what to expect or what to do, not knowing how to be a [U.S.] Congressman.  Bewildered, excited, nervous.  I remember getting on the back--in the back of a van that we had rented during our campaign and we drove from 60th [Street] and Constance [Avenue] to the Matteson [Illinois] Holiday Inn.  It was very, very hot in that van too.  But it was a cold night.  And I remember pulling up to the--to the center and Reverend [Jesse Jackson] was saying that, "You know, son whenever you do your best, you know, you can't complain.  You just do your best."  Well I heard that we had won.  I mean I finally hear that we had won once we got out of the van.  And people were all excited.  And the music was playing.  And the mayor [Richard M. Daley] of the City of Chicago had to drive all the way out of Chicago, out to Matteson, Illinois to come to my event.  I mean it was a really, really big deal.  And I got this picture of my father sitting over in the corner like crying!  I'm like, "What's wrong with ya?"  He was having like some kind of of fit.  I mean it was like--but he was like--he mentioned later that he had been reflecting upon how far he had come, and how long, you know, from Haney Street in Greenville, South Carolina, all the way to a son in [U.S.] Congress.  Big time.  And, well.
Speaker 1: Well, you know--what was interesting--'cause I remember that night watching as a lot of other people did.  It was a very powerful image of your father and you. Since he had, you know, he had just come off trying for being a "Shadow Senator" [non-voting Senator for the District of Columbia].  And, you know--and I think also--you know, there was--that hasn't happened a lot in our community.  Or if it's happened, it's not been that visible. You know, I'm not saying, you know, there have not been--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, wives take over husbands' seats and things like that.  But it hadn't--you know, it just--and you represented sort of a freshness--you represent a freshness.  And I think that's what people appreciate about you too.  You know, that while you have your father's name.  There's a lot of perception that you are different.  And in that, that difference there's--you know, that's good.
Story_ID: 18258
Speaker 1: I know you're very, you know, fervent about education.  What I guess I would ask is--you had--you know, there's this whole thing--you had won.  You know, you had this sort of trepidation.  All of this--you know, something that was not possible, suddenly possible.  You know, you were--a short race.  You know, here you come out the victor.  What has been interesting to you about the political experience?  Because you've had to build a team, you have a office.  You know, you've actually two offices, right? Your office here, office at Washington [D.C.].  What has been, you know, of interest, you know, in this whole experience?  And I would say, what has been positive about it?  And what do you think not positive?
Speaker 2: Well I think the positive--I mean is clearly the opportunity to serve. To change the condition of people's water in Ford Heights [Illinois], to try and bring jobs and opportunities back to the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And I don't mean this in a purely political way.  What I have discovered, however, is so many people get elected to office aiming for the next public office, what they're gonna run for next.  And they spend very little time trying to get anything done for the office that they presently hold.  Now I've observed that also being in [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity].  Watching all the candidates come, and he's running for this last week, and now he's running for this, this week.  And the cycle appears to just make fodder out of people.  So I decided that if I ever got elected, what I was gonna do is I was gonna fix some things.  I want some things to change that I can physically see myself.  And I have set about doing that.  I have a number of things that have occurred around the District [of Columbia].  Building a staff was not easy.  I asked my wife [Sandy] for help on this.  She asked her former boss, Leisha Green, who was married to a state senator in Texas to come to Washington [D.C.] and set up our office.  And she was our first chief of staff.  And she set up this office and the office in Washington.  And because she had this experience for Capitol Hill.  I tried to strike what I thought would be Rainbow [Coalition] and PUSH balances.  Blacks, and whites and Christians and Jews and Muslims in an environment where everyone could work together.  But what I did not understand really was that the government sector is so different than the private sector.  In other words, if I decided to wake up tomorrow and fire everybody in here, I can fire everybody in here.  And you know what?  They have no legal recourse. In other words, everyone serves at the pleasure of the congressman.  In other words, if I determine tomorrow that the most important thing to happen in this office is for everyone to move to part of the district where I feel there needs to be some major service, everybody's gotta get up and go. So it's hard to imagine that, but when people serve at the whim of the congressman, that's a little different than the private sector.  Because the private sector has one set of rules, but the public sector, in terms of [U.S.] Congress, has a completely different set of rules.  I mean legal rules for operating.  I am not so sure that's all that good, but I can understand the flexibility and the need. Because even though we serve all of our constituents, there's still a certain, you know, political dynamic associated with this.  Some of my constituents are Hispanic.  So I have a Hispanic lady works on my staff who can communicate with them.  A large part of my population are African American men.  I have African American men on my staff who relate to them.  I have a number of white mayors in our Congressional district who run, you know, large municipalities.  Well I have people that they can relate to and feel comfortable with.  Those are decisions that I have to make.  And keep those balances and those relationships. Because after all, every election I'm constantly trying to seek re-election.  And the monotony of constantly running is actually a very painstaking task that quite frankly is taking its toll.
Story_ID: 18259
Speaker 1: What do you think Congressman Jackson will be doing in the future then?
Speaker 2: Right now he's going to be raising his daughter [Jessica Jackson].  And I want two or three more kids.  So if I can convince my wife [Sandy Jackson] to give me a couple more, I'm gonna be happy as a lark.  But that's about as far as I see.  I'm not looking for anything more than that which I do.  And if the people call me to do something else, I might consider it.  But I am going to be true to the people of the 2nd Congressional District [Chicago, Illinois].  I'm the only member of [U.S.] Congress who's never missed a vote.  And this is what I focus on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think you will continue--?  Will you be a Congressman for twenty, thirty, forty years?
Speaker 2: I don't know how long I'm going to serve in public office.  I did not term limit myself.  I did not term limit myself.  But I can't imagine twenty or thirty years of this.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think that you would pursue--would you go into business like your brothers or ever do you think?
Speaker 2: I'm not a businessman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not a--I'm not a--I mean, I need money.  I mean, I want to have a comfortable life.  I want to be able to put my child through college.  I worry about these things.  But I don't--I mean I don't live for money.  And I think too many people do.
Story_ID: 18260
Speaker 1: One of the questions I have--because often during, you know, this interview you've talked about being an average student or below average student.  And I want to ask you, what message do you have for, you know, those average students out there?
Speaker 2: Oh, that you can make it.  That not all education is academic, that he or she who best relates to people can also win.  That life is a learning experience.  That our personality and that which we seek to develop is like a sponge.  It absorbs a lot.  I don't qualify as an academic--an academically excellent student.  But I've written two books, and I'm presently working on two more.  Another one, which comes out next fall.  And there are a number of people who did better than me in school who've never written a book.  Who don't have a thought beyond the fact that they did well in a history course.  In a history course, quite frankly, that my next book challenges through these prisms. In other words, at no point and time at St. Alban's [High School, Washington D.C.] or A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina] did anyone share with me how fundamental our history was to the very development of the nation.  Well I--in order to amend the [U.S.] Constitution, I need to take that history to Americans so they can say, "Wow, I didn't know this. Now I see why you're fighting for this kind of structural change."  So the next generation of Americans, regardless of their race or color, will all be beneficiaries of our work.
Speaker 1: So what is the book called?  What was it--?
Speaker 2: It's titled 'A More Perfect Union.'  And I traced the nation's history through the three phases that I talked with you about, and I show how Democrats and Republicans through the nation's history have failed.  And that that is the paradigm of race as we know it. And the way out of it is not to become a better Democrat or to become a stronger Republican, but it's in more independent thinking and it's in amending that course that the founding fathers of our nation have put us on, so that we can insure that all Americans can truly benefit from something.
Story_ID: 18261
Speaker 1: What issues do you think the--you know, the--this generation, your generation, and future generations of African Americans, what are gonna be the critical issues?
Speaker 2: Balanced economic growth for all, health care, housing, and education.
Story_ID: 18262
Speaker 1: I don't recollect any of my youthful dreams.  Not that I didn't dream, I mean--but I have--I wanted to graduate from high school at one point in time.  I wanted to graduate from college.  I mean every dream became the fulfillment of another academic achievement, even though I was a less-than-average student.  So I got credentialed and I felt good about the credentials,  but I knew deep down inside that I was less than average student. But I did what I did, my rites of passage, and I finished.
