Story_ID: 31736
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state you full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Julius Hamilton Jackson.  J-U-L-I-U-S, H-A-M-I-L-T-O-N, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 6, 1944, Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm Professor of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Associate Dean in the Graduate School of Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 24th of October, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Linton Hall on the campus of Michigan State University.
Story_ID: 31737
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five really light-weight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I'd say barbecue.  I almost barbecued anything.  I grew up in Kansas City [Missouri], and Kansas City barbecue is absolutely the world's best.
Speaker 1: All right, so, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, probably, it has become red, since I have a 2010 F Ford--Ford F-150 truck that's red, and I love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Time of the year?  Spring has traditionally been my favorite and fall is a close second, but having moved to Michigan, summers are awfully nice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation destination?  I don't tend to take vacations, and, and--but in a sense of where I thought about that, New Orleans [Louisiana], before the flood, and I've been there since the flood, and it's still a favorite place; San Francisco [California] has been one of my favorite areas, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying?  Probably, the one I like most and use most is from [William] Shakespeare [English poet and playwright], Shakespeare, and it would be "Who steals my purse steals trash; tis something tis nothing; t'was mine, tis his and has been slave to thousands, yet he that filches from me my good name, robs me of that which not enriches him and makes me poor indeed."  And this is from Iago [character in Shakespeare's 'Othello'], who is not a good character, but often not good characters have remarkably refined statements of truth and beauty, that they don't live by.  But this embodies to me a sense of how one ought to think about living and I aspire to achieve that.  I haven't quite yet gotten to the point where I can consider my purse trash, and someone trying to steal from me my purse is gonna encounter a little bit of resistance.
Speaker 1: Probably from Iago, too.
Speaker 2: Yes. (laughing)
Story_ID: 31738
Speaker 1: All right.  So, I'm going to ask you about your history.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but stay with your mother's side; we'll keep them separate until we bring them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Julia Esther Jones, Julia E. Jones, J-U-L-I-A, Esther, E-S-T-H-E-R, Jones, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was--so I get it right.  July 5, 1913, and she was born in Coletown, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, how do you spell Coletown?
Speaker 2: It's spelled C-O-A-L, I'm sorry, C-O-L-E-T-O-W-N.  It's really an area near Lexington [Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, on her side, it's a very interesting history.  My mother grew up in St. Joseph, Missouri, and her family moved from a farm in Kentucky around 1913, within about six months after she was born.  Her father, my grandfather's name was Ulysses Simpson Bentley Jones, I'm sorry, Ulysses Simpson Jones, U.S. Jones, and he was a farmer.  And he raised--he raised mules, and a cash crop was tobacco.  And at one point, several years before--for several years, he was bringing in bumper crops of tobacco and vegetables and such, and making quite a bit of money, and he was told that he was making too much money for a nigger, and don't plant tobacco again and make that much money.  He, of course, went on and continued.  So he was threatened by the [Ku Klux] Klan and actually they came to attack his house in the middle of the night.  He got word of it, and he and the oldest son and his--he had two older sons, one from a prior marriage.  Any rate, several of them--several of the men went down to the road and waited on the Klansmen to come; they came up the road in the buckboard and the Klansmen ended up leaving, screaming and that--the family as a consequence of that, had to leave, had to leave in a hurry, so they gave up the farm and moved northward to St. Joe, Missouri.
Story_ID: 31739
Speaker 1: So, that--on that side [Jackson's maternal family], my grandfather had--in researching the genealogical records, I found his father, and his father was named Green Jones, who lived until 1933; he was born in 1833.  My grandfather was born around 1865, and my grandmother on my mother's side was born about 1871, I think.
Speaker 2: So, your [maternal] grandfather and your great-grandfather were both born during the slavery era.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  But I think that Green Jones may have been living free in Kentucky.  I've heard that, but I'm not sure about it.  My grandfather--my grandmother's family was--was enslaved, and we had pictures for a long time of the--of the family sitting on the step of the slave cabin after the emancipation, after the federal troupes came through and freed, freed the family.  That picture was lost in the flood.  It was kept by an uncle, Bentley Jones in Elwood, Kansas, but after frequent floods, that information and that document was lost in one of the floods of the Kansas River.  But an interesting aspect about my mother's [Julia Esther Jones] side is my grandmother, Martha Ann Jones, was a teacher, and she studied, she went to college at Berea College in Kentucky.  And this was always part of the family lore.  I decided one day to check this out and I wrote to Berea College archivist to find out was there any record of her attendance, and in fact there was.  I think there's a record of her being there in the 1890s, the early 1890s.  And not only that, one of her brothers taught there at Berea College in a period of the 1890s, and I found from talking to an uncle that the family lost track of him at one point in time, after he had stopped teaching there, so they didn't really know where he went or what happened after that.  But I have a family--I have a photo of my grandfather and grandmother sitting around the radio in the 1940s when the radio was the centerpiece of attention in the living room.  You have a piano on one place and radio; that's the center of attention.
Story_ID: 31740
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us a little bit about Berea College [Berea, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Berea College in Kentucky is an interesting place, in it's-it's had a religious affiliation for its history.  From what I know about it, it never charged people tuition.  Instead, it worked on the principle of students working their way through college.  So, at that time, in the Reconstruction Period, many of the places were--that opened up, were forced--at post-Reconstruction, were forced to close their doors to blacks and freed slaves--to freedman, they were forced to close their doors, when in fact, they had a policy that was open. And so Berea was open to blacks and educating them, and then they were forced by the State's rights, local laws, to exclude blacks from--from admission to the university.  And that lasted probably for the next fifty or so years, certainly until Brown versus the Board of Education [1954].  I think I'm getting that correctly.  But it's--it has an interesting history, and I had never been there until a few years ago when I drove--was driving through Kentucky I decided just to take a tour through campus, and it was, you know, a moving experience.
Speaker 1: There something in the back of my mind about Berea, and I can't bring it up.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It's an interesting--interesting philosophy that it had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it still has that same philosophy; you work your way through and you ought to be able to work your way through so you can make it happen.
Story_ID: 31741
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did your [maternal] grandmother, did she continue to teach in Missouri?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, she did not.  But education became a critically important factor for the family, and my mother [Julia Esther Jones] went to college at Lincoln University in Missouri.  She was there in the early 1930s, and in those days to teach, you needed two years of training, and then you would do practice teaching, but you had to practice in a country school before they let you into a city school.  And she moved from St. Joseph [Missouri] to Kansas City [Missouri], which is--where she and my father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] were married, but she never taught school, because she wasn't willing to go into this country school mode to--to get the practice that was necessary at that time to enter the public school system to teach.  My aunt, my mother's sister, got her bachelor's and master's degree, and I think there were from Wilberforce University in Ohio.
Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Aunt--was Florence Lees, Hearn is her married name, Jones, was of course, her maiden name.  And Aunt Florence was, as I say, had a master's degree but she worked in the--with the Board of Education in St. Joseph, and she was the secretary, as best I can remember; held a secretary with a master's degree.  But, you know, that was a time that we used to go up there in the summers, during our childhood, and this was before the opening of public accommodations, so we experienced, my brother and I, experienced a great deal of the effects of segregation in St. Joe, as well as Kansas City.  But that--I am sure that the segregated conditions contributed to her lack of opportunity to go beyond where she was.
Story_ID: 31742
Speaker 1: I imagined there were publicly funded--state funded public schools for black students in St. Joseph [Missouri] and Kansas City [Missouri] were completed segregated?
Speaker 2: Completely segregated at that time.  So, in Kansas City, you had the black public schools and you had the white public schools, and you didn't mix them.   And even though you may have lived closer to a white school, you couldn't go to it.  It was kind of like Chicago [Illinois], there are lines--street lines you didn't cross, so in Kansas City you didn't live south of 27th Street, and you didn't live north of something and east or west.  So there was an area, it was the black area, and the black high school was Lincoln High School.  By the time I went to Junior High, in fact Brown v. Board of Education [1954] occurred, that decision occurred when I was in grade school and in the sixth grade, getting ready to go into the seventh.  So 1955 Kansas City implemented the desegregation of the schools completely.  So I started off in Central Junior High School and then Central High School as--in the first years of desegregation.  And that was in itself was really quite an interesting experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31743
Speaker 1: So, now, did your mother [Julia Esther Jones]--went to Berea [College, Kentucky]--
Speaker 2: Right.  No, no, not my mother, my grandmother did Berea, my mother was Lincoln University [Missouri].
Speaker 1: --Okay, Lincoln.  But she didn't teach?
Speaker 2: No.  Later in life, she assisted in teaching in the public schools.  She enjoyed that quite a bit, but she never was certified to teach as a teacher and having her own classroom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, the story I told you about the family leaving [Kentucky] to go to St. Joe [St. Joseph, Missouri], is one of the legacies of the family, and every one of the relatives recounts that story in one way or another.  So, I'm pretty sure there's a fair validity to that; interesting times.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were quite a few of those stories where people had to get up and leave--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --quick.  And some that are, you know, some they get like--well, it's all a loss, they lose land--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: --Regroup themselves, but some, you know, get it handed to them and others hand it to somebody else.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I've often wondered, if it's something that's recoverable, and the short answer is no, but it kind of irritates you, you know, when you look back at that sort of thing.  But it is part of life and, you know, we deal with it.
Story_ID: 31744
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Father is Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.  And it's V-I-R-G-I-L, Lawrence is L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, and Jackson, Sr.
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was July 21, 1906 in Fayette, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Fayette, Missouri, now, where is that in relationship to Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: It's about thirty miles from Columbia, Missouri, so it's the middle of the state along the Missouri River.  And the slaveholding in Missouri, slaveholding in most states followed rivers.  Those were the fertile areas, they'd flood, and those are the most fertile areas and most productive areas, and so the intensity of concentration of slaves tended to be along those river roots.  It's--those also were the routes of commerce, and Fayette was in an area that had quite a--quite a lot of enslavement going on.  Missouri was an interesting place too, because you usually think of slavery as the large plantations and some landed gentry that's lording over this, but if you look at the record of Missouri--of slavery, you'll find it to be much more distributed and whether it was that way in all the states, I don't know--all the slave states, I don't know, but you saw more of a farmer here with a slave or two, and it was--slaves are treated like livestock, so they'd have a mule--a couple of mules, a horse and buy a slave.  And they buy a slave to do housework, or they buy a slave to do field work, and of course saved them paying people to work. So they--they treated it just like lives--treated us--treated our people, just like livestock.  And that was an eye-opening discovery about how that happened.
Story_ID: 31745
Speaker 1: Did you check archives?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I got records of this distribution of slaves in Missouri, and if you look at the number of slaves per person--per slave owner, it averaged in a low number, maybe two or three.  So it's like farmers; small farming and small places, you get a worker, so you have a slave as a worker, and they either worked in the house or they worked on the farm.  So a lot of people--when you look back in the records, you'll see a lot of people registered as farm worker, and listing the farm work as the occupation.  So that's--that was kind of interesting.  So Fayette, Missouri is still a small town, and I went there on one of my travels. I tend to drive everywhere I go, where I can.  Flying has become less pleasant than it was in the younger years.  So I drive as a means of relaxation and I drive long distances with joy.  On one of my trips, it probably was one where I was going to meet my daughter coming back from Iraq, but I stopped off in Columbia, Missouri and then travelled to Fayette to look up records in the court house, and it's just as you would imagine it in films, where it's this old court house on the square, and you go in, you ask about the records of marriages, etcetera, and people were very helpful and they take you into a dusty, dusky room, old room, and pull out these archives, and you go through these archives, and you find all kinds of interesting things.  I was able to find the marriage records of my grandfather on my father's [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] side from the court house records there, and I was looking for my father's mother, I'm sorry, my father's--my grandfather's mother.  So my father's father was born in 1874, I think.  And he was born in Missouri, and he and his sister grew up differently then came together later, but something was going on in terms of their history.  His mother--I haven't been able to find definitively in the record, but his mother, I think, was Irish.  And the--his father, I think, I found in the records, but I'm not quite sure, so it's--it's a little bit murky there, but on that side, I can go back to about 1810, in the records.  So the family came from Virginia, originally had the roots in Virginia, around 1810 and then moved to Missouri, or at least were moved to Missouri, showed up in Missouri.  So, I can go back just so far, and then it starts getting difficult, and the census records is difficult when you're getting before the 1870s.  And the [American] Civil War records were not very, very good, and the slave records are first names only, and it's really a challenge, takes a lot of  time to pursue those.  So I have much work to do, and I'm not spending much time on that, at this point, but it's one of those things I'll get to, perhaps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31746
Speaker 1: What was you grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Virgil Hampton Jackson.  I did not know him; he died at a relatively young age.  He was--he moved the family to St. Joseph [Missouri].  They ran a truck farm and a small store in Fayette, Missouri.  And my father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] lived there until he was about six years old, when his mother died, and she died pretty young.  Her name is Mary Lee Douglas, Douglas was her maiden name.  I think we're related to the Douglases from Virginia, all of them come out of Virginia, and the exact relationships I'm not completely sure of.  But she died in 1912 and the family moved to Missouri; moved from Fayette to St. Joe not long thereafter.  And my grandfather was a mechanic for the--for the public utilities and repaired street cars, that sort of thing.  He could repair anything, service airplane engines, and when they had these flights across country, I mean, this is pretty early in the flight history, that he was often requested to service a plane that would come in on a cross-country flight, hop to hop to hop in those old by-planes.  But he was quite a mechanic and--
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how he learned, you know, his mechanical skills?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no particular story, but you know a number of slaves, he wasn't--he wasn't born in slavery.
Speaker 1: He was born in 1870.
Speaker 2: He was born in 1874, so and he learned to read and write from people he grew up with.  He grew up among whites, and he learned a lot from them.  What he did beyond being the storekeeper, etcetera, I don't really know.  But he was always involved in making things, and his brother, my Uncle Clarence, his--his trade was a millwright in a packing house, and he invented, for example, when you look at the packing house industry in processing carcasses, they have these--these belts, not belts, but they hang the carcasses, and they run them around from station to station in processing the meat, and he developed that and was recognized by Armour and Company [meatpacking and food processing company founded in Chicago, Illinois in 1867] in what--1930s for developing this process.  He was--the family was considered mechanically talented.  And as a consequence, they lived rather well, because they were--they were paid well in those times of the teens [1913-1919], the twenties [1920s] and thirties [1930s].
Story_ID: 31747
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] go to college?
Speaker 2: My father went to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].  And that was again, in fact, he was a--he was a pre-med and he finished the pre-med training, and he didn't want to ask his father for money to go to medical school.  He was always kind of a self-activated, self-made person, didn't want this dependency, and he decided to stop and just sort of make his way, and never really got back to go to medical school.  And when he completed the pre-med, that was 1929, and of course, the stock market crashed.  So he was in Washington, D.C. then and he began a process of making his own way with various kinds of businesses and moved to New York, and lived in Harlem, sort of that period of time--of the tail-end of the heyday of Harlem.  But he lived in New York for a number of years before moving back to St. Joseph [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, he came back, when do you think he came back?
Speaker 2: He came back somewhere in the '30s (1930s), and he--dad was always talented, had sort of a heritable trait of talent in using his hands, and he could learn anything; he learned mechanics, mechanical work from his father and was always around engines and instruments of various kinds.  He loved--he worked as a boy in a pharmacy, and that's what sparked his desire to do medicine.  He used to compound prescriptions for the pharmacist, he could read Latin, because he studied that in high school, and then they actually used more Latin in writing prescriptions.  And he delivered these to people in St. Joe, Missouri.  So he had a lot of stories to tell about that.  But he--when he went back to St. Joe, he developed a business working on cars, and he'd wash the cars and he'd do body work for car maintenance, etcetera, and basically, he left St. Joe to go to Kansas City [Missouri], because he was making too much money operating a business in St. Joe, and his family was threatened, so he was run out of town by gangsters.  And he had many stories to tell about that.  But when they threatened his family then he knew he had to leave.  So he moved to Kansas City to start making his way there.  While he was in St. Joe and running this business, at one point, "Pretty Boy" Floyd [bank robber] came through, and he serviced his car and said he opened up the trunk and saw these machine guns and things in there and then that was kind of an interesting experience.  I think it was Pretty Boy Floyd, yeah, Pretty Boy Floyd was the one who was responsible for the Union Station massacre in Kansas City, that was in 1919 [1933].  So at any rate, I don't know what the--I don't remember the life of Pretty Boy Floyd, but I'm pretty sure it was Pretty Boy Floyd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think he was shot in Boley, Oklahoma, wasn't he, or was that the same one?
Speaker 2: That was--no, that was Bonnie [Parker] and Clyde, you know, Clyde Barrow [robbers, outlaws]?
Speaker 1: No.  Bonnie and Clyde, I know.
Speaker 2: Maybe he was. He may have been.
Speaker 1: You know, Boley is a black town (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear, inaudible).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 31748
Speaker 1: That area around Fayette, Missouri.  It's several towns there, one of which was all black.  I think it may have been Mexico, Missouri.  I have a cousin who's a mathematics professor, retired from here [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], who grew up in Mexico, Missouri.  And I didn't know he was a cousin until maybe three or four years ago--two or three years ago.  I was contacted--when my first cousin called me to tell me that someone had died and then called him, and I didn't know that he was at all related; he's related by marriage.  So we'd known each other twenty years at Michigan State, and he's a professor of mathematics and I, microbiology, and we found through a death call that we're actually related and they used to see each other as children where the family would move from Saint--go from St. Joe [St. Joseph, Missouri] to Mexico, Missouri to interact with folk, and so that was quite an interesting experience.
Speaker 2: So Mexico, was that a black town?
Speaker 1: I think so.  I couldn't swear to it, but I think so.
Speaker 2: I know there are some out in Kansas.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think every state has a couple.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oklahoma had thirty.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 31749
Speaker 1: So did your father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] stay a mechanic most of his life-(unclear)?
Speaker 2: He did for most of the life that I knew he was an upholsterer; he did body trim, I mean, I'm sorry, auto trim work and upholstery of furniture and he ran a used furniture store and upholstery shop in Kansas City.  And that was a period where--so from 1948 or so, he had a fixed location for an upholstery shop, and there were two locations that--that he had for the duration of that period of time, the '40s (1940s) and '50s (1950s), but before he had the fixed location, he would go out on a lot with a sewing machine, pedal sewing machine, and he would sew seat covers and auto tops on site.  He'd make them on site, and then put them on the cars.  And in post-World War II era, used cars were pretty--pretty hot items, because the cars were not produced during the war.  And he had a pretty good--pretty good go of it at repairing making the--he could do tops--soft tops on the old 1930s--1920s types of automobiles that had these soft tops.  He could do those; he could do anything in that regard.  But during the war--that was an interesting story about the war years.  He was too old to be wanted in the military.  And in those days, if you're black, you could get too old quickly, but he was in his thirties, and he tried to join up, and they told him, well if you--they're forming an engineers company somewhere in Kansas, if you can get there, and so he said, what the hell is this stuff, you can form a black engineer's company is what they were saying, but they wouldn't sign him up for regular service; part was the age, the other he's black.  So he ended up getting a job at Pratt and Whitney [U.S.-based aerospace manufacturer with global service operations], and he was a machinist at Pratt and Whitney, making airplane engines, and he ran, what was called a Bullard lathe, it was a multi-turret lathe, pretty complex machinery.  And he would tell us stories about making sure that the manufacturing went the way it should and as fast as it should, but making everything perfect, as part of his contribution to the war effort.  And in that capacity, he designed tools and he became a tool inspector.  And when he designed tools, they would try to modify it to improve it, and they couldn't.  So they'd make these tools for cutting on the lathes and his tools would last longer than the ones designed by their engineers.  They couldn't understand that and didn't want to give him credit for it; but, you know, those stories abound.  But he was quite good again at mechanical anything in machinery.  But in the life that most of us knew, and he did construction work; people did whatever they had to do to make it.  He was a business man at a time when you couldn't borrow money and really take it to that next step.  And so that was always a damping--it would dampen the opportunities to expand and build the kind of business that he had the capability of building.  But my siblings and I grew up in this environment where we spent a lot of time around the place of business.  And so I had an opportunity to learn a lot, and we had no choice, we had to do something to help out.  And as a kid, early teens and on, not only did we watch the store when he'd go out to give estimates, etcetera, we did some of the work, and we had a business of small engine repair and the lawnmower sharpening back when a lot of people had the bladed mowers that you pushed, the mechanical mowers, we would sharpen those.  We had machines that you put those on, and I ran those machines, and I did small engine repairs and things like that through grade school and junior high school.
Story_ID: 31750
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story that's passed down about how your parents [Julia Esther Jones and Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: A story that what?
Speaker 1: About how they met?
Speaker 2: About how they met?  Not really, because they didn't grow up that far from each other.  They were within multiple blocks of each other, but there's a six year difference in age.  So as you might imagine a small town like St. Joe [St. Joseph, Missouri], everybody knew everybody, and exactly when they met, to get together and actually form a union, I didn't hear a lot about that.  It's just everyone grew up in St. Joe, and they knew each other and then they happened to be in Kansas City [Missouri] and magic, but no, no particular story.
Speaker 1: You say he went away to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and then he went to Harlem [New York], and came back in the 1930s, that would have been, maybe when she was coming back from school?
Speaker 2: Well, she had come back and was not able to find a job and, you know, didn't really want to do this rural thing, but part of it, Depression Era, the jobs weren't there.  She worked in service; she worked in maid service for a number of years, and she was working in maid service when they met.  And when they married then she stopped working in service and that--so we learned a lot about in-service, and it's one of those things that we learned enough about it, not ever want to want to do it.  And we grew up doing things as children that most children now don't know about or know how to do or don't want to do.  But we learned pretty early what you don't want to do and that's kind of a stimulus to do what you really do want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did they get married, do you know?
Speaker 2: They got married in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay, right at the beginning of World War II.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  1941.
Story_ID: 31751
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about their personalities [Jackson's parents, Julia Esther Jones and Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.], their dispositions, their mentality, their habits, how they walked and talked and looked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, we of our current generation never want to be like our fathers.  And I would say I'm a fiercely independently developed individual who can attribute nothing to either parent. (laughing) But in reality, I see a lot of my father in what I do, and I don't know how much is genetic and how much is otherwise.  My mother had a keen sense of humor, a very rye sense of humor, and I've been accused of having a similarly rye sense of humor and to make funny of things that are not perceived as particularly funny.  So perhaps I attribute that to her. (laughing)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31752
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us, starting with the eldest and put yourself in there?
Speaker 2: I have a brother, Virgil, and a sister, Esther; my sister's younger, my brother's older.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, when you were growing up, did the household consist of just you and your brother and sister?
Speaker 2: My brother and I were king of the household until my sister came along.  She was six years younger than I, and my brother and I are separated by two years.  So we were pretty close together and I tended to be tall at that time.  And so I always looked older, and everyone thought we were twins.  I actually began school at age three.  And my brother was in kindergarten, and I began to go to kindergarten when I was three years old and he was five.  And so, I would go, you know, go half a day.  In those days you'd do a half day kindergarten, and I did a complete year, half day of kindergarten when I was three years old, and I looked to be the age of the other students.  And one of the vivid memories I have of that period was bringing home a mimeographed paper where we had to color a pumpkin, and I colored my pumpkin purple.  So that still stands out to me as a--as a remarkable bending of the rules.  I knew a pumpkin was orange, but I wanted it to be purple.  But we grew up in a--in an apartment building for the early part of our lives; an apartment building on Percell [ph.], Eleventh and Percell.  This was two blocks from Twelfth and Vine.  In the song, "Kansas City", "Going To Kansas City"--  Twelfth Street and Vine is a very famous location of night clubs, and the Orchid Room was one of those night clubs that B.B. King [blues musician] used to play when he was called B.B. "The Blues Boy" King, and Bobby Bland [blues singer] would come there; they had headliners coming there.
Speaker 1: The Orchid Room?
Speaker 2: The Orchid, O-R-C-H-I-D.  The Orchid Room was on Twelfth and Vine, southwest corner, Twelfth and Vine.  And we--my brother and I would slip off, down there whenever we had an excuse to be out--be there near the evening.  We had to be in by dark, but we'd get by there in the evening and listen to some of the music, and you'd get a chance to see some of the baseball players come through.  Twelfth Street was a happening place, it was all of the--first of all in a black neighborhood, this is of course the days of segregation, when the baseball players came to town, the black players had to stay in a hotel that was up the street.  What was it called, the Park Hotel or something like that on Tenth and Purcell, yeah eleventh--Tenth and Purcell.  It may have been called, I forget the name, I think it was the Park Hotel or Park Purcell Hotel, or whatever.  They had to stay there, while the white players could stay downtown and various other places.  Neil Buck [ph.] was the hotel of fashion.  But the players would come to Twelfth Street or 18th Street to--for the night life and for the social life.  Vic Power [Victor Pellot; the second Puerto Rican of African descent to play in Major League Baseball and the first Puerto Rican to play in the American League] was a player there, and I don't know if you remember that name, Vic Power.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Yeah.
Speaker 2: He played with the Cleveland Indians in the pro team, but we--
Speaker 1: I thought he was a white player.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Victor Pellot Power, he was from the Caribbean.  And he played with the Kansas City Blues, it was a minor league team until the athletics moved there in '55 (1955), I think.  And Vic Power would often stroll down Twelfth Street, with women on his arms, and I remember he had a bright blue blazer and broad shoulders and he had these big sunglasses, and he'd just stride down the street.  We all knew who he was, and you'd see Satchel Paige [baseball player] and you'd see a lot of the Negro League players come through there, and it was an interesting time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was going to say that Kansas City Monarchs--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Monarchs were there, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Great teams of the Negro League.
Speaker 2: Right, and I had a coach of a little league team I played with was a professional ball player; played with the Negro League.  So it was--you got to meet some people, or at least encounter people who later you find are pretty famous or became famous.  But in that area, you just--you ran into people, because you're compressed into the area where you had to interact.
Speaker 1: Now this is an area today, I think, that even houses the Negro League of Baseball Museum?
Speaker 2: On Eighteenth and Vine.  Eighteenth and Vine by the Street Hotel, right.
Story_ID: 31753
Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up, I guess, I don't want to get too far off track, I guess, the Negro Leagues were in decline--
Speaker 2: They were in decline, right.
Speaker 1: --In '44 (1944), so, when you started school about '47 (1947), '48 (1948), that's when, I think Satchel Paige [baseball player] was actually playing for the Cleveland Indians in '48 (1948).
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: It started shaking up.
Speaker 2: The decline was coming--was coming.  And it declined pretty rapidly.  I think Jackie Robinson [first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB)] played with the [Kansas City] Monarchs, as well before going into the--with the [Brooklyn] Dodgers.  But yeah, it declined very rapidly.  The Monarchs did play using the [Kansas City] Blues' [minor league baseball] stadium when the Blues were not playing.  We also got a chance to see--the Blues--the Kansas City Blues was a Yankees farm club.  So we got to see Mickey Mantle [baseball player; New York Yankees] before he made it really big and Roger Maris [baseball player] and some of the big name Yankee players.  We also got a chance to see Harry "Suitcase" Simpson [African American outfielder and first baseman in Major League Baseball who played for a number of teams].
Story_ID: 31754
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.  Harry "Suitcase" Simpson.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  I thought that that was rather nicely handled in that short mystery series that--what's his name, who did, he grew up in Detroit [Michigan], Detective, blank his name for a minute, but--
Speaker 1: You're talking about Walter Mosely?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The actor--
Speaker 1: Oh, the actor.
Speaker 2: --Who did--what is his--he's very interested in baseball and--Tom--Tom Selleck.  Tom Selleck was a big baseball fan, and in one of his movies, sitting in a small town where he's a sheriff, and there's a series of three movies, the sheriff of Maine or something like this.  His deputy, he nicknamed "Suitcase," and he had to explain to his deputy what that meant, and it was referenced to Harry "Suitcase" Simpson, so you get some rather poignant references that just kind of float out there by people who have knowledge that's broader than the experience of many--many of us, and it's kind of pleasant to detect and perceive those.
Speaker 1: Now, why did they call Harry Simpson "Suitcase"?
Speaker 2: Because he moved around so much.  He always had to keep his suitcase packed, because he was always being traded to another team.  But he was--I remember when he was a lanky guy and could run like hell, but he was always being traded, and I don't know how many different teams he played for; I never studied any of that, but the names stuck with me.  I used to listen to the games on radio all the time and got to see a few of them in the stadium.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31755
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And in that regard the shop [Jackson's father's shop] probably had one of the most impressionable impacts on us, because it gave us a view of life that most kids don't get an opportunity to have.  So we saw life, not only as--young life, not only as an opportunity to play and have fun and all that, but we saw the business side, and we saw the tough side.  And one of the things that dad [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] did he would get things at auction, and we would make regular trips to salvage, what you now call a salvage yard, we called it the junk yard.  We'd go every week to sort through the junk that people threw and buy things that could be repaired and sold.  And things like roll-away-bed.  People would throw away roll-away-beds, and it wouldn't be anything wrong with them except they're a little rusty and maybe missing a spring or link or two.  And so, he would buy that for a little or nothing and take it to the shop, and we'd buy aluminum paint and we'd paint that sucker, after repair--and making the repair, and then set it out front on the street for sale, and someone would come by and they'd buy it, and then we'd go pick up another one.  And dad would buy irons that didn't work, and he'd repair those, and anything that didn't work that was subject to being captured and essentially recycled, if you will.  So we learned about making things, where he could repair clocks and just, you name it.  It's nothing--nothing you could think of that he couldn't make use of or make whole again.  And you grew up learning how to make do with what you have and improve everything.  There's no such thing as what you cannot do; absolutely no such thing.  And that has, I think, was an extremely strong force in shaping the character of who we became.  And we got a chance to meet a lot of people, because a lot of people--the shop was located at a bus stop, and in those days, the commuting was largely by bus into the downtown area, and people would pass by there; the bus would stop, they'd look in at the display, and then they would come back later and check out things.  And so, you know, we got a sense of what you needed to do to advertise, and we got a chance to meet a variety of kinds of people we would not have met.  And one of the sights, sounds, smells, the shop was a gathering place, kind of like you see images of the general store.  It was a gathering place for dark old men.
Story_ID: 31756
Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the shop [Jackson's father's shop in Kansas City, Missouri] becoming a gathering?
Speaker 2: Right.  The gathering place for dark old men.  The--every--especially the winters, when you're kind of shut up, the winters, summers--and the summers and all the time, Dad [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] would stay there many, many hours.  He'd start off early in the morning, seven o'clock or so, and not close up until nine or ten, usually ten--ten o'clock or so.  And the only reason he would close earlier would be so that we could get home to do some homework or things like that.  But as a gathering place, the people in the neighborhood, the men would just drop in and chat, they loved to talk with Dad, and Dad would work while talking to them.  And they'd talk and he'd carry on conversations, and, of course, all of the world's problems were brought up and solved in those--in those sessions.  These were men with broad experiences, one was--had experience as a cowboy, and he used to tell stories, all kinds of stories.  So as kids, my brother [Virgil Jackson] and I especially, were able to hear, I mean, those days you were children who were seen and not heard.  And we'd sit around, we'd listen to the stories that the people would tell, and there always were stories going on, and they'd talk about current people, gangsters and so forth.  And we heard the term about, "Oh, you know, I saw Seldom Seen the other day."  Said, "Really, where'd you see him?"'  You know who Seldom Seem is--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --He was a gangster, he was a gangster.  In the movie, 'Kansas City', Harry Belefonte [also a HistoryMaker] played the role of Seldom Seen, and this--that was a beautiful movie for the jazz that it brought to the screen, especially.  But it was an [Robert] Altman film of his memories of growing up in Kansas City, and Seldom Seen was part of that gangster element in the hey-day of gangsterism, but he was still around, he lived quite a few years.  And we would encounter mafiosos--mafiosos in the running fruit stand catacorner across the street, and we saw a woman get killed.
Story_ID: 31757
Speaker 1: There were events that occurred that you observed, and we could see things that most kids would not have an exposure to, and there was contact with organized crime elements.  Many of the big name people in organized crime would come and--come to my dad's shop to get him to do work for them.  My brother [Virgil Jackson] and I did photography in high school, and we did some professional type of work where we would shoot pictures at races and provide copies to be sold.  And these generally were run by some--some of the figures who were well known in organized crime.
Speaker 2: Horse races?
Speaker 1: Well, these were car races and go-cart races that sort of thing.  There were always schemes to make money, and some of the names that you hear associated with mafiosos across the country, some of the big names, we encountered them.  In some cases we knew them.
Speaker 2: Can you name any of them, now?
Speaker 1: Well, Civella, Nick Civella, Carl Civella, the Rebondos [ph.], a number of names like that.  We knew who they were, sometimes we met them and certainly as kids you had opportunities to interact.  Some of them would--would--would recognize you, and we're always recognized as Jack's kids.  So that afforded a certain level of--you know, we always took pride in who our--who our father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] was, in some sense.  We also had regrets that he didn't make more money.  And you know, we weren't impoverished, but we had a richness that transcended how much money he could make.  And so those--those experiences of growing up in that type of era and in that type of neighborhood, were really maturing and they were developing.  We learned to play music, piano music.  We all had to play the violin as we were growing up.  That was a requirement; dad played the violin, mother [Julia Esther Jones] played the piano, and we all had to do violin first.  He was good at it; I wasn't very good at it, but we played well enough to make the all city orchestra when were in the eighth grade.  And when I was in the eighth grade, my brother's in ninth, I think, and once I made the all city orchestra, I stopped playing violin, but we played piano, as well.  And we had a German piano teacher who'd come to the shop to give us piano lessons on Sunday mornings.  We took piano lessons for about two years, and he stopped coming; I suspect because he died.  Otherwise he would have still kept coming, but he was a person who had experience in the dance halls and brothels and things, and sometimes he would just show off on the piano.  We had an old upright piano barely in tune and he would make that sucker rock.  But he--we trained classically in piano, and that was--so life in some sense revolved around the shop, and we'd made a circle of friends who--with whom we would play in that area, as well.  In the midst of all this, as I began to mention before, Dad would buy books.  He'd go to auctions, and he would buy a box of books that were being sold at a--it may have been just getting rid of them, and a dime or quarter would buy a box of books, and he'd bring them in and sort through them and keep ones he wanted and move the rest of them along.  And not many of them did--not many of them reached escape velocity, so they tended to hang around.  So you always had variety of books to read, it was like being in a book store or a library.  And reading was always part of what we did, and comic books were a major source of literature. (laughing) And we traded comic books.  You know, if you're brought up in a business, you learn to do things in a businesslike way, so we trade comic books with kids in the neighborhood; they'd give us two, we'd give them one, and we had a collection of com--we never paid ten cents in the drug store for comic books; we always got our books by trading, and so we had a huge collection of comic books.  And that was an extraordinary education to read comic books in those days, very different than now.
Story_ID: 31758
Speaker 1: Now, was church a factor when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was a factor--we were not a church-going family.  My mother [Julia Esther Jones] was much more religious than anybody else in the household.  And she was a Mahalia Jackson [gospel singer] fan, and she liked all kinds of things religious.  We had to go to Sunday School, and we had to go to Sunday School from an early age.  For my brother [Virgil Jackson] and me, going to Sunday school was a chance to look at girls and to hook up with girls.  It wasn't about the religion whatsoever.  But we--we were aware, and we were part of that religious experience.  And so we knew about the preacher on Sundays and the long services.  Rarely did we have to go to long service.  Sunday school was the big deal.  If we went to Sunday school, we were good for the week, and we didn't have to pay anymore penance.  So, church was not an emphasis.  My father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] tended to be more thoughtful than people who go to church and use that as a crutch.  My father would go once a year or so, and to a Church of Christ Scientist, but he was more of a intellectual, and he was a person who explored alternate states of reality; he's a person who was an extreme--extremely talented and intellectually focused person.  And he would do all kinds of experiments with what he could do and what he could exercise power over; he had quite a bit of personal power, and when he was there, you knew it, you knew he was present.  So the church was not something that we grew up aspiring to or not being able to live without.  We were trained in the usual ways that you gotta be good and fear God and all that.  And eventually, all of the children grew out of that.  We grew out of that having been probably enriched by the experience, but not entrapped, and I think the enrichment without entrapment was particularly good.  In rearing my own children, I've never put them through a church filter.  And occasionally I get a feedback from them that, oh I denied them some of these things that--you know, I can constitute an Amen corner in a minute and have a experience of the richness of that culture that is the  black church, and I denied them that because of my moving away from the religious part of it, not thinking that--but  there's a cultural part that the experience would not be bad for them to have. And so they gained their experiences in various kinds of ways, but they didn't get it by being drug off to church on a regular basis.  However, when I go around relatives, you sit around the table, and everyone has to recite a--some sort of verse before you eat.  Well that didn't happen in my house, but in my aunt's house and things like, "Okay, now, your turn," so you had to think of something, and you learned some of these versus to recite so that you could get a chance to eat.  I never put my kids through that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31759
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the church that you all attended, or did you go to different ones?
Speaker 2: No.  A couple of them, St. Stevens Baptist Church was a pretty big one at that time and then the Second Baptist Church, which is where I probably had spent most of the time.  And through high school, I would go to Sunday School there.  And I'd come--I came back after entering college in order to engage in conversations, particularly, as I began to learn about some of the philosophies that were leading to the concepts of western civilization and those things that challenge the faith.  And I wanted the ministers, and the ministers, they were college-educated, and one of them, at that time, was relatively young.  I looked at something and saw that he was still involved in the ministry.  But I wanted a discussion to occur where you could look at--look at these--the balance of good and evil and the discussions of such as if God is good, he is not God, if God is God, he is not good.  The counter-play between omnipotence and omniscience, and if you have omnipotent and omniscient God then why the hell is all this bad stuff happening.  And I thought it to be important to discuss it, no matter how--what your outcome is in terms of belief, but to deal with this, and I wasn't really willing to continue involvement in the church as a social organization if it didn't do more to educate the people.  And what made me break with the church, per se, was because they were more involved in the routine things like, "Oh, we got to get a new church" and see you pay hundreds of thousands of dollars for a new church, and are you feeding the people in the street who need to be fed, if you're not, what the hell are you doing?  And so I thought of the church as a social organization that could do good, and this church did some good, I suppose, but not in the way that I thought it should, and so--well you know, if I could do more than just gild the lily.
Speaker 1: The churches you were going to weren't involved in civil rights?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody was.  You couldn't--you couldn't escape that.  Everybody was involved in one aspect of civil rights or another.  But, there were so much need that wasn't being met, and poverty that wasn't being helped.  I wanted to see things done actively to work for the people, and not just a gathering of the well-to-dos once a week.
Story_ID: 31760
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school.  You said you started school at age three?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started at age three.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: W.W. Yates Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so, you started at [age] three, now did they every catch up with you?  Now, you were in the same kindergarten class, you told me?
Speaker 2: I wasn't officially in school.  This was unofficial, because you could get away with things then that you couldn't now.  And I was allowed to attend classes, all right to attend the kindergarten, knowing I wasn't officially in school.  I started officially in school two years later.
Speaker 1: So you had a pretty good head start on everybody?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And my mother [Julia Esther Jones] worked with us [Jackson and his older brother, Virgil Jackson] to help us learn.  I didn't learn long division just by being in a classroom; my mother worked with me to help me learn that. She was good at teaching all kinds of things.  But I began school officially in what, 1949, at age five.  And in the first grade, I started--well I started getting a lot of tests early on, and the--I was just being tested, and tested, and tested and eventually I was skipped, moved from the first grade to the second grade.
Story_ID: 31761
Speaker 1: All right.  So, they skipped you to the second grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--they wanted to skip me another grade, but that would have put me in the same grade as my brother [Virgil Jackson], and that, my mother [Julia Esther Jones] wouldn't allow that.  And I--looking back I'm really glad that that didn't happen.  You don't think about it, you know, as a kid you don't.  I could do the work, it wasn't a problem, but she had concerns about the socialization, and she was quite right-on about that.  And you--becomes apparent when you reach that puberty, teenage--with the other kids reaching it before you, because age-wise, they're--they're more developed, and that's a big switch, big switch.  So I caught up--I mean I hung on pretty well, but I would certainly not have wanted to be jumped another grade or even another grade, and somewhere along there it matters less what you academically are capable of, but a great part of that growing is the social maturation, and you have to have time for that, and you have to be around people who are real peers in age.  And that--so skipping one grade didn't hurt me that much.  Of course you get into high school athletics then that one-year difference is quite a difference, and so it means a lot in a short window of time, and then as you grow older, it doesn't mean anything at all.  But early on it means a huge difference in developmental difference.
Story_ID: 31762
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school at this stage?
Speaker 2: I liked everything.  I really liked everything.  When I was in the sixth grade, I recall taking what they would call aptitude exams.  And those were designed to tell you what you--where your interests lie, and what you might be good at doing.  And it was a tie between being a naturalist and being a scientist, a bench-type scientist, at that stage.  So I had pretty well developed the idea that I wanted to be a scientist early on, and I attribute that to my comic book education, where I could see examples of role models, if you will, that I didn't see in real life.  So obviously, growing up in inner city Kansas City [Missouri], I did not see scientists.  I saw a physician once in a while, and of course, you see the preacher, that's standard thing, and then lawyers like Algonquin J. Calhoun, but they were not--they're not objects to aspire to or careers to aspire towards.  But in the comic book, I could see a biophysicist, I could see an astrophysicist, I could see a biochemist, I could see a physicist, I could see all kinds of opportunities and people living out those opportunities in ways that were appealing.  And so, I'd say "Hey, you know, I learned to pronounce it, damn, I want to be it, I want to do that."  And so I gained an early interest in being a scientist.  And then my father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] was always pushing chemistry and elements of the sciences, because he had an early interest in that, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was in pre-med?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you're right, those comic books seemed to be full of scientists--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --The heros and many villains were scientists.
Speaker 2: Indeed, indeed, and, of course, in the '50s (1950s), it was rich too, because in the post-atomic bomb era, you had this explosion of interest in science and scientists and the evils that could occur and the fascination with space and space ventures, and you had all kinds of possibilities were out there, and so it stimulated the imagination and, you know, at that age, nothing is impossible, so we would not feel impaired by not having a role model who looked like us.  We didn't have anybody who looked like us in positions of importance.  But we grew up with that feeling, show me where the door is, even if you don't leave it open, or even if you don't open it partially, just show me where it is, and I just want to get through it.  If you show me where it is, I'll get through it, and if I get through it, I'm going to succeed.  And you were--you were from early childhood on, you grew with the notion and everyone reinforced it, you have to be twice as good to go half as far.  And you must, you must succeed; there just isn't any option, you know, failure is not an option, you must succeed.  And everyone was supportive of that, and everyone in the neighborhood.  They'd all encourage you, whether they're mobsters or just ordinary people on the street, public works people and some of the men who would gather in the shop where some were retired, one worked for the city and he--public works truck; just all kinds of folk.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering, in terms of the comic books, was there any particular character, there must be one or at least a couple that might stand out?
Speaker 2: Not as a recurring character, but more in the sci-fi [science fiction] books where there's this scientist who's working against odds to do something or another, and I especially was attracted towards physics and nuclear physicists, atomic physicists.  And part of it was the fascination with the words and part of it was a fascination with what do they do in the wake of the--of the nuclear age and the--in that time you had atmospheric testing of atomic bombs-- atomic weapons, atomic bombs, hydrogen bombs were being set off in the atmosphere.  And so you would--you would hear about that on a regular basis.  Nevada was always getting--having some explosion.  Before they moved it underground, it was above-ground explosions and they moved it below ground.  Well, I lived through that period, and it was just extraordinarily exciting to see the changes that were occurring, and I always wanted to understand what--what's going on, what's happening, and so that--that kindled that curiosity early on.
Story_ID: 31763
Speaker 1: Now, did you know about--how old were you when you brought that up about [Albert] Einstein [physicist]?
Speaker 2: Probably very early grade school.  One of the things you find out in comic books about the E=MC2 [Einstein's Theory of Relativity], I mean that was--it was sort of like--sort of the perception it's always there.  I don't know when was the break-point, where "Oh, here's the discovery," but it seemed to have just been there all the time.  You know, I never--I don't remember not having an interest in--in science.
Speaker 1: You said your father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] collected books, but did you get a lot of newspapers, magazines in the household?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, newspapers, and not just the current ones, but old ones.  We had Harper's Weekly, in the volumes of Harper's Weekly that he collected, we'd have things that would date back to the turn of the century, 1900s, and some the things would go back to the [American] Civil War era.  So we had a rich field to explore, field of knowledge, certainly information carried in a whole variety of books.  And we would get books and exposure to books by recognized authors, great authors, O. Henry and people like that, and we would read them.  We would read them sporadically. Edgar Allen Poe. Whether you remember or not, in those years, we were all required to memorize things, and you had to memorize poems, and Dad had favorite poems, and [Henry Wadsworth] Longfellow was one of his favorite poets.  And he was always reciting something or elements of poems that were inspiring.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Midnight Rider, Paul Revere ['Paul Revere's Ride']
Speaker 2: Exactly.  We learned, we learned those, and learned where they came from and to the point that when I was working outside of the shop [Jackson's father's shop in Kansas City, Missouri] and had jobs--job washing pots and pans, I would put a copy of Poe, 'The Raven', on the shelf where I stored pots and pans in the back room, and I'd go back there, and I'd read a couple of lines and come back and wash pots to memorize those lines, and I'd go back, and I'd memorize the entire poem by going back and forth while I'm working.  And then I'd practice on it and practice presentations just--you have those quiet areas, quiet moments and it was all precipitated by that, or triggered by the curiosity that you just grow up with.
Story_ID: 31764
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were describing like a memorization process that you were doing for fun, but this is--this is also is quite a tool to have to try to learn any subject, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to be able to look at it and memorize part of it and go back and look at it again and think that to yourself, and polish it up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we grew up in an environment where learning was supreme, and mastery was supreme, mastery of what you learned.  It doesn't mean I was always the best student, that's a different issue.  But the seeds of becoming able to do what you want to do were all sown in those early years, in those formative years, before any outside of the formal education aspect.  And they had a lot to do with the likelihood of success during the formal education.  But again, it's never a question of whether, but when.
Speaker 1: Now, did your brother [Virgil Jackson] have a similar approach?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was less cerebral in a sense than I, more worldly, but nonetheless, he's quite a well learned person, a learned person.  But he was always more street-wise than I, and a salesman by nature.  My father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] was a salesman by nature.  And I tended not to be, tended to be more of a quiet person and more introverted.  But in the end you become a professor and you're selling.  You become a salesman of one kind or another, no matter what you do, whether you like it or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as you progressed through grade school, now as you said earlier the Supreme Court decision in 1954, Brown versus the Board of Education [ruling for integration of schools] in Topeka, Kansas, the neighboring city, this causes school boards around the country to what they were supposed to do (unclear).
Speaker 2: Huge changes, huge changes.  And we went from complete separation to, "Okay, now, ya'll get along." And it was a time of--it was a frightening time in a sense, but also a time that would allow for possibilities that just weren't there before, and an example--well there were a lot--a host of changes, and you couldn't escape being part of that push.  We couldn't participate in the public accommodations, restaurants, etcetera, you couldn't go to any restaurants that you wanted to until the Baptist--National Baptist Convention came there.  And those folk sat in every place that wouldn't serve us.  And before they left town, as I recall, certainly that was a big catalyst.  There was a group of people in Kansas City [Missouri] who were trying to break down these accommodation barriers.  But that National Baptist Convention really helped push things over the line where lots of people went in and just occupied restaurants and hotels and places like that to force the changes in the public accommodation laws.  This was after Brown v. Board of Education.
Speaker 1: Is this the National Baptist Convention of 1961?
Speaker 2: No, this was 1958, probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know they met there in '61 (1961).
Speaker 2: This was earlier than '61 (1961).  If I recall correctly, I remember there was the preacher who was over that, that may have been Jackson or Johnson, I forget.
Speaker 1: Reverend Joseph Jackson, yep, from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay. And it was--it had a powerful effect, and I remember that vividly.  And things just changed.  They really did change, but they were inching along.  But when the restaurants opened up and the movies opened up, that was a huge difference, oh, man!
Speaker 1: I will have to go back to this, because people watching this, won't understand unless we say this.  The National Baptist Convention is the largest black organization in those days--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Negro organization in the world--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --And so, you were talking about maybe tens of thousands--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --Of black people from churches all over America and other countries coming to Kansas City for a convention, and they--I don't know if you realize at the time, but Reverend Jackson opposed Dr. [Martin Luther] King.
Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't know.
Speaker 1: --You should be saving souls instead of doing civil rights. (unclear)--sheer numbers, they took all the available space.
Speaker 2: Just forced--forced a lot of changes.  They had to stay with private dwellings and things like this, because they'd over filled the hotels pretty quickly, there was only Street Hotel, the Purcell [ph.] Hotel and a couple of others that I knew of, and then you had to stay with individuals.  Well, meanwhile the hotels in downtown were whites only.  Well, they began to change that stuff.  So that was a seminal period.
Story_ID: 31765
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is an incredible story, something historic that I didn't expect to hear in this interview.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That--as a kid growing up, we thought we were better than people in the South, where they had to sit in the bus--in the back of the bus.  In Kansas City we didn't sit in the back of the bus, we sat anywhere, but the public accommodations were not opened.  In St. Joe [St. Joseph, Missouri], the kids would go to the--the black kids would go to the same theater, but they had to sit in the balcony and the balcony only.  As we were coming along in Kansas City, even after Brown versus Board of [Education, 1954]--well, before that, we would have--we would go to, annually, to listen to the Kansas City Philharmonic Orchestra and in the auditorium, there was a balcony and there was a main area, and the compromise for letting all the students come in at the same time is that black students would sit in the balcony and the white students in the main area one year, the next year the white students would be in the balcony and black students would be on the main floor.  And that was the accommodation to getting everyone together in the same place at the same time.  But it was--everything was--absolutely everything was segregated.  And for movies you went to Castle Theater on Twelfth and Purcell, the Gym Theater on Eighteenth and, it wasn't Vine, it was block up from--over from Vine, whatever that was, and the Lincoln Theater, which was on Eighteenth and Purcell.  Lincoln was the plush black theater.  There were three theaters in town, that was it.  Meantime, downtown there was RKO Missouri Theater, a beautiful art deco type of theater and all kinds of things, we just couldn't go to it.  So, opening up the public accommodations, extraordinary, extraordinary impact.
Story_ID: 31766
Speaker 1: And as we went to--my mother [Julia Esther Jones] wanted us to go the previously all white junior high school, because we knew what was there in the black high school, and it was not a put down of that but rather looking to have some new adventure, and to see what lies there, facilities were so much different, and when I got to the junior high school, I got into areas, you know, everyone had to take shop of some kind or another in those days, and we had metal working, and I took--I learned to work lathes, and essentially I started down a course of learning to be a machinist, by doing work in the seventh, eighth and ninth grades in metal shop.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your--is this Central?
Speaker 1: Central Junior High School, right, and went to Central Senior High School, Central High School.  And I continued that metal working through the tenth grade, and I learned to be a pretty good machinist.
Speaker 2: How were your grades first of all and did they change, did they go up or down with integration?
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't go down at all.  I skated through most of the elementary and junior high and high school, it was easy, it was easy.
Speaker 2: I was wondering if you were bored?
Speaker 1: It was no big deal.  My sense of--I developed a very bad habit in that I had the attitude that you're not smart if you have to study, and those who make good grades by studying, yeah, you know, no big deal, anyone make good grades by studying, but the real test, you know, the pound your chest type test is can you make the good grades without putting forth much effort?  That's a bad way to do in preparation for college though, because everybody's smart in colleges, at least everyone--most people work hard, and if you don't come along learning the proper way to work, you can get in trouble in a hurry, because things have come so easily, even though it may be difficult for some, and I see a lot of modern days kids who get in that trouble where they coast through high school, and then they come into the college they're challenged in ways they did not imagine, and they have to learn how to tackle the challenges and succeed.  So, if sometimes I think about, if I could go back and so something over, what would I do differently.  And most of the times I end up thinking, I don't really want to go back and do any of that stuff again, because there's so many--whereas there are a couple of things I'd like to do and do a little bit differently, I'd have to take all these ancillary things I don't even want to think about again, and so I--I just take it as a--take it as history and move on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you said you just kind of coasting along in school in terms of your grades?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, I did well enough to get in all of the places that I applied.  I went to--I had experience in three universities in undergraduate essentially, I started off in Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri] and I went to junior college in Kansas City [Missouri] and to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] where I got all of my degrees.
Speaker 2: Now, I didn't want to get you in college yet, but in high school, so there wasn't any--what was the difference between Central and the black junior high school.
Speaker 1: I don't know because I never really went there.  My brother [Virgil Jackson] had gone to the R.T. Coles Junior High School, which was that black junior high school.  And their facilities were awful.  In what they were able to do in the shop class, for example, was just not in the same league as what you were able to do at the Central Junior High School.   They didn't have--every place had a woodshop experience, but they didn't have the equipment for metal working, and I learned brazing and welding and machine operation, lathe, milling machine, drill press, all kinds of things, forging, tools, I made tools, learned tool-making pretty well, just in those years of metal working.  I did leather work and plastics and all kinds--in the meanwhile, I was on the, what would now be called a college track.
Story_ID: 31767
Speaker 1: In mathematics, I was--I took an extra course when I was a senior in high school, I went to the junior college to night school to take a course in calculus, because it wasn't offered in high school, and I still was taking the math sequence in high school through trig [trigonometry] and solid geometry.  They were changing that then to where it became more looking at using materials from the school mathematic study group, which was a National Science Foundation [NSF] funded experiment in teaching and learning.  It came out of Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], and it was a whole series of science, ways to treat science and mathematics.  There was a physics study group as well that came up, but our school was a test site for teaching mathematics, and it taught it from--focused on understanding the principles of mathematics.  Whereas the calculus I took at--it had the principles of calculus in that senior year of math, but the calculus I took in night school was taught by an engineer, and it was more of the practical, this is a problem you have in engineering and here is how you solve it, that kind of thing, get an answer type of thing.
Speaker 2: So procedure?
Speaker 1: Yeah, procedural, you learned the algorithms, you learned how to solve problems without necessarily understanding what the hell--the fundamentals.  And one of the things I find about students who go through mathematics now, is that they may do very well and score very well and solve all the problems they get, but understanding, what does this mean, what is it doing?  That's the critical factor, if they can learn to understand it, then they can use it, and that has been so terribly important in my approach to my area, professional areas in biological sciences.  I utilize quite a bit of mathematics in that, and it's not something that traditionally has been done in the areas where I work.
Speaker 2: From what you're saying, it probably couldn't be done by someone who just had a procedural understanding in math.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the way biology is taught and the way the expectations for biology are to dampen--tone down the use of mathematics. So even now, if you get a degree in microbiology or any of the biological sciences, the minimal expectation is you have a semester of calculus and you, maybe a semester of statistics or two semesters of cal--I'm sorry a year of calculus and maybe a second year or a statistics course, and so you--you have very minimal expectations for mathematics, and in those courses, you learn to solve problems, you don't necessarily learn to understand the principles behind these areas of mathematics and computation.  And it's--it's only when you learn to a depth that you understand the basics and basis for this area that you can embrace it and actually use it, and use it effectively.  And so, in the biological sciences, often we tend to do an extraordinary number of experiments and then we get data, and we analyze them and we can apply statistical analyses, etcetera, but we--we don't utilize mathematics the way physicists do where you model what you're looking at and studying and you use the model that--you make it as accurate as you can, and you use it to study possibilities that you may not be able to explore experimentally, at least not right away.  But you can explore behavior of systems after you can construct a model of those systems that responds well to the system behavior mathematically.  In biology we're getting to those points now, we're heading in those directions, and some areas of the biological sciences, are more intensely quantitative than our other areas.  Population studies tend to be more quantitative and molecular [biology] is getting to be more quantitative.  But areas like systems biology is getting more and more emphasis on, shall I say, embracing the area, embracing mathematics, to a much greater extent than in prior decades.
Story_ID: 31768
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any particular teachers who were like mentors or showed a special interest in your talent in grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There always were, in fact, all of my teachers expressed an interest in my capability, my talent.  And I knew that, I knew that early on.  And I didn't--I always worked to keep from appearing to be the smartest guy around.  It was important not to be singled out as a brainiac, and so I always worked at being an ordinary guy, and sometimes it was not to my best advantage to do that.  But nonetheless teachers were very supportive and laudatory.  And some--before going to junior high school [Central Junior High School] and high school [Central High School], this was the case when I had an all black environment, and it was the case even when I was in the non-black environment, the mixed environment.  I had teachers who would issue challenges and do things to try to encourage you to move along.  In one case I had a seventh grade teacher who saw me getting in trouble by clowning around too much with the class clown, and saying, you know, you don't want to go down that road, because you really have too much to offer; that clown doesn't, and you need to be careful about your associations and utilize the talent that you have.  Others would--had a physics professor in high school who would give me extra books, some college-level physics books and make assignments for me to do problem sets in there beyond what we did in high school class, things like that.
Story_ID: 31769
Speaker 1: So by the time you were a senior in high school, now, did you play any sports, because you're pretty tall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did.  I had to work a lot, but we had football--didn't play basketball in high school.  Turned out I was pretty good in basketball, found that out in college, but I could have been--
Speaker 1: Were you on a team?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, I played on a high school team for a while, sort of spottily.
Speaker 1: We were poor, I mean, we were poor.  As someone would say, now, we were "poh," in periods of time.  After '57 (1957) recession, we really fell on some hard times.  It was a period of time there, seventh and eighth grade, things were pretty damned good, we lived in a--moved out of an apartment, moved in a house.  In an apartment, we had a one-room apartment, kitchenette, five people.  When my sister [Esther Jackson] was born, then the five people living in one kitchenette apartment, now that was a very trying experience.
Speaker 2: When did you all move out of the apartment?
Speaker 1: In '55 (1955), we moved the year of the desegregation, we moved into a house with a yard, and boy that was probably the quintessential, ideal, oh, you couldn't ask for more, where you had to--it was a brick house, one story house, and my brother [Virgil Jackson] and I had a bedroom, and we had a front and back yard, fenced-in back yard, had a dog, it was great.  We could walk to school, about eighteen blocks away, but we could walk to school.  It changed life a lot, changed perspective on life a lot.  And then it toughened up after that '57 (1957)--those years you had--you had strikes that would occur every three years when it was time for contract renewal, steel workers, auto workers, and when they go on strike, they had their strike fund built up, because this was something that happened regularly, but it impacted the larger community hugely, and Dad's [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] business dropped off precipitously, and I have just vivid memory of that, things were going along really well and then boom, things shut down, and you sort of struggled from that point on, but it was always a struggle of one kind or another.  We would have preferred to have had a father and parents with a steady job and steady income as many of our friends had, but that just the way it was, it was sort of a character building experience.
Speaker 2: So right after that '57 (1957) kind of a crash, now you were in high school, I guess from '57 (1957) to--
Speaker 1: '61 (1961) right.
Speaker 2: --'61 (1961).  So, during that period of time, you all were struggling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were struggling, yeah.  We were struggling.  And I worked--worked at a car wash.  You ever see the move 'Car Wash'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was reflective of what it really was like.  It was a riot, it was quite something.  Years before--I think 'Car Wash' was the '70s (1970s), depicted '70s (1970s) L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but in '50s (1950s) Kansas City, it was a--car wash was again, that was one of those maturing experiences.  You had interaction with all kinds of people, who'd been in and out of jail and--but you know, it was a time too when you had a lot of interaction with people who were in the military.  Everybody served in the military.  So veterans were just everywhere, and you can count on them in the car wash and such, and you build special relationships, so I think that those experiences were as important in developing the character of who I would become as the intellectual pursuits in the courses that I studied and the places that I went to gain the knowledge that I acquired and the degrees that I acquired.  Those persons who were--who constituted the milieu or the fabric of the people, those were critically important in helping me to develop to my maximum possibilities.  Again the communities were always encouraging.  At a barber shop that I went to on a regular basis, and I'd always go back there when I was home from school, and the barber, when I had come in the shop, after a while, the conversation led, well, how's school going, and year after year, how's school going, and he said, you still in school, that kind of thing, you ever get out of school.  I'd say I'll let you know when I do, and it was a wonderful experience, that was.
Story_ID: 31770
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you graduated from Central High School [Kansas City, Missouri] in 1961?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: You didn't go to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], directly, did you?
Speaker 2: Not directly, no, I went to Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri].  And, then I ran out of money after the first year, and I came back, went to junior college, kicked around for awhile, and ended up going to the University of Kansas.
Speaker 1: I think we may be skipping past something.  So, you're at Washington University--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And so, did you, I mean, we all know that you were a very bright kid, at that point, but did you--were your study habits, you know, good enough to get you--you should have had a scholarship, a full scholarship.
Speaker 2: Well, but I didn't--I didn't get a full scholarship, and you--remarkably, now, they even have even less available.  I had partial--I put together money from all kinds of places to get there, but it wasn't enough to sustain me, and it was a culture shock, going in there, Washington U, I don't know if you've been there, but Washington U in St. Louis, that, coming out of the ghettos of Kansas City into the--into this pristine environment of Clayton, Missouri in 1961, hell, that was--you talk about a shock, that was an extraordinary--an abrupt change, and I wasn't prepared for that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you allowed to live on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I lived on campus.  And the campus was fine, it was fine, but at that time, I couldn't go to restaurants in the area.  And, in fact, I was put out of a restaurant, and it's something that made the [St. Louis] Post-Dispatch [newspaper], where I was thrown out of a restaurant, and it was an Italian restaurant near the campus.  They would deliver pizza to the campus, but you couldn't go in there and sit down to eat.  A guy told me--he'd called the police, threatened me and ruin his business.  I went in there with a group of students who--with the intent of challenging that segregation of accommodations.
Speaker 1: Now, were you all a part of a snicker, or anything--
Speaker 2: No, no, we weren't a part of anything--
Speaker 1: --A corps?
Speaker 2: --Just college kids challenging the system.
Speaker 1: Did you have an organization with a name or anything?
Speaker 2: No, nope, no.  Just college kids challenging the system, said, "Dammit, let's go there and make them serve us."  And my buddies were mostly from Hawaii.  So we--we did--and I played football there, and there are places that we went, which were not going to serve me, and the team just threatened to turn them out.  And so, I got into motels and restaurants and things like that, travelling with the team, because the players were all behind me.
Speaker 1: You said most of your buddies were from--
Speaker 2: In that restaurant thing, were from Hawaii, Hawaii, yeah, Hawaiians, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Really.  Now, this is interesting.  So, were they like the native Hawaiians?
Speaker 2: They were mixtures, mixtures; names like Nishimora (ph.) and Kimora (ph.) and Azuma (ph.), things like that.  They were Japanese descendants.  I had a roommate who was a Chinese descendant Hawaiian, Ho (ph.) was his name.  And there were very few blacks on campus, and the the dormitories at the time, very, very few blacks, even in or out of the dormitories.  But we--it was--it was an interesting mixture of people that I encountered, and I got into football and track, that's where I learned I could really play basketball pretty well, and so I went back to Kansas City and was kicking around working and going to school part time, and playing basketball a lot, and then I got ready to go off to Kansas.  And I was recruited by several coaches from various places.
Story_ID: 31771
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the junior college [in Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: It was Kansas City Junior College.
Speaker 1: Kansas City Junior College, right.
Speaker 2: At the time we became Metropolitan Junior College.
Speaker 1: So you were at Washington [University in St Louis, Missouri] for about a year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for a year, and then I left there, Kansas City, working and going to school part time.  And what triggered getting--getting focused on going back to school full-time was a chemistry professor I had--I had the summer course at what was then, Kansas City University.  I had a summer course in organic chemistry.  And I had a conversation with him after a couple of exams. He said, "Jackson, you know, you, you have talent, but you really need to concentrate on developing your talent, and this working part time and such as that, that doesn't do it, you need to focus your attention on it."  I said, "Look, man, I got to work to make money, help support my family and such."  Those were days when my father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] was sick for one period of time; that's one of the--one of the reasons I didn't go back.  And I had, you know, the money I made, I had to put into the house to help support the family.  So he said, "You need to focus on doing what you want to do, and putting your full effort toward it, otherwise you're not being fair to yourself."  And, you know, it made sense, but I said, "Hey, you do the best you can given the circumstances you're in."  But while working, I had the fortune--I'd worked at a hospital, Menorah Medical Center, in Kansas City, and made friends with a--with a resident physician there who recognized my talent, capability, etcetera, we'd talk a lot, and he--he took an interest in me and tried to convince me to head for medical school, and his father was a physician and quite wealthy, they're Jewish.  And in our discussions, we would hang around the emergency room outside, at night, and talk and such, and he said, "Look, if you just concentrate on going to school, I'll help you, or my father will help you, and we'll give you the financial backing to support your completion."  And it was with that that I had the financial stability to go back to school full-time and from that point on, I could focus heavily on what it is I do, just get the--make the grades and be able to get into [University of] Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and move on.  And when I finished Kansas, I had a slot opened for medical school, if I wanted to go, at the University of Kansas.  I decided to go to graduate school, instead, because I was more independent.
Story_ID: 31772
Speaker 1: So, by the time you got to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], had you completed, like, the equivalent of two years of college?
Speaker 2: Two or three, probably three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a lot of course work and accumulated credits, etcetera.  But when I began that focus that took me to Kansas, I began to find--find my way better.  And while--I had some interesting experiences at the junior college where I--that's where I took a--got involved in biology, where I hadn't studied any biology before, and actually became a de facto teaching assistant in a course in anatomy and physiology.  But that was--that was an interesting time too.  And from that--from that point--from that point on, and that stimulus on, it was hard for me to make less than an A in anything that I encountered, because I developed a focus and the resolve to do what I wanted to do, and I had learned--I took my first microbiology course then, and that's where I really caught fire, got an interest in that, and when I went to Kansas, I went to study one of two things, microbiology or biophysics, radiation biophysics.  And I decided the microbiology, because I can combine chemistry and mathematics and physics in the study of life systems, and that's what I wanted to do, and so, when I went to Kansas, I had that weight--I had the clear--clarity, and I also couldn't play ball when I went there because physically, I was diagnosed with hypertension, so I had to turn down the recruitments that were made to get me to play ball in various places, but I was damn good in basketball then, and thought I was pretty good in football, too, probably wasn't, world class in track, but I was a damn good athlete.  But I turned my attention towards the academics, exclusively, because of the diagnosis of hypertension, and a physician told me, "You want to live past thirty, then here's what you do."  So, I said, "Me, I want to live past thirty."  And so I had to slow--to cut back on the intercollegiate stuff, and I couldn't play intercollegiate sports.  I could do intramural and such until I got control of my physical condition.  And so that--it aimed me, you focus pretty well on that.
Speaker 1: Did you have to change your diet?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you're supposed to.  I went on medication and such, but it only works so much, but I've been medicated since nineteen, one medication or another.  But it's been working, and so far so good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31773
Speaker 1: All right, so, the University of Kansas at Lawrence [Kansas]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Now, we have here that you achieved your AB degree in 1966, right--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --In microbiology?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your--were any special teachers of interest there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a couple of people.  Christopher Seward was my major professor in graduate school there, and David Paretsky was the department chair in microbiology.  Paretsky, P-A-R-E-T-S-K-Y.  You heard of Sara Paretsky--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the novelist?  That's his daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Dave Paretsky was departmental chairman and Chris Seward was associate professor there then.  I worked in research as an undergraduate.  And I went on into graduate school from the undergraduate experience.  I majored in Russian--majored in microbiology and minored in Russian and English.  And I was influenced strongly by Professor Anderson (ph.) who's a comparative (unclear)and taught Russian.  I really got into the Russian.  I started studying Russian at the junior college in Kansas City [Missouri].  But when I did my Ph.D. reading exam in Russian, which was not common then, usually, it was German and French.  So I knew German and Russian, and I could read French.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the height of the Cold War period--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --So you think--did you see yourself being of service to the government, or something passing, you know, knowing Russian?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--the reason I studied Russian was because I had four years of Latin, and for the romance languages, I had a--in high school, I had four years of Latin.  I had a reasonable foundation for the romance languages.  I hadn't studied--I went--when I went to college, I studied German.  I became fluent in German at one point, as a Germanic language, and then Slavic language was another adventure.  So, for me, it was another adventure and it happened to be Russian and it happened to be a language of interest in the Cold War.  I didn't think of myself in that regard, explicitly; implicitly, it probably was lingering somewhere in my--this might be of value at some point to somebody.  And the contributions the Russians had made were fairly significant, and they were becoming more and more significant.  So, I had at least the reading knowledge of French and German, which had been historically important in the sciences.  And Russian, which became a more important, but then at the point in time, it began translating a lot in English, as well, and so you didn't have to read the foreign languages as much as you did in prior years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did Dr. Anderson teach you Russian?
Speaker 2: Anderson was one of the Russian professors, and he was--just an enigmatic figure; he was the prototype of a college professor.  He was a black belt martial artist, he was in his what; he was middle aged at the time that I encountered him, and he was always easygoing; he's just a, make-no-big-deal out of anything, and so he was a scholar par excellence, and I thought, "That's pretty cool way to be."  And in the--in the Russian language, I studied Russian language and literature, and so his influence is more in the period of studying Russian literature.  So, I remember the Russian professors, Professor Kruzanofsky (ph.) was one of the Russian professors, and I had scientific Russian; it was just an interesting area, and I enjoyed--enjoyed reading--reading it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you learn about [Alexander] Pushkin--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh, yeah, absolutely.  My father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] told me about Pushkin.  So, I went into--into it knowing something about the history of--in Russia, and Pushkin (unclear), Pushkinskaya Street.  Yeah, I learned about that.
Speaker 1: And they say it's impossible to learn anything about Russian literature, unless you learn about that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --He's the--he formed the language or something, he (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He was good, hell of a poet.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Story_ID: 31774
Speaker 1: So, when you go on to get your--well, most scientist, we know, they don't take much notice in getting a master's [degree], they're going for the Ph.D. [degree].  Is that the way you approached that?
Speaker 2: Yes, you could go to the master's, or you could be accepted into--directly into the Ph.D. program.  And I was accepted directly into the Ph.D. program.  Usually what you do, is you go--in the first year you'd see, are you really ready for the Ph.D., if not, then you take a master's, and then you take the next step, but I was able to track on directly to the Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you really go from '66 (1966) to '69 (1969), you're really working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, so, can you tell us, who was your advisor, and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: The dissertation was--Christopher Seward was my Ph.D. advisor, and I studied Listeria monocytogenes [bacterial species] and the effects of iron on the physiology of the organism.  Iron was important to--establishment of infection with listeria.  Listeria is an organism that causes a disease in humans, sort of accidentally, and you'll hear outbreaks of Listeria from contaminated cheese or other dairy products.  But it can cause spontaneous abortion in cattle and also in humans.  So it is a disease that affects the very young and the very old.  And I studied carbohydrate metabolism in Listeria, and how it was influenced by the iron and the iron availability.  So that was the Ph.D. work and I--while doing that work, I worked closely with the department chair [David Paretsky], because his area was physiology, and Chris Seward's areas was more of host-parasite interactions.  So, I essentially grew up in a lab there, but studied host-parasite interactions, and I studied the organism that was used as the model for the host and parasite interaction, and my emphasis was more on the organism.  And, so, the studies that I did were more chemical and biochemical in nature.  And those days required quite a bit of organic chemistry as a basis for doing the studies and so the classical--classically-trained microbial physiologists were well grounded in organic chemistry.  So, I would go to Paretsky for counsultation and (unclear), who was also a very influential microbial physiologist, to learn what I couldn't learn from my advisor or the--or the students around me.  So I had a chemical--biochemical approach to understanding the workings of the--of the bacteria.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wasn't quite sure if I understood how iron affects Listeria?
Speaker 2: Well, the iron availability, if there's an inadequate access to iron, then that influences the ability of the organism to cause disease, and so there's a whole--a whole area built upon small molecule--in the metal involvement in infectious diseases.  What I was most interested in was how the organism, itself, would react in a host environment, and my thought was that the more one could understand about the organism and how it behaved during an infection and prior to infection, and the behavioral changes of the organism as a consequence of infection, the more I could understand that perhaps the better the ability to control an infection once it occurred then antibiotics were rapidly rising in use, and it was thought for a while that antibiotics were the solution.  You really did not need to understand how something worked, because as long as you could kill it, you're okay.  As it turns out now, with a number of organisms developing resistance to antibiotics, it is helpful to know how a disease occurs; what are the mechanisms of causing the disease.  That was always a fundamentally intriguing area.  And so I wanted to learn more about cellular physiology and genetics, and that's what led me to my post-doc [postdoctoral training] choices, where I went to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] for a post-doc, after completing the Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was your father [Virgil Lawrence Jackson, Sr.] around when you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how did he feel about it?
Speaker 2: Very, very proud, my mother [Julia Esther Jackson], especially.  She--I gave them a copy of my dissertation, and though they--she didn't understand it, she'd show it to everyone who'd come in the house, "See, this is what my son does."  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd thought I'd ask about that.
Story_ID: 31775
Speaker 1: So, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Louisiana--
Speaker 2: Indiana.
Speaker 1: --No, Indiana.  What was Purdue like?
Speaker 2: Purdue was a place that attracted and processed a number of black scientists at a time when you didn't get the opportunities many other places.  And--and they had a unique role there.  Big ten universities in general, and big eight universities, gave opportunity to blacks in higher education studies that weren't available other places.  Had an Aunt Elamae [ph.], who was--who went to the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and got her bachelor of nursing in the late '40s (1940s), after practicing nursing for a number of years, but there were very few universities you could go to.  And--so Purdue, historically, had been--had been at that point in time, turning out a number of scientists who were black, and many of whom I knew.  So you kind of got the word of where it was good to go, and [University of] Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] turned out a number of people in a stretch.  In fact, it was an interesting thing about Kansas, [David] Peretsky, the chair [of the microbiology department], always made sure there were maybe three blacks in the department; it was a very small department, three black graduate students.  And when one would leave, somebody else would come in, one would leave someone else would come in, three or four, and out of twenty or thirty students, total.  And he just made it happen; didn't take extra money for it, nothing like--he just made it happen.  Purdue, I don't know that it was exactly that way, but it did attract people.  And then Ed [Edwin] Umbarger, was an extraordinary scientist, and he was noted for one of the fundamental discoveries in biochemistry and that is that--it's called "feedback control of metabolism." It simply means that when your body makes something, or when an organism makes something, the product that it makes is at the end of a number of series of reactions controls the flow of materials to that product and so as that product concentration rises, it regulates that flow down through the system so you don't overproduce that product; that's called an end-product control, end-product inhibition, feed-back inhibition.  And I think that he really should have received a Nobel Prize for that.  But he was a member of  the National Academy of Sciences, very, very well-respected scientist, and quite liberal in his leanings, and he was--a series of extraordinary people there at the time.  Luther Williams [also a HistoryMaker] was there at that time.  And that's where I encountered him; he was a--he was initially in graduate school there and came back as a professor while I was still a post-doc, and we developed a collaboration; worked across the hall from each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were there for--were you there a full year?
Speaker 2: Three and a half--three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you partially supported by the National Science Foundation [NSF]?
Speaker 2: The NIH [National Institutes of Health] postdoctoral fellowship for two years and a year with money from Umbarger's grant as a research associate before moving to my first professional position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get married during this period of time?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1966--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And so I had waited until I got my degree [A.B. degree in microbiology, University of Kansas, Lawrence].  My degree was in what, February of '66 (1966), so it was early.  I got married in June.
Story_ID: 31776
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to back track a little bit.  Tell us how you met your wife?
Speaker 2: Okay, I've been married twice, and the--my marriage in 1966 was for twelve years, and she died in '78 (1978).  Then I was married again.  I've been married now for thirty-three years in my second marriage.  And my first wife, I met in Kansas City [Missouri], and we were in school together there at the junior college.  And then we went on through Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and through--finishing up in Kansas and then Purdue and then the first job at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and she got cancer and then died at--we had two children at that time.  And my second marriage was with a person who was a student at Meharry in pharmacology, one of the older students in pharmacology.  And we struck up a good relationship, and we eventually married and had another child--I had another child by her, so I have three children altogether.  And my second wife, my current wife, works with me in research.  So, we've been sharing laboratory for probably twenty-five or twenty-seven of the thirty-three years we've been married.  And she worked with me, initially, in post-doctoral kinds of work to learn microbial systems and molecular genetics, but her classical training is in biochemical pharmacology, and her study of pharmacokinetics, that's of great value to study my area, where she could apply that to enzyme kinetics and some of the studies that we do in regulation and genetics.  So, we've worked as a team in research for quite a long while and managed to stay together and rear a family and make a go of it.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unique in the people we've interviewed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because a lot of the people in science have a challenge, matter of fact, that they're doing research so much, they're not at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well we--we combined the best of all possible worlds, and I've used the career opportunities as a chance of advancing the family function, because often I would travel for consultation, and she would travel with me, with the kids, and so the kids come along, I'd go to Washington [District of Columbia] three times a year for doing consultation for the National Institutes of Health [NIH] or National Science Foundation [NSF], and bring the kids along, and she'd take them around to places, to see places I still haven't seen, and I would do the work, and so we would get those exposures--San Francisco [California], New Orleans [Louisiana], and the kids would get exposures that otherwise they might not have just by tagging along as a child of a pair of scientists.
Story_ID: 31777
Speaker 1: Okay.  Back to '72 (1972), now, when you came on board--
Speaker 2: Meharry?
Speaker 1: --At Meharry Medical College, you came on as the chair of microbiology.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I came on as assistant professor, yeah, no.  And as a matter of fact, I was advised not to go there.  Meharry, I don't know if you're familiar--Meharry is a black--black college; black medical college.  And at the time I went, it had trained half of the black physicians in the country.  The two--the two major training grounds for black physicians was Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and Meharry, same thing with dentists.  Meharry was establishing a Ph.D. program.  Charles W. Johnson was the dean of the graduate school that he'd just founded there, and he was interested in starting a Ph.D. program, and I went there because they were beginning a Ph.D. program, and I wanted something to be world-class and competitive at an environment like an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], where people would come there because they want to, and would find a social context that would not be off-putting, and they could move forth out of that socially comfort--social comfort zone into the rest of the world.  And so several--several "young turks" converged there at the same time.  I was one of several who decided to go there to get this thing off of the ground.  And we got it going and got it going pretty well.  I think that--Meharry is still doing good things in training Ph.D. scientists.  But we went there sort of against all odds and against all advice, for sure.  But some of us took the risk, and I was there fifteen years, and published regularly, and did all the things expected for anybody at any major university.  And when I left Meharry, I came to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  So, after fifteen years at Meharry, coming to Michigan State, I had to be competitive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You became the chair of microbiology.
Speaker 2: I became the chair of microbiology in 1981.  What happened there, they were always cash-strapped, and the place--places like that are on the brink of closing frequently because of cash-flow problems.  We had had a big turnover of administration in over a two-year period preceding my taking the chairmanship in '81 (1981).  One of the years we had to give up 20 percent of our salary to just keep the doors opened, and we were supposed to be paid that back.  I don't remember whether I ever recovered all of the salary that I gave up in that period of time, but we did extraordinary things to keep the doors opened.  So as part of a new team coming in, a lot of new chairs were appointed from people who were there to get a push towards the future, and I was one those chair, chair of microbiology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31778
Speaker 1: How did the offer from Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] come about?
Speaker 2: It came about when I was--I was at a grant review panel with a person who is now emeritus colleague at Michigan State, and were just talking about things in general; we were in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and I told him I was--I just stepped down from being chair [of microbiology at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and, frankly, was pretty pissed because we brought in a--Meharry had brought in an incompetent dean, and we got into some fights about various things and he's one of these people who thought he knew everything and didn't, and anyhow it was the wrong direction, the wrong time, and I was not a person to sit silently by and allow that crap to happen.  So we couldn't get along, so I had to leave as chair, if he's going to stay as dean.  So at that time I was saying okay, maybe it's time for me to look at other possibilities.  And so I began to look at other possibilities.  I always had offers from all over the place, all the time.  But I didn't jump and move; I took my time, and when I made it known to this fellow; his name is Larry Schneider, I made it know to him that I was really moveable.  The chair of the department here [Michigan State University] at that time, I had encountered when he came through Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], he was a faculty at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] then, but when he came through Purdue to give a talk, and I met him then, and we had interacted over the years in our professional capacity.  He heard I was available and I hadn't any sooner gotten back to Nashville, that I had a phone call, Pete McGee is his name, he said, "Hey, I hear you're in the market, or you might be moveable?"  I said, "Yeah."  So he invited me up for a seminar, and I came up, gave a talk, and it wasn't too long after that, I got the offer, an offer I couldn't refuse.  And so, we moved in '87 (1987) to come here, and I have no regrets; no regrets of going to Meharry and no regrets at leaving, and no regrets at coming to Michigan State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Michigan State has been a good fit?
Speaker 2: It's been good, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's been good.  There's always--there always are things you would improve if you ran everything, but that's wherever you are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31779
Speaker 1: All right, now, you came in [to Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] as a professor in the department?  Now, did you come in with tenure?
Speaker 2: I came in with tenure as associate professor, and I became professor here in the Department of Microbiology.  While here I was able to take a leave and go--I went to Atlanta as dean of Arts and Sciences at Clark Atlanta University.  This was after Atlanta University and Clark College had combined to become one university.
Speaker 1: Now, is that when Luther Williams [also a HistoryMaker] was there?
Speaker 2: Luther was at Atlanta University; he went in '83 (1983), I think, '84 (1984), and he left; '87 (1987), I think, is when Clark and Atlanta U collided.  And Luther had gone by then, so Tom Cole was the president of the newly combined universities, and we had--we engaged in talks.  I'd been interacting with Atlanta University for years and so I decided to come down and try--try to make it work to help this new university really become something.  I came down as a dean of Arts and Sciences.
Speaker 1: So, what year is this?
Speaker 2: '91, 1991, that's when I came there, and I left in '93 (1993).  Things didn't work out the way I'd hoped they would, but no regrets in going and no regrets in leaving.  And what Michigan State afforded me the opportunity to do was to take an unpaid leave.  And so I was still tenured, tenured faculty here, and I took the unpaid leave, tried this out, came back; and so that--that's one of the experiments that being a faculty member here has made possible to do.
Story_ID: 31780
Speaker 1: Now, here, at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], at some point, you directed the "J Lab?"
Speaker 2: "J Lab," it's just a nickname for my lab.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "J Lab" is just my lab.
Speaker 1: The Jackson lab?
Speaker 2: The Jackson lab, that's right.  And I put together a theoretical computational biology group, and it's a--I grouped together people who can work with me to accomplish a common purpose.  And so, I can create a name in a minute.  (laughing)
Speaker 1: Okay.  You focused what it says here on the study of bacterial and archaeal genomes as information systems that determine the physiological states of an organism?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  What I do here, my work from Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana; postdoctoral work] set me on a path to study genes, silent genes, and in my early studies of silent genes, I'd found that there are genes on a chromosome of bacteria that are there, but they don't express; you don't know they're there unless you know they're there.  And I--the curiosity is well, what's behind that, you know, how do you explain their existence and persistence?  And that started me down a path of trying to understand where are all the genes that are involved in a physiological function, and how is it that they end up being located where they are, and what are the factors determining whether they're functional or not functional?  And that has--that has been a sort of organizing framework for all the studies that I've done.  And eventually, I began looking at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] at the organization of genes on the chromosome, and that's where I began to apply mathematics intensively in looking at arrangements, organization patterns, and in looking--in working at Clark Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia], I was able in the two years I was there to establish a working group with physicists and computer scientists as well as the molecular genetics people in my lab where weekly we would meet to focus our attention on biological and genetic questions and problems and look at how computer science and mathematics could be used to understand these problems better.  And over a two-year period, I studied, literally, mathematics of various kinds that I had not prior exposure to and learned to apply these to understanding the information that's available in the chromosomal material and in the genes and to develop concepts of how the--how the information changes over time, so information dynamics, if you will.  So what I study to this day is the evolution of genes and chromosomes, and I model--how I use mathematics to model how the information evolves and how to study, how to probe the chromosome and information in the chromosomes to understand how that information evolves.  And so, that's what I do now and I reached the point where I stopped doing laboratory experiments, and all of my work now is computational theoretical, so I do things on paper and computers; I no longer go to the laboratory, but I work on models that can be experimentally tested.  And I collaborate with people from time to time to accomplish that experimental testing.
Story_ID: 31781
Speaker 1: We interviewed a mathematician early in the week who was involved in biological math, and we were asking a question about whether, you know, biology and chemistry were evolving to a more theoretical, you know, put the theoretical models, like a physicist uses to look at, and she said she thought it wasn't, and here we are.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It has to, and it's been slow in doing that, and for sometime, I--people see me coming down the hall and they'd run because I'd capture them to tell them about something that I was thinking about, and usually they say they didn't understand, I don't know how the hell they couldn't understand, because I can explain pretty clearly.  But it's--it's kind of--when you put up mathematics, people treat it like, like some negative force, because it's too difficult to understand, and we run away and shy away.  We've got to get past that, especially our kids, the under-represented minority kids have to get beyond that point, and black kids especially, and unleash their talent and capability, and they need to run after the mathematics and embrace and it use it and not be afraid of it.  And one of the things that Clark Atlanta did being around theoretical physicists, etcetera, they demystified a lot of the challenges of mathematics and physics; they made things real, and Ron [Ronald] Mickens [also a HistoryMaker], I don't know if you've interviewed him at all, Mickens is a collaborator, as well.  Beautiful time interacting with Mickens and Roy George, Odu Adeyemi (ph.) who since is deceased, I got the equivalent training in interacting with those guys of a master's in mathematics just by the weekly interactions that we had.  I worked very closely with Adeyemi, he was a mathematician, and he had worked with [David] Blackwell [Professor Emeritus of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley, and one of the eponyms of the Rao-Blackwell theorem. He was the first African American inducted into the National Academy of Sciences, and the first black tenured faculty member at UC Berkeley] in statistics at--Blackwell was at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] or [University of California, Berkeley], one of the two, I forget [University of California, Berkeley].
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the famous Blackwell mathematician?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Adeyemi was a student of Blackwell.  And when we began talking about the biological sense, what I--see what I do is I would go off to try to learn some math to apply to understanding what I was studying, not knowing what I needed.  And what Adeyemi did was say, "Let me take you in tow and introduce you to mathematics that may be helpful to you."  And for--really for two years, I kind of followed him around, I'd go to his classes and participate in those, sometimes I'd teach in them and I learned areas of mathematics I would not have had--and with Ron Mickens the same thing; areas of math that I would not have had exposure to.  Even if I had gotten--if I had gotten a doctorate in math, I would have been in a very narrow area, but I took from sample--sampling of pieces and so it helped me develop a sense of what do biologists need to know and how do you get them acquainted with so many different areas that can apply.  And one of the things I want to do now is to bring into fruition a capability to expose and train students; give them that knowledge about--give them the information about, this is what's out there, and these may be useful to you.  Here's how to recognize that, and you'll never take a course in all these areas, but you can recognize some of the--of what you need to apply to your system and find someone who's an expert in the area beyond what you can do and collaborate with that person, you talk the same language, and you can learn to get help to work with your system.  So, I'm all about talking across the disciplines.  And I've learned enough that I can--I can do that.  And the article that I wrote in the Math Bio 2010 [Mathematical Association of America] speaks to that push to broaden the exposure and the training and the opportunities for biological students, students of biology, to learn mathematics and its importance in the study of biological systems.
Speaker 1: Yes.  At the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] there was a Trachette Jackson [also a Historymaker], I talked to, mathematician by training, pure mathematician who got into becoming a math biologist--
Speaker 2: Mathematical biologist, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --So this is interesting stuff in a way that even I can understand.  Yeah, Ron Mickens.  Yeah, what's--Adeyemi's first name?
Speaker 2: Odu.  Odu is short for--what was his full name?  Just called him Odu Adeyemi.  I forget a longer version of that, but, yeah, I think he just went by "O."
Speaker 1: Odu Adeyemi, and he's a student of David Blackwell--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --Great mathematician.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 31782
Speaker 1: So, you've been here [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] since 1987?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what is--so, you're really on the--I always ask the people what's that cutting edge, but you are the cutting edge on this--at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and have been for years.  We usually will get to a point where we're so far out over the edge, that we can't be taken seriously, and that compromises the support you can get to do the work you want to do.  But you can't let that stop you.  And one of the reasons for going more into the mathematical approaches and abandoning the experimental is because you can do so much more with the information available without having to spend a hundred thousand, two hundred thousand [dollars] a year hustling that money to support a laboratory operation.  You can do it with less money.  And what I'm about doing now is what I call a grand synthesis of the component ideas, and I like to call it my opus magnum.  But I want to put together all of the pieces of the ideas that have been emerging over my career and put it into one understandable, complete work that shows the full body of what it is I'm doing.  And I want it to be--I want it to be--I want to present it with clarity so that a reader will understand the concepts, the principles and the impact and potential even without understanding the mathematics.  But I also want to have the mathematics there that grounds it in a solid footing so that it can be accepted by the most ardent critics of the concepts.  And, just very briefly, one of the concepts I have is--is that there--if you look at a circular chromosome of the bacterium that not all of the space is taken up by genes, it is a defined limit to the number of genes that can be there.  And I can detect that by an informational analysis.  And I can detect that in organism after organism after organism and so there's some principle that's a fundamental principle about the composition of the chromosomes in terms of how many genes could be there, what--how much of the space could be occupied by it.  I think it relates to the folding of the chromosome to fit into a very small space, but I want--that's one of the fundamental discoveries that I have, and I want to develop the complete expression of an equation that describes any gene and any genetic set of genes in an organism and be able to allow you to visualize all that this organism can ever be, all that it can ever change into, in essence, the entire history of the evolution of organisms, I'm putting into a cube, a 3D space. And so you take all the bacteria known and you look at the history of all the bacteria known, and looking at the shape that these organisms would occupy, the information these organisms would occupy in this three-dimensional space, and I can show you that there is a shape, they're not just all over the place, they're not just scattered throughout, but they form a shape in space, and that shape in space constitutes the limits of variability, it constitutes all that any of them can be, have ever been, or can ever be.  And anything that you study that lies outside of this is not real.  If it's gonna be functional and real, it has to lie here, so if you look at any given gene, you look at informational properties, if the properties lie outside, let's say the shape of the spaces like that, something lying out here, no, it's not real, throw it aside.  If it's real, it's gonna be very close to that and it's gonna conform to that space; defining--defining that space and how to characterize it.
Story_ID: 31783
Speaker 1: So, can you formulate a challenging question for a young scientist?
Speaker 2: A challenging question for a young scientist.  That's something I hadn't really thought about and probably should have.  Let me--let me think about that for a moment.
Speaker 1: We'll keep it on the back burner?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: What's inferred by what you said a few minutes ago is that you're writing a book?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm writing what will become, essentially, a book, complete work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And what I'm writing out, it'll be officially published through a series of review articles that I assemble as a, almost a monograph, but a pretty large one--a pretty large monograph, and that's--that's a puzzling thing, what question would I ask a young scientist.  That really is a puzzler, because it really is a question about what would I challenge a young scientist to do, or to be able to do, and my challenge would flow along the lines of the trail that I have been blazing, and that is the biggest challenge they're going to find--if they're headed in biology, they have to get the grounding in mathematics to make the progress that will be ground-breaking in biological areas.  And in one sense the challenge is not so much an intellectual one, but a challenge not to be lured into a trap of accepting pedestrian thinking and ordinary approaches, not being confined by the limitations of--and constraints of this is what you have to do to get money, and this is where you have to go to work.  So, the real challenge is to fight off the--the pressures that force you to be a particular place and to act in a particular way, and instead, find a way to become and remain an individual who is fearless.  And the real challenge is to become fearless in what you do, and it doesn't mean reckless, but it does mean question everything, and by no means, allow yourself to be confined by the status of knowledge.  There's too much--there's too much pressure to keep you from thinking independently and to make you conform to the accepted norms, damn the norms and full speed ahead.  But you best have your act together, and so preparing for that is, I think, the biggest challenge a young scientist is going to have and not just be satisfied to tread that ordinary trail and don't wander far off from it,  and so you end up at the end of career, cranking out a lot of papers, and what the hell have you done, what have you said, what have you discovered, and how do you feel about  it, do you really feel good, are you excited, and if you're not doing something that excites you everyday to get up and think about it, you're not anything, you're not doing enough.
Story_ID: 31784
Speaker 1: Now, '95 (1995) to '97 (1997), you served as Director of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences of the National Science Foundation [NSF]--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --Correct?  So, that's basically assessing programs that have potential to be funded by the NSF?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It involves that as the core responsibility.  I was brought--invited to come there at the National Science Foundation because there was an increasing awareness of the importance of what we would call microbial biology.  There had been insufficient emphasis on the study of micro-organisms.  The macro-organisms, the things that you can see, touch, feel, get most attention and funding.  But the microbes constitute the basis for life on the planet.  And I was asked to come there and help lead an effort to focus research on the microbial world, and that's what I did.  So there, we launched programs like studies of organisms and extreme environments and the study of micro-organisms, to understand what is out there, and to look at the variety of micro-organisms that are there and the roles that they play, and this is an outgrowth of microbial ecology; what roles do microbes play in the eco-system of the earth and catalyzing an effort to study more about, and find out what is there, and how do they work.  So, in that two and half years or so I was there, I did get a lot of what I went--meant to do done, in fact, I got everything on my list to do, done, plus some, in working with other agencies.  And in the process, I directed a division where the program officers would--are the ones who make decisions and recommendations about funding individual grant projects, and those program officers reported to me.  And what I did was challenge those program officers to go beyond their usual funding machinations and consider, what are you really funding now?  Is this ground-breaking research, or is this something unusual that's going on, or is this the same old thing and is comfortable--a comfortable rut to get into because it's easy, and you can go home and relax?  So pushing them to--to look at what you're doing and can we learn more, and is there somebody with real talent in a lesser known place and space who has an idea to contribute to the body of knowledge in ways that none of the standard models apply.  Why not give them a chance to get started and identify to me some of those possibilities; it may be risky, but the possibilities.  And I'll ask you, why not give them a little boost and let them get started.  So, that role as division director was not only just to supervise the ordinary machinations, but to stimulate thinking and stimulate better stewardship of the fields.  And, so, it was--it was a exciting experience that had, I think, real impact.
Story_ID: 31785
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't have the years here, but you also served as Director of the Alliance for Graduate Education and the Prof--
Speaker 2: Professoriate.
Speaker 1: Professoriate, and then it says under the program it recruits and supports doctoral students and the Committee on Institutional Cooperation [CIC] summer project [Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP)].
Speaker 2: Right.  That's part of what I do as administrator.  In my current position, I'm associate dean in the graduate school, and I operate multiple program grants in programs that are focused on training future scientists and getting them prepared to succeed.  And a lot of what I do involves inclusion in the sense of under-represented minorities, what are the opportunities, how do you get them involved and give them the preparation needed and in general, who are we training, how are we training them.  And so I'm concerned with graduate education overall and the alarms that I sound about graduate education sometimes being too much of--of a formulaic experience.  If we have the money to do this, so this is what you do, this is what you work on, can you explore something else, well, only to a certain degree.  How well prepared will you be? And one of the things that we worked up here is a concept of what we call parallel mentoring in our Center for Academic and Future Faculty Excellence.  Parallel mentoring, where scientists, traditionally, are trained to do the science, and then they are released into the field, and they become faculty.  They don't know how to teach, they don't know how to do any of that.  Well, we want to prepare them to succeed beyond just the science in the laboratory.  And so we're working to help faculty to interact with the students in a way to assess, where are they now, and where do they need to be for the careers they want to pursue.  And someone who wants to pursue a career in the professoriate, become a faculty member in the university or small college or whatever, what do you need to do that?  So while you need the training in the area of expertise, you need preparation on how do you teach, how do you prepare for a class, how do you handle conflict, and we--professional development activities, and we want to help the faculty work with graduate students and post docs [postdoctoral researchers] to put together this combination of disciplinary preparation and professional development, in common, so that parallel mentoring is a--is a real focus as part of what I do in the graduate school.
Story_ID: 31786
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't have the year for this either, but you were elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Microbiology?
Speaker 2: Right.  1996.
Speaker 1: 1996.  Now, this is, for those who are not biologists, this is important?
Speaker 2: Very important.
Speaker 1: This says that you are somebody?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is, yes, it is.  It's a recognition.  And the William A. Hinton Research Training Award [from the American Society for Microbiology (ASM)] is also one of those national recognitions.
Speaker 1: Now, that was in 2000.
Speaker 2: 2000, correct.
Speaker 1: So with this kind of recognition, you're part of the standard of what this is?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it says you made it.  You've made it, you're making it, and it sets an example for what you need to be and what you need to do.
Story_ID: 31787
Speaker 1: So, we always ask this question.  What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The first hope and concern is that [President Barack] Obama is re-elected.  I think that this has been an extraordinary period of time.  I encourage all of my students to be active and participate in politics, participate in certainly the plebiscite; vote, vote, vote.  A caution I have for the black kids is--and I make a distinction from saying African American, because I--that's another story, probably take another session to deal with that, but for the black kids growing up with the American experience, the real American experience, don't get lulled into a sense that the difficulty has passed, and this is a post-racial society; it is not.  Our children don't understand what those of my generation encountered, and they're likely not to understand unless they learn either by reading or by talking to people.  Sometimes they'll be hit by a hard negative experience.  But look at life as a work-in-process, always a work-in-process, and working with people is the most important aspect of life, and there are challenges, always going to be, they're going to have to continue to work harder just to keep up than a lot of other people, because it is not a meritocracy.  And if you look at--at the politics, the current politics, you can see it play out.  Obama should be way the hell ahead by all that's he's done, qualifications and what he has displayed.  The fact that he is not, is attributable to one thing, and I think Chris Matthews [news anchor and political commentator] nails it every damn time; it's racism.  It's going to be there, deal with it; don't wallow in it.  But it is a factor and something we don't want to accept, but it is a factor.  And it's going to be difficult for them to do it, because they don't know a life like I did, they don't know harsh discrimination, and many of them don't want to know, and they shouldn't live their lives in that--in that history.  But history, they need to learn again so they don't have to repeat it.  Knowledge of it helps them prepare for what they're going to find.  Things always come around again and again and again; and then they'll keep coming around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31788
Speaker 1: You alluded to this earlier, but we always ask this.  If you could go back and change something, you know, in some way or another, would you--what would you change, or would you change anything?
Speaker 2: In my life, the--every time I engage in the exercise, I think, if I change, make a change, then, for example, I probably wouldn't have met my current wife;  is that good, now that's not good.  Maybe not have my current son or sons; now that's not good.  So, whereas I can think about change in retrospect, yeah, there are some few things I would change, were I to be able to do a surgical incision and just change that little bit, but that is kind of like the model for chaos; the butterfly flapping it's wings in Beijing [China] changes the weather in New York City [Chaos Theory].  There's a multiplier effect, and you never can tell what's going--so, I'm sort of existentialist in that way, this is where we are, move on, and I can't change that, so in the realist--existential realism, move on, because I can't change that.  So, that's kind of where I am in that perspective--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --But boy, there are a lot of little things; man, I wish I'd done this instead of that.
Story_ID: 31789
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your whole life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  Family is a legacy, and everyone will give that.  That's a given.  But I think that I leave behind a body of work and my intent is to leave behind a substantial body of work that will be of value in the future.  The students I have trained are part of my legacy.  And I've influenced how they think and what they decide on doing.  My students go to a lot of places.  One of my former students is a dean of Arts and Sciences at North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical State] University [Greensboro, North Carolina].  I have students who were--I have three former students who were on the faculty at North Carolina A&T University; I have students on faculty at various places, Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland], Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], Creighton [University, Omaha, Nebraska], a number of plac--Youngstown State [University, Youngstown, Ohio].  So, that becomes part of a legacy, whether I want it to be or not.  And I want it to be because--and those are just grad students and post docs [postdoctoral researchers].  Undergrads have come through my lab, and almost without exception, the undergraduate students go on to graduate school.  And I know that I influence them.  I know I influence how they think and I plant seeds of ideas, and I help them see the opportunity to grow beyond where they are.  So I imagine then, my legacy is--and in planting those seeds, and those seeds are sprouting and developing in a variety of places, so each one of us in that regard is a--creates a diaspora, whether those who were the disciples, if you will, recognize it or not, nonetheless, they are part of a diaspora.  And I stand on what I learned, and they will stand upon what they learn.  And my aim is to get them all way above where I am.
Story_ID: 31790
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.  Now, you've got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, three children.  My oldest is a major in the [U.S.] Army, that's Rahsaan; my second child is a daughter, Sajida, she is--she was in the Army and fought in Iraq, and my--she's out of it now, my youngest is Ajane [ph.] A.J., who's a graduate student at Columbia University [New York, New York] in film, he's working with Jamal Joseph and studied film at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] with Kevin Willmott, who's a filmmaker, who made '[The] Confederate States of America' [2005].  If you ever get the chance to see that, you really should, and there's also one called 'Ninth Street' in Junction City, Kansas, really an excellent, par excellent filmmaker.  My oldest son, Rahsaan, got his undergraduate degree here at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  He started at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], transferred to Michigan State and got a master's degree while he was in the Army.  And he's going to be a career soldier; my daughter Saji, did her undergraduate degree at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], and her first graduate degree in--her undergraduate degree is chemistry and biochem [biochemistry] and master's in public health and epidemiology, all from Ann Arbor.  And then she went into the Army after that.  And after the Army, she came out and got her MBA [master's in business administration] here at Michigan State in finance and she's working with the subsidiary of Eli Lily and Company now.  So, with a career soldier and erstwhile soldier and career that's ahead of her in areas that relate to science, in drug industry, and then a young aspiring filmmaker.  Those are--it's a pretty good record of success there in parenting.
Story_ID: 31791
Speaker 1: Sir, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's something that I treat with mirth.  Reality is I sort of think it will take care of itself.  And I don't--you know I came from the age when we were going to live forever, but we're not.  And I think, though, that the memory of me will be, you know, whatever it is, and I accept whatever it will be.  I don't have a preconceived notion of what it will be.  Probably things that are on the internet about me will live forever and ever and ever, as they do for everybody.  And I don't know whether that's good or bad.  But I think my kids will take care of how I'll be remembered.
