Story_ID: 613054
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, and we have some observers that I'll identify later. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Marvis, M-A-R-V-I-S, LaVerne, L-A-V-E-R-N-E, Kneeland, K-N-E-E-L-A-N-D, Jones, J-O-N-E-S [HistoryMaker Marvis Kneeland Jones].
Speaker 1: And that's hy- hyphenated Kneeland Jones, right? Kneeland hyphen Jones?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it's not, okay, it's just Kneeland and then Jones?
Speaker 2: Well, I married a Jones [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't spell it with a hyphen, you just put Kneeland Jones?
Speaker 2: I just put Kneeland Jones, yeah. Or LaVerne K (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, 'cause we have it hyphenated, so we have to take the hyphens out. So we--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to make sure.
Speaker 2: Does it matter?
Speaker 1: Well, yes. 'Cause we wanna get it right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Can--so can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes. I was born in Chicago, Illinois at the Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County], and I--February the 1st, 1941.
Speaker 1: Now, I've neglected to do this, but is there a story behind the name Marvis?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My Aunt Beulah [Beulah Robinson Oliver (ph.)], which is my mother's sister, named me Marvis and my mother's name was Gladys Laverne Robinson [Gladys Robinson Kneeland]. So she took Marvis and she put Laverne with it and the Robinson Kneeland. My dad's name was James Kneeland.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired now, but my occupation was a teacher in the Memphis City Schools system [Shelby County School District]. And that was my, my career was built around that. And I--I've had several jobs, but that's what I did most of my time, I did twenty-five years in the Memphis City Schools and I retired from that occupation.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were a member of the Memphis Eight [Memphis State Eight], right?
Speaker 2: I was a member of the Memphis Eight--
Speaker 1: Or are.
Speaker 2: --who integrated nine- 1959, Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth--oh I'm sorry. Can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 27th, 19--2010.
Speaker 1: Right. And where are we at the present time? You don't have to give your address, but just--
Speaker 2: You're in Memphis, Tennessee. You are in South Bluffs, one of the historical areas of Memphis near Beale Street, near GE Patterson Boulevard [sic. GE Patterson Avenue]. And I live on 528 Monteigne Boulevard, right off of GE Patterson Parkway [sic.].
Story_ID: 613055
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. The first one is (laughter), they're kind of a warm up. Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right and wh- what is it?
Speaker 2: Salads.
Speaker 1: Salad, oh okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes. I'm wearing it, it is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it that--that shade of blue, sort of turquoise?
Speaker 2: Any shade of blue.
Speaker 1: Any shade, okay.
Speaker 2: Any shade of blue.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes. My birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I have visited all of the continents and the United States, except two and that's Antarctica and Australia. So, I have--any of them, I've enjoyed my, my tours, everywhere I've gone.
Speaker 1: So world travel would, I guess, would be, sort of be your favorite (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, a favorite phrase. I'm always asking God to help me and I always say, "God help."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I say it all during the day sometime.
Story_ID: 613056
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Kneeland] side, but we're gonna start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's name is Gladys LaVerne Robinson Jones [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Gladys, G-L-A-D-Y-S, LaVerne, L-A-V-E-R-N-E.
Speaker 1: Is that with a capital V or?
Speaker 2: Yes. Robinson. I said Jones didn't I, I'm sorry, it's Kneeland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: K-N-E-E-L-A-N-D (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Gladys LaVerne Robinson Kneeland [Gladys Robinson Kneeland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So Robinson is your mother's maiden name?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: And wh- what's her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Because--what I have is October the 12th, I think, nineteen four- date of birth, I don't, I don't have that because my father was very quiet after her death. My mother died in, in a car accident and I never knew her real birthdate, but I do have it over there somewhere on her tombstone.
Speaker 1: Okay, about how old was she when she passed away?
Speaker 2: She was thirty-seven.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. And, and that was in, what year was that?
Speaker 2: When she died. Oh it was August the 8th, 1949, I won't ever forget it.
Speaker 1: All right, okay. Well, tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family. How, how far back can you trace that side for us?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side of the family? I don't know a whole lot about my mother's side of the family, but I do know that my mother had about five brothers and sisters--six brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: I, I'm sorry, did you know her parents? Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grand- my grandmother's picture is over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back first and then bring up the brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see. My mother's parents were Nina Robinson and I think it was Nina Johnson [ph.] Robinson. And my da- my grandfather, who I never knew, he died in 1941, his name's Samuel Robinson, Sr., I guess it's Sr. Samuel Robinson, Sr.
Speaker 1: What did they do for a living, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a principal of the school. And I think it was Rust--am I right Yvonne [Kneeland Jones' maternal cousin, Yvonne Robinson Jones]?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: No, she's saying--our consultants are (laughter) saying that he attended Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): He became a school principal in Tipton County [Tennessee] right, right outside of Memphis, Tennessee, in the county right outside of Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Well what's the name of the county?
Speaker 1: It may have been Tipton.
Speaker 2: Tipton?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay. So we think he was a school principal in Tipton County, T-I-P-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Outside of Memphis.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): In a county outside of Memphis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Does that sound right to you?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): It's safer to say a county outside of Memphis.
Speaker 2: I get the information from her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So let's say, okay, he's a school principal in Tipton County.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother was a housewife, right?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Right. She was a homemaker.
Speaker 2: Homemaker.
Story_ID: 613057
Speaker 1: You're [maternal] grandfather [Samuel Robinson, Sr.] attended Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): He attended Rust.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she [Jones' maternal grandmother, Nina Robinson] was in high school and I think he married her out of high school.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: He was older.
Speaker 1: Well, was he from Holly Springs [Mississippi] or did he?
Speaker 2: I have no--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, where--is there any word passed down about where your grandparents were actually from in the first place or where they?
Speaker 2: Yvonne?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Yes.
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Okay. Your grandfather, according to my mother, came from east Tennessee, out of east Tennessee and made his way into west Tennessee. And it's believed that he was reared by, primarily by whites I believe. They knew very little of his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know we can't hear you really, I--the mic [microphone], I don't think we can hear you on a mic, but yeah, the information is, I guess she has to tell us what she knows. I mean for certain things I guess we can consult you, but we can't hear you, because you don't have a mic on. But, but your saying, what to summarize what your saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You got another mic?
Speaker 2: --that I could hear was that your grandfather is from east Tennessee migrated to west Tennessee.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): It's alleged.
Speaker 2: He went to Rust College and he--but he was a principal.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): He was a principal.
Speaker 2: He was a pr- I do know that.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): It was Norris Chapel [ph.] or White's Chapel [White's Chapel Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Barret's [Barret's Chapel School, Memphis, Tennessee] wasn't it?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Barret's, no, no it was like something like Norris or White's Chapel. My brother knows it better than me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: She's on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yvonne. Actually Yvonne Robinson [Kneeland Jones' maternal cousin, Yvonne Robinson Jones], so she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So he, you know, your--your grandfather he was a school principal I guess--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Of a county school.
Speaker 1: --a county school, okay. And your mother was raised in, oh where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Your grandmother, she didn't know her grandmother--
Speaker 2: Mother.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know very little about my--heritage of my mother because I died--she died when I was eight and my father [James Kneeland] never talked about it.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. But, but actually probably was--lived around Tipton County [Tennessee] or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably around there--
Speaker 2: --and when she was going I guess she met the principal of the school?
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, on my--on my--on their marriage certificate that I have for them, they were married in Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is that Tipton County?
Speaker 2: I don't know. Yeah--
Speaker 1: James Kneeland.
Speaker 2: Well, well that gets us in there. Okay, in Jackson, Tennessee. Okay. Did, did your, I know your mother died when you were young, but did she talk about growing up at all to you or have any stories that any other family members are sharing about her growing up?
Speaker 1: My mother and her sister, Beulah Robinson Oliver [ph.], did--were very close, and Bessie, Bessie Robinson [ph.], who was--all of them were educators except I think Beulah was a homemaker wasn't she, Yvonne?
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Yes, she was a minister's wife.
Speaker 1: She was a minister's wife, that's right, a minister's wife. And--
Speaker 2: Did you say Gilda was her name?
Speaker 1: Beulah Robinson Oliver--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was her name.
Speaker 2: Beulah, Bessie and was there a third one, a third sister?
Speaker 1: Beulah, Bess--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Your mother, Gladys [Gladys Robinson Kneeland].
Speaker 1: My mother, Gladys, and then you had Samuel, Holloe Robinson [ph.], Samuel Robinson, Jr., Holloe Robinson. What was that other boy?
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Clifford.
Speaker 1: Clifford Robinson [ph.]. And one died.
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Marvin, Marvin.
Speaker 1: Marvin Robinson [ph.], and who else?
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Samuel, Clifford, Alan [ph.], Omar [Omar Robinson, Sr.], my father.
Speaker 1: Oh, how can I forget him, because he took me when I--my mother got killed--
Speaker 2: His name was Omar?
Speaker 1: Omar, O-M-A-R, Robinson. He, he was--he and her mother, Aunt Sarah [Sarah Robinson], took care of me when my mother, when my mother died.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your Uncle Omar and your Aunt Sarah took care of you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because of--that's Yvonne's parents, her parents.
Story_ID: 613058
Speaker 1: So, now did your mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She, she was an educator, so I guess she did go to school?
Speaker 2: My mother was an educator and she--
Speaker 1: Now, where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to school at, I thought it was Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], but I don't think so.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): She went to LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] with Aunt Bessie [Bessie Robinson (ph.)].
Speaker 2: LeMoyne normal school.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Aunt Bessie went to LeMoyne normal.
Speaker 2: LeMoyne normal?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Probably.
Speaker 2: Probably, teachers school. And my mother went to--at that time you couldn't become pregnant and teach school. So that's why I ended up in Chicago [Illinois]. Because she went to live with her sister, Beulah [Beulah Robinson Oliver (ph.)], who was the minister's wife, and they--that's how I ended up there, being born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was a teacher along with my Aunt--my Aunt Bessie. They taught at Benjestown [Tennessee] or Benjestown, is that where they taught? Yvonne [Kneeland Jones' maternal cousin, Yvonne Robinson Jones], Benjestown. Was it Benjestown or Barret's Chapel [Barret's Chapel School]?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Barret's Chapel.
Speaker 2: Barret's Chapel.
Speaker 1: That's here in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: That's here in Mem- that's in Millington [sic.] isn't it? And there's a--
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): That's the origins of grandma.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And also, Barret's Chapel has a name too and it's owned by Barret, oh a white, or I call it my slave owner. And my, my [maternal] grandmother was the product of a slave owner.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be Nin- Nina Robinson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Nina.
Speaker 1: Her, her father was a wh- the white slave master or the landowner?
Speaker 2: I really don't know. All I know is that she--
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Johnson [ph.], right.
Speaker 2: I'm thinking, that's what I think I used to hear, James [James E. Robinson], your brother, tell me that she was a Johnson and she be--she married a Johnson and so I don't know--I think--
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): She married--she married Samuel Robinson [Samuel Robinson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she married Sam--yeah, Samuel Robinson, and she must've been a Johnson who--her mother must've be--was a Johnson. But there were four girls and one of those four girls had my mother [sic. grandmother], Nina, and the four girls were descendants of this Barret, Paul Barret [ph.] was his name. And he was the white slave owner and he somehow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So, your, your grandmother was a granddaughter of a white slave master?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Paul Barret, okay.
Speaker 2: Paul--well, they call him, there's a street named after him in Millington [Tennessee] and then of course he was a banker and a landowner and all of that stuff. And so he--
Speaker 1: So Barret's Chapel was named (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Named after him.
Speaker 1: --for Paul Barret.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That's where I got a lot of information from my cousins, Bernice Kirk [ph.] and Samella [ph.], who were the--who live there and they still live there out in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he--this Paul Barret, did he put up the money for the chapel, is that why they named it for him?
Speaker 2: Probably so. Probably so.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause this is a black chapel, right, I mean?
Speaker 2: Barr- Barret's Chapel?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My, my--and another thing, my grandm- one of my aunts, I think it was Gladys [sic.], used to teach there. Now I've been out there, used to teach there.
Story_ID: 613059
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was James Henry Kneeland [James Kneeland].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: K-N-E-E-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: All right, and James and Henry are spelled the regular way?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-Y. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was February the 12th, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking it was around Stanton, Tennessee or Stanton and Brownsville [Tennessee], that's what he used to talk about. Have you ever heard of Stanton, S-T-A-N-T-O-N?
Speaker 1: No, not necessarily, yeah. Stanton--well, so Stanton and Brownsville are close to each other, close by each other (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes they are. And I think they kind of moved around.
Speaker 1: Are they near Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's about maybe I would say fifty miles.
Speaker 1: To the north or south of it?
Speaker 2: I think it's--
Speaker 1: Well it's about fifty miles from Memphis, we'll just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] knows that answer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what do you know about your father's side of the family, how far back?
Speaker 2: I know. We can go back to Mandi. That's my fa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now who is Mandi? Who is Mandi?
Speaker 2: Mandi is the lady who got off the ship in Charleston, South Carolina. And she told her story to my great-grandfather, Jerry Williams.
Speaker 1: Now from what I understand, and correct me if I'm wrong, just for the record, Mandi was from Africa, right?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking she was.
Speaker 1: She came over as a slave or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But anyway, it's in the paper that you got.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she came over as a slave, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah as a slave.
Speaker 1: From Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. And she used to tell, tal- tell Cousin Alversa [Alversa Williams Lee] all about how they came over.
Speaker 1: Now, wh- what--was she your, what great-great-great or great-great or?
Speaker 2: She goes back--I'm of the seventh generation so I don't know how far that is.
Speaker 1: From her, okay.
Speaker 2: Or I might of the sixth, sixth generation, whatever that paper says up there.
Speaker 1: Okay, seven generations back. Now this is in the 19th century when she came over around the 1800s.
Speaker 2: Eighteen hundreds [1800s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, abou- you know what year she came over?
Speaker 2: No I don't, but it is in that paper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It is written--it is written.
Speaker 2: --that I gave you.
Speaker 1: And I'm sure it was before the Civil War because we didn't have slavery after the Civil War, so okay. Okay, well what stories did she--what stories were passed down that she told? Do you remember any of the stories?
Speaker 2: According to Cousin Alversa Lee, she would talk about our great-grandfathers, like Jerry Williams and all--that's why we have a Williams family reunion. And she would talk about them and the brothers and their sisters, and I have documentation of that already that I will give you.
Speaker 1: Oh, are there any stories that Mandi told that are passed down about coming over from Africa and, and what it was like, what slavery was like or anything like that.
Speaker 2: It was very hard and of course she, according to I think Cousin Alversa, that she came over in shackles. And she was also was the parents of Harmon Wi- Williams, of Harmon Williams.
Speaker 1: She was the mother of Harmon Williams?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then from there it went on down to my daddy's--my dad--marry--was a Kneeland. His, his daddy was Willis Kneeland and his mother was Melissa Williams. So it was on the maternal side of the family that I'm connected with the Williams group.
Speaker 1: Okay with Mandi through the Williams (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Through the Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] side--on, on your father's side rather?
Speaker 2: I did not know Jerry Williams. I did not know Willis Kneeland. And I did not know--like I said, on my mother's side, Samuel Robinson [Jones' maternal grandfather, Samuel Robinson, Sr.] died in 1941, I was just born.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your father's parents at all, I mean even though you didn't meet them, did you know, know anything about them?
Speaker 2: My father's parents?
Speaker 1: Yes, what they did for a living or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I don't know anything about Willis Kneeland. I don't know anything about Melissa Williams Kneeland other than she was my great-great-grandmother [sic. grandmother].
Speaker 1: No, I was talking about your grandmother, I'm talking about your father's mother and father?
Speaker 2: My father's mother, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, did--okay.
Speaker 2: But, it's documented over there. I just can't remember who they were. Over there on the table I do have it.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 613060
Speaker 1: Was your father [James Kneeland] raised in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was raised in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was raised in Stanton [Tennessee] or Brownsville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Over near Coco Road [ph.], if you ever heard of that.
Speaker 1: I have heard of it, but was he raised on-in--on a farm or in town?
Speaker 2: He was raised on a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his parents [Melissa Williams Kneeland and Willis Kneeland] were probably farmers I would guess, right?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you know if they owned their own land or anything?
Speaker 2: I used to hear dad talking about the land that he--that his parents owned. But he never really talked a lot about it. He didn't talk a lot about--my father was more of a quiet type man, he just didn't talk about it.
Speaker 1: Now did he have a chance to go to school in--too or?
Speaker 2: My--yes, he did. But he was stanch supporter of education. And he always talked about how he wanted me to get an education. And he always pushed that point about he didn't want me picking any cotton, he didn't want me going to the cotton fields. And he said, "Because that's what I did," and my father wo- you know, what I know of my father he worked for what they used to call Rhodes and Jennings furniture [Rhodes Jennings Furniture Company]. He was a delivery person and he did a lot of deliveries of furniture it--in the counties.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he did furniture delivery.
Speaker 2: I mean that's what I know about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, he retired from Rhodes and Jennings Furniture Company in Memphis.
Story_ID: 613061
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Did they tell a story about that?
Speaker 2: Well, let me think. No. I really don't know, because I'm thinking that my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] was in the area of Jackson, Tennessee, and that's where she met my father [James Kneeland]. And I think that's all I know about how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they got married in Jackson, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then at some point, I guess, at least your mother moved to Chicago [Illinois] to have you. Did your father go too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, he stayed in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: He stayed in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He would come visit, but he would stay in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did they--did they stay together or did they split up or what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they stayed together and they bought a house at 1268 Dunnavant Street, Memphis, Tennessee, and that house is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He--when she--then she came back to Memphis and started back to teaching. And she was at that time a substitute teacher because she had lost her right to be a full time teacher because of the pregnancy.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the rules of the Memphis public schools [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District] were that you had to--you couldn't have children and be a teacher or couldn't be, you know, was that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not like it is now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, you had to just lay out.
Story_ID: 613062
Speaker 1: But one thing about my family, they just never talked about it, you know. It was always a hush hush kind of thing. And I think my father [James Kneeland], who was a huntsman, he liked to hunt and he would just not talk about that thing--that was the most heartbreaking thing for him to talk about my mother's [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] death. Because at the same time, my mother was taking me to Milli- Arlington, Tennessee where her, her mother was, which was Nina [Nina Robinson]. Nina was at the death bed of her sister, Darthula Johnson [ph.]. And my father had taken her to--taken both of them ra- my Aunt Bessie [Bessie Robinson (ph.)] and to--taken us up on Sunday. And so when came back home, my mother said, "I think I need to go back to Arlington and help mother out," who was staying with her sister to take care of her. And on the process, both of them died on the same day. And it was my Uncle Omar [Omar Robinson, Sr.] that got the news and had spread it to my father. And so when my mother died, as we stopped at a fruit stand and a lumber truck hit her. Hit my Aunt Bessie's car. My mother did not drive. He hit the car and we were crossing the street and tragedy happened like that and I was--I had a brain concussion and I didn't come out of it until two weeks at John Gaston Hospital [Memphis, Tennessee]. And I never saw, I never went to my mother's funeral because I was in the hospital. And my father just didn't talk about it. My mother was a member of St. Andrew A.M.E. Church in Memphis, Tennessee, and she was the choir, she was in the choir there and she did a lot of singing, had a beautiful voice. And so I just didn't know a lot about it and the person who really gave me that information was my cou- was Beulah's daughter, Bennie Oliver Carson [ph.]. And she was the one that was at the house when I came home from the hospital when I started looking for my mother. And of course she said, "Your mother has gone to heaven." Well at that time I didn't understand that. And so I would wake up every day looking for my mom and thinking that my mom was coming back. But she never came back and I just didn't understand that.
Speaker 2: How old were you then?
Speaker 1: Eight.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Eight years old.
Story_ID: 613063
Speaker 1: We were just talking off ca- camera about all the tragedies with your Grandmother Nina's [Kneeland Jones' maternal grandmother, Nina Robinson] family. You said your mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] was killed, another son was shot and another one was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Give me--explain what?
Speaker 2: Well of course I, I got a lot of this from Uncle Omar [Omar Robinson, Sr.] and Aunt Sarah [Sarah Robinson] too, that Darthula [Darthula Johnson (ph.)] died the same day my mother was killed. So, my mother didn't--my grandmother, who was Nina, did not get a chance to go to her sister's funeral, even though she was there taking care of her. And she went to my mother's funeral. My daddy [James Kneeland] went, but I didn't go.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah you explained that. I was asking about the, the other people in the family that had accidental deaths, you were talking about all the accidental deaths in the family before?
Speaker 2: Oh, like who?
Speaker 1: You said so--someone was shot and?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she's telling you about Marvin [Marvin Robinson (ph.)], Yvonne [Kneeland Jones' maternal cousin, Yvonne Robinson Jones]?
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Excuse me, now Marvin was one of those rural deaths. They were going through a fence, right, remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): (Simultaneous) When my father's cousin told--
Speaker 2: I, I was just trying to establish the fact that there was other people--were killed, had accidental deaths and I wanted you to say it because we can't hear her and I'm not supposed to know it, because you're the one that knows it. So it's your story, so you have to tell it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so Marvin was going through a fence and they had a mishap and it was a sh- shooting. And of course that caused some kind of division between Darthula's family and, 'cause I think it was one of Darthula's sons and they were cousins. And they that was--a lot of--
Speaker 2: So the person that shot him was, was his cousin?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Darthula and Nina were sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And of course Darthula's son and Nina's son were either hunting or something and one of the sons shot the other one and it was my grandmother's son. It was accidental though.
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): An accident. He went underneath the ca- what do they call it the fence, and the gun accidentally went off.
Speaker 1: Went off, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So accidental death, okay.
Speaker 2: It was an accidental death.
Story_ID: 613064
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, what you know of your mother's [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] personality and your father's [James Kneeland], and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I probably take after my mother and my mother's side of the family. Because my mother talked more than my father. But I probably take the understanding of my father, because he always stressed education, he wanted me to be like my mother. And he wanted me to be like my aunt. And he was industrious, you know. He, he did a lot of things. He, he could build, he--construction for his home and he did a lot of building onto our house. And he was just--and I'm always in this stuff. I got more projects going on and that's what he had. Now my mother was a teacher and of course she started me very early. She wanted me--I mean at that time she even started me in kindergarten and she wanted me to learn everything. And she used to read to me very early.
Story_ID: 613065
Speaker 1: I remember when I used to go down to Uncle Omar's [Omar Robinson, Sr.] house, I had all these lovely cousins of mine that I wanted to get to see 'cause I was the only one. And I wanted to be around them and my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] would take me over there. And one thing I can say about my Uncle Omar, he always came to see his mother [Nina Robinson]. And he used to bring Yvonne [Yvonne Robinson Jones] and my cousin, Juanita [Juanita Robinson Carter], up there to see hi- to see their grandmother and I would get a chance to have company then. And so that was a great par- and then my cousins like Theodora, Theodora Robinson Meadows was a park director and she wa- that was time for me to get out. She would come and get me and take me with her little sisters, Ruth--I mean Juanita and Yvonne to, to the park. Because in--at that time, Douglass area was a rural country like town and it--but the people there had a lot of pride.
Speaker 2: Is this the area you grew up in?
Speaker 1: Not really. I mean when my mother died I was in the third grade and when I moved there I left there in the tenth grade, I moved to Douglass, Douglass community which was a well thought of self-supporting community and it still is.
Speaker 2: Here in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Here in Memphis. And that community is so strong and the people are homeowners. You don't find any projects or anything, even now out there. And Douglass High School [Memphis, Tennessee] is--they rebuilt it. We got Douglass Community Center [Memphis, Tennessee]. And my Cousin James Robinson [James E. Robinson], Holloe Robinson, Samuel Robinson are all supporters of that area, Yvonne, Juanita, although when Yvonne and Juanita came along it was not--Uncle Omar had nine ch- nine children. And of course these two, Yvonne and Juanita, were all younger and they had a better chance because their brother, Omar Robinson, Jr., was determined that he was gonna pull them out and move them up. And he did a lot of that. And I depended upon Omar Robinson, Jr. to do a lot for me because he gave me music and he was a musician that you, I mean one of the best musicians that you could find. And I had music and so I had some extracurricular activities as I was growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay, now I don't wanna get too far off, I'm gonna go back to the--I wanna go back to--
Speaker 1: My mother and father [James Kneeland]?
Speaker 2: No, we've talked about them and who you take after. And I wanna ask you about your brothers and sisters. How many brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: I don't have any.
Speaker 2: You don't have any brothers or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And my brothers and sisters are who I just named, all of Uncle Omar's--
Speaker 2: Children--
Speaker 1: --children.
Speaker 2: Your, your cousins are like your brothers and sisters, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah they are.
Story_ID: 613066
Speaker 1: When your, your mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] died did--you went to live with your aunt [Sarah Robinson] and, and your uncle [Omar Robinson, Sr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I went to live with my [maternal] grandmother, Nina [Nina Robinson]--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, okay.
Speaker 2: --Aunt Bessie [Bessie Robinson (ph.)]--Bessie my aunt, the one that was in the wreck, but she didn't get hurt, but my mother got killed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did--where, where were you living, I mean what town were you living in then?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Were you still in Memphis then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1471 Sunset [Street] in Memphis, Tennessee in Douglass, in the Douglass area, yes. Right off of Chelsea [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay. What were--can you describe--I know you prob- you lived in a couple places right, you were describing. Can you give us a sense of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were?
Speaker 2: Sights and what now?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes. My grandmother lived next to a stockyard, those were the smo- smells. And I used to hear those cattle and hogs screaming and I really didn't know what that really meant until I got older as a teenager, because I lived out there. And that's the slaughtering of those animals. Now, she lived on a gravel road that fr- that soon became paved. And the people that she lived around were all homeowners and they still are.
Story_ID: 613067
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I was at my mother's house, when my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] was living. You know I told you I had to leave Hamilton High School [sic.] in the third grade. Of course she exposed me to kindergarten and music with Mrs. Ragsdale [ph.], and of course it was a more upscale area near the Parkway area and near the high school. And of course, even though Ham- Hamilton was supposed to be a pretty higher standard school, but it had its own, own environment. A lot of the important, like McEwen, Bishop McEwen [A.B. McEwen, Sr.] and Dr. Jo- doctors sent their children to that school. Well, so I got a chance to go there and tha- one that I remembered a lot was Mrs. Sally Bartholomew [ph.], who was my third grade teacher.
Speaker 2: Now this is--this is at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is at Hamilton school. I'm eight years old now.
Speaker 2: Hamilton school, okay. Wha- what was your first school, le- let's go back to the first one?
Speaker 1: Who? Go back to what?
Speaker 2: Your, your first school, the first school you attended?
Speaker 1: The first school I attended was Hamilton High School.
Speaker 2: Hamilton High School?
Speaker 1: Well, Hamilton Elementary [Hamilton Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] I guess you call it. At that time the elementary and the high schools were combined.
Speaker 2: Together, uh-huh, okay. Okay, you started there in kindergarten?
Speaker 1: I started at--no. Up the street there was a kindergarten called Mrs. Rice's Kindergarten [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay, Mrs. Rice.
Speaker 1: And I started there. So when I began in the first grade I went to Hamilton High School--Hamilton Elementary I should say.
Speaker 2: Okay, Mrs. Rice's Kindergarten and then you went to Hamilton?
Speaker 1: Elementary.
Speaker 2: Elementary, okay. And you were telling me about your favorite teacher?
Speaker 1: Mrs. Sally Bartholomew.
Speaker 2: Okay. Wh- what did--she taught everything I guess?
Speaker 1: She taught me in the third grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: That was at Hamilton Elementary.
Speaker 2: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 1: Okay, my favorite subject was music and math, mathematics.
Story_ID: 613068
Speaker 1: Now, what did you like to do when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well I liked to play (laughter). Across the street was an important man, Reverend J.A. McDaniel, who lived right across the street from me on Dunnavant Street [Memphis, Tennessee] and he had about seven children. So I used to play with them a lot. I used to hate to come home because I was the only one at home. And I always had to leave when it got dusk dark, Dad [James Kneeland] would call me and say it's time to go in, and I would have to go home. And I attended Greenwood C.M.E. Church [Memphis, Tennessee], which was not far from--I could walk there and I used to walk. I did a lot of walking. I walked to school, walked to Hamilton school [Hamilton Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] and I walked to the church. So most of my time was spent either in the church, playing outside across the street and that was it. Oh, dad, dad used to take me to the fair. He would always take me to the fair and we would play games and win some little gadgets or whatever. And I do remember that.
Speaker 1: That--was this the Shelby County Fair or the Mid-South Fair or?
Speaker 2: Mid-South Fair.
Speaker 1: Mid-South Fair, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He would always take me there. And I don't remember, I wanted to say take me to a movie, but I think--I didn't get the chance to go to the movies until I got to be a teenager and could ride the bus (laughter), that's how I got to the movies. And I could have parties at my home. And my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland]--I don't, I don't remember interacting with her with a whole lot of extracurricular activities exc- except for music. She, you know, and she kept me in church.
Speaker 1: Okay now di- did your mother teach you the, you the piano?
Speaker 2: No. My mother didn't do that. A lady by the name of Mrs. Ragsdale [ph.] on Dunnavant. You see a lot of the activities that I was involved with were right there on my street and I never ventured out of South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. Because number one we didn't have a car and so I had to stay confined, you know, right into that area. I didn't know anything about North Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] other than that's where my [maternal] grandmother [Nina Robinson] and my Uncle Omar [Omar Robinson, Sr.] lived and his children. And I didn't know anything, I knew nothing about East Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], and that is where Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] is located. South, north, east--west, I knew--I didn't know anything about West Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 613069
Speaker 1: Did these geographic designations have anything to do with who lived there? I mean was--how was the city--
Speaker 2: Organized?
Speaker 1: Yeah, organized in ter- ter- in terms of race?
Speaker 2: It's very polarized. Well, I'm, I'm just speaking now. The East Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] was all the affluent people and the South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] the part that I lived in was more the affluent black people. But there was another one, southwest Memphis [Tennessee], which was where my husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] came from, the Walker Homes, the Boxtown area [Memphis, Tennessee], that was the people where most of your black people, you know, were concentrated there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, did--when you were growing up, was, was it apparent to you that there was segregation in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Yes, because I learned more about it when Rosa Parks started that boycott and that's when I really got involved. (Unclear)--I had a very strong civil rights activist, Dr.--Mr. Jesse H. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] who ha- and he lived in the area where I lived on Gill Street [sic. Gill Avenue]. And that's right across--oh maybe about a block from Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. He was trying to get us all entertained with the Civil Rights Movement. So I got involved, as I got into my church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee], I got involved and one of the most prominent teachers at LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] was Mrs. Charles P. Roland, who taught audiovisual aid at LeMoyne. And she was my Sunday school teacher. She would come by and pick me up and take me to Sunday school so I got that exposure. Other than that, that's about all the exposure I had that I can remember while I was on that side of town.
Speaker 1: You were thirteen when Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was--and I guess you were maybe about fifteen when the Montgomery Bus Boycott took place?
Speaker 2: Yes, by that time I was more aware of what was going on in terms of seg- segregaton. But you know, my father [James Kneeland] never talked about it. So I really didn't know. But I don- I thought it was something strange that on Christmas and Thanksgiving, the people that he worked for were white at Rhodes and Jennings [Rhodes Jennings Furniture Company], they would always bring him hams or turkeys, you know, stuff like that. The only time I saw a white person in my neighborhood was the insurance man and those people. I didn't see any. I didn't go to doctor's much, so I really didn't see any until I got to be a teenager. And of course you had the Memphis Press-Scimitar, which was one of the major evening papers and you had The Commercial Appeal. But I didn't read the papers that much, but that was something that my father always did was read the papers. He kept a real tight stroke on the--what was happening in the paper. So that helped me.
Story_ID: 613070
Speaker 1: Did he [Jones' father, James Kneeland] get the Tri-State Defender?
Speaker 2: I d- we didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I learned about the Tri-State. I'll tell you about that. I learned about the Tri-State Defender through Mr. Jesse H. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.], because that's the area--you know, when I got to be a teenager, he hired me to work. That's when he was trying to recruit me to go to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, now Mr. Jesse H. Turner, who is he?
Speaker 2: He was a civil rights activist, one of the strongest of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] group. And he was the one that was out there trying to get as much desegregation among the libraries, the counter- the counters, you know, the--
Speaker 1: The lunch counters.
Speaker 2: --lunch counters and the bus boycotts and all of that. He was pushing that and he started pushing it from Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee] because that was his area, that's where he lived. And he was--he was recruiting us for that event.
Speaker 1: So, were you as a youth a member of the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council]? Did you join, okay?
Speaker 2: Yes I was. And I eventually became a life member. And right now I have all of my grandchildren and all of my, my husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.], all of us are life members.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now were you the only person in your family who was a member of the NAACP at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your immediate family?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was just my father and I, I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay so, now did Mr. Turner organize demonstrations?
Speaker 2: Yes he did. And he, he was a hardnosed civil rights activist. You could not work for him and not have a NAACP membership. So I, I--that's how I joined, I joined through him and my church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: How much did it cost to join?
Speaker 2: Maybe about three dollars maybe, two dollars. Oh not now, but back then it was. And I remember, I worked for Mr. W.C. Patton who was one of the executive directors of it and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith. All of us were sort of confined to the Universal Life Insurance Company [Memphis, Tennessee], which was owned by A. Maceo Walker. And A. Maceo Walker was the banker of the town. He was a black banker. And he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now, let's not get too far away from, let's see, he was a black--
Speaker 2: Banker.
Speaker 1: --banker. He was also--
Speaker 2: Of Tri-State Bank [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, Tri-State Bank. He also had the Universal--
Speaker 2: He owned Universal Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was also a sponsor of us going to Memphis State.
Speaker 1: Okay. A. Maceo Walker, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we have a correction. We were talking about the Walkers, now well, tell us something about the Walkers--
Speaker 2: I know--
Speaker 1: Now you, the most important thing about them is what?
Speaker 2: That they were bankers and they were entrepreneurs, and they wanted to see the best for black people. And Jesse Turner became the president of Tri-State Bank, which was owned by A. Maceo Walker.
Speaker 1: And during the break, your husband mentioned that the Walkers were the richest black folks in Tennessee probably, which is probably--
Speaker 2: I don't know about Tennessee, but in Memphis [Tennessee] they were. But we had a lot of doctors that were pretty well off, they're living on Parkway which was down the street from Dunnavant Street where I lived.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the NAACP head, Jesse Turner, who is--who one--the one that organized NAACP to you, became the director of Tri-State Bank?
Speaker 2: He's the president.
Speaker 1: He became the president of Tri-State Bank?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And his son [Jesse H. Turner, Jr.] is the president now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But when you were--when he was or- organizing, he wasn't involved with--was he involved with it when he was he was organizing the NAACP with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the president.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was the president of the bank (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) President of the bank and he was organizing the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, that's why I'm getting this down.
Speaker 2: And he had the lawyers, executive director that just passed away Bill Hooks. All of them were friends.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Hooks, A.W. Willis, Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon]. And then we had another silent, called a silent supporter, George W. Lee [George Washington Lee], who was a Republican, but he supported us. And he owned what they called Mutual Federal Insurance [sic.]. And Mutual Federal [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association, Memphis, Tennessee] and Tri-State Bank were the most prominent businesses that were moving ahead for business. And they supported business. And when you couldn't get a loan out of First Tennessee [First Tennessee Bank, Nashville, Tennessee] or Union Planters [Union Planters National Bank, Memphis, Tennessee], that's where you got your money--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to do things.
Story_ID: 613071
Speaker 1: Tell me about, now you were in high school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] when you wen- went to your first demonstration, civil rights demonstration?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me what the first one was like, what was it about and what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, of course I was working for Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] then and I how did I get to work. I got to work for Mr. Turner through Mrs. Roland, who I told you was my Sunday school teacher during my--when I was like, what twelve and thirteen. And of course she found me a little job. She said now would you like to work then and of course I started working with Mr. Turner then. But all I did was sort of--he was--he was also a CPA [certified public accountant] and I used to work on the weekends. And keep--help keep his books under his secretary who was my mentor. Mozelle [ph.]--I forgot her name, but anyway she was good.
Speaker 1: I was as- asking what was the first demonstration you went on, do you remember?
Speaker 2: What--going to door to door to do NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] memberships, would that have been a demonstration.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't think so. I mean that's the reason (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, okay, let me go--let me go back.
Speaker 1: --was there a time when they confronted--
Speaker 2: Going downtown, when Mr. Jesse Turner started all this sit-in movement during the Rosa Parks era, that's when I participated in everything that he had going on, on weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was he trying to do and do you remember the first one and what the target was? What was the focus?
Speaker 2: He would just go by the churches and ask them to meet at the NAACP office and we'd get to marching and doing things. And his target was to get the young black people involved in understanding what Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] were trying to do in terms of desegregating areas, different parks, libraries. 'Cause you know, we only could go to one library, and we only had one day, I think, to go to that. One day to go to the zoo. One day to go to anything. And most of our people were confined to the little neighborhoods that they lived in.
Speaker 1: Now what did they call that day, did they call it Colored Day or Negro Day or what was it called?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what day they called it, but I think it was like get out the vote or get out the--
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm saying what--how did you know you had one day to go to the zoo or one day to go to the library?
Speaker 2: You must remember, I didn't go, 'cause I didn't have no way, way to go. I used to hear, Yvonne [Kneeland Jones' maternal cousin, Yvonne Robinson Jones].
Speaker 1: Someone in the back said there were signs?
Speaker 2: Oh okay, maybe there were signs.
Speaker 1: You didn't see anything?
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Yeah there were signs. Thursday is Negro Day.
Speaker 1: Maybe it was Negro Day (laughter).
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Right, and on the zoo--at the zoo, they would sometimes have a sign, I recall seeing signs, no Negroes allowed in park.
Speaker 1: And water fountains is what I, I learned. But see my father [James Kneeland] really didn't let me go, you know. He, he was very protective of where I went and then I didn't have anybody to go with and he worked, so he couldn't take me. So I, I didn't really go until I started going downtown and paying bills for him, and that's when he got sick. That's when I, I learned how to get around in the city. But again, going to work for Mr. Turner because that was downtown on Beale Street, I think it was 588 Beale. And that's when I saw a difference of what life was all about. But I stilled it.
Story_ID: 613072
Speaker 1: So what you were telling me off camera and I want you to say it again on camera, is that your father [James Kneeland] was concerned that if you would--as you went to work that you might be in trouble on the bus?
Speaker 2: Yes, he, he was saying that this is new--and he would tell me, he said, "This is a new event for our city," he said, "so I think we need to see how it's going to work out."
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: The sitting anywhere you wanted to sit on the bus.
Speaker 1: Now did the City of Memphis [Tennessee] say you could sit anywhere you want to? Or were you all trying to push that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think they had passed that law.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we had a bus boycott in Memphis when Rosa Parks came along and we decided not to ride the bus for about a whole--a couple of months or so and then that's when the business community decided we're losing money and so we're gonna say okay, you can sit anywhere you wanna sit on the bus. But my father was saying a little something differently and that was, "Kid, don't you try to sit right now until we get--they get this thing ironed out." He said, "When you go to work, you get on that bus and you get off that bus. You're going to the back of the bus." But as a teenager I didn't quite get it that way. I was saying if they have said that we can get on this bus and sit anywhere, I'm going to sit. Well nobody bothered me. I just took my seat. And it went on and on and on, and then when I got to work, Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] would ask me, he said, "Where did you sit on that bus?" I said, "I si- I just took a seat wherever was available." He said, "Well, that's what I want you to do." Because he was a strong man to (unclear). He said, "I don't want--," he said, "are you gonna participate in the sit-in movement for libraries this weekend, that's what we're gonna do." And I said, "I don't think so" (laughter), because I didn't have a way, I would've had to catch two or three buses in order to get where they were talking about and my father wanted me to be home before dark. So you know, I got off at about five o'clock, but I had to hurry and get home. And I didn't have a phone, like they get now, to call and tell him when I was on my way. He was just, he knew what time the bus would come to McLemore [Avenue] and Dunnavant [Street], and that I actually would be walking down that street within the next ten minutes and he would be standing on the porch. And I used to wonder, why is he standing on this porch looking for me? I can walk my way home. But the more I look at it now I can understand he had some fear that something might happen. So that's it.
Story_ID: 613073
Speaker 1: That's when I, you know, my, I went to--go back a little bit. I went to live with my [maternal] grandmother [Nina Robinson] after my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] died when I was in the third grade and I ended up in the Douglass community [Memphis, Tennessee] with my grandmother and my Uncle Omar [Omar Robinson, Sr.] and Aunt Sarah [Sarah Robinson] and the--and their children. And I had a friend by the name of Geraldine Bell [ph.] who lived right behind my grandmother. And we would catch the bus and go to church, St. James A.M.E. Church on 4th Street [Memphis, Tennessee]. Now, and that's how I was able to learn how to ride the bus. But I couldn't have been any more than about twelve years old then, because my daddy [James Kneeland] came and got me and I move--again to live with my grandmother. At first I lived across the street until he got off of work with a lady. That didn't work out too well, Mrs. Hooker [ph.] was her name, Robin [ph.] and Mrs. Hooker. And I did not like that idea, because I wanted to stay at my house with my father. But he wasn't there, so I would have to wait 'til he got off from work. And so when I got in the house, I was happy and then I could play on the weekend and again Mrs. Roland would take me to church. But then I realized that he--my aunt decided it was time for me to come to live with them. So I went to live with them and that's how I started in the fourth--fifth grade at Douglass Elementary [Douglass Elementary School; Douglass K - 8 Optional School, Memphis, Tennessee]. So I went from there to the ninth grade and I got involved in a lot of movements, they had a lot of movements in Douglass. And I learned how to ride the bus, then go to work at Mr. Turner's [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] office and one thing I learned from him is that whatever you make, I made about what, maybe thirty dollars, put 10 percent of it away. So I would put three dollars in my savings account. And that--I did pretty good with that, because he taught me, he taught me what to do and how to save money. And he also taught me how to be civic responsible and that's what I did. And then of course I had Omar Robinson, Jr., my first cousin, Yvonne's [Yvonne Robinson Jones] brother, who I had to ride the bus to take music. So I learned a lot from him and he was--they were all proud of me for, you know, on my own because I didn't have a mother to do things with and they all pretty--nurtured me and mentored me as I grew up.
Story_ID: 613074
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were gonna tell us about the Black and White restaurant and what happened there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. When I did participate in the movement, I would go down to Shainberg's Black and White [Black and White Store; Shainberg's, Memphis, Tennessee], we would try to sit-in and sometime they--they just ignored us. And I remember one group that went--got drinks thrown in, in their faces.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you do it, what, what did Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] tell you before you went over there? Did he try to organize you in some way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would tell us, "Don't say anything, just take your seat. And if they ask you to move, just sit there." He said, "Don't do anything." And then he would always assure us that if anything happen to you, we got lawyers and we got people that will help you, so don't be afraid, take a se- it was always don't be afraid. This is gonna mean something to you as you grow older. And so that was the way he would talk to us.
Speaker 1: Now did he--what did he tell you to say. Say if I was a waitress at the restaurant and I walked up to?
Speaker 2: You order what you want. Order what you want and if they don't serve you, just sit there. And if they don't wanna serve you and if they ask--now some of them weren't too lucky, like I was lucky. They didn't serve me and I sat there until they asked us to move at the, you know, they go and say, "All right, we gonna call the police." Now when they started talking about the police I got ready to get up. And so I left but the other--there were some others who were not as lucky, and they decided not to move at all and they were arrested.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you can decide on your own whether you--how far you wanted to go with it?
Speaker 2: Yes, but then when you got to Mr. Turner, when I went back to work he said, "What did you get up for?" And I said, "Because I didn't wanna be arrested." He said, "Well, you shouldn't have gotten up," and that's the way he would talk to you. And so the same with everything that had to do with sitting in, he would say you're not supposed to get up. You're supposed to sit there. And then I said, "Mr. Turner, who do you think wanna be arrested and have a record?" He said, "We'll get you out." But that was not a part of my personality (laughter). So, you know, I, I was very cautious about it because my father [James Kneeland] had told me that I should not--if they tell me to get up, get on up and come home.
Speaker 1: Now was your father nervous about you working for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Sort of. But because of our finances, economically I almost had to work, because I did not--and not only did I work for Mr. Turner, I played for my church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee] and I got money, you know, that way. Because my father at this time was getting ill.
Speaker 1: You played the piano?
Speaker 2: Yes I do. I did. I mean I'm doing it now. But I, I do play the piano now and I try to do my very best. But all of that came from Omar Robinson, Jr., because he taught me from what Ms. Ragsdale [ph.] had taught me the basic stuff, but you know he would enter me in a whole lot of guilds and recitals to perfect my skills. And that's how I was able to economically support myself.
Story_ID: 613075
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student at school?
Speaker 2: I would think I was a good student. I was a salutatorian of my graduating class [at Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Well, I guess so then, you were an honor student?
Speaker 2: Well, that's how Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] got me. Because he's saying, he called and he said, "Okay, I see you made--you, you--." And then I had a, a teacher by the name of Mrs. Campbell, Mrs. Lillian Campbell and Mrs. Juanita Brinkley was my English teacher and she said, "I wanna enter you into to take that entrance exam to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]." And I said I don- I don't wanna go to Memphis State University.
Speaker 1: Now what was--describe what Memphis State University was like then?
Speaker 2: What was it like when?
Speaker 1: Then, then, in those days.
Speaker 2: When I was in high school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know, because I didn't even know where it was.
Speaker 1: Well, simply, I mean they make it--were there any black students at Memphis State then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, well nobody knows this except you and you have to tell us, that's why I'm asking you.
Speaker 2: Oh, far as I know nobody knew about any undergraduates being--now there were some graduate students. I think [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith was one of them who went into the graduate program and became a student there [sic.]. But, I don't remember any undergraduate students ever touching Memphis State University because they had something that would--stalled you anyway, called an entrance exam. And all the people who took the entrance exam failed.
Speaker 1: Okay so they didn't sta- state as policy, no Negroes are allowed at Memphis State, they didn't say that and they couldn't say it by law. I don't know if they could or not, but they didn't, there was no rule that was stated saying you couldn't go there?
Speaker 2: No, not a rule directly that said it, but it was implied. And you could--it was also polarized and you knew that. Your parents knew it, but then my parents [Gladys Robinson Kneeland and James Kneeland] just didn't talk about it. And when they read it in the paper, the Press-Scimitar [Memphis Press-Scimitar] and The Commercial Appeal and he decided to--now that's how he got his information, you know. And that's how he directed me not to do these things, not to do that and da, da, da, da, da, whatever (laughter).
Story_ID: 613076
Speaker 1: They tried to get you involved in trying to integrate Memphis State and?
Speaker 2: Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] called my father [James Kneeland] and he--and of course my teachers wanted--he says, "You're a good candidate for this. Do you want to go?" And I told him no. So, but when they told Mr. Turner no and Mr. Turner found out that we had passed the test, he called my parent, my father, and my father had said, "You can go to Memphis State because I pay taxes, and I don't see any real reason why you can't go." And I said, "Well Dad, I don't even know where Memphis State is--is, I have never heard of it." So just, and I really hadn't. So then he said, "Well, I told him that you would be interested in it and the next time they're gonna have a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meeting at Mutual Federal [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association, Memphis, Tennessee] and you will be meeting with some lawyers. Then of course, you decide what they tell you to do and you do it." And I said, "Dad, I don't want to do this." And he said, "Well, try it anyway because I'm getting sick and you can't go away to school." He said, "I don't have any money to send you to school." I said, "I can go to LeMoyne, LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis Tennessee]," and he said, "Well, I don't have any money to send you to LeMoyne College." So (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So let me get this straight. They were gonna--they were offering to pay your way to school if you would be part of this?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did. At the--at the sororities, fraternities, the churches were pushing to get us to integrate Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: And another question I have is then they--so they, they organized you and other students to take the exam for Memphis State--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) was offering the same exam, they were flunking other students out, they were keeping students out of with or did they change the exam or did you--wh- what was it, how did that work?
Speaker 2: Well they, they stopped requiring you to take the--they, they called it illegal. Some of--I think it was the school sometimes--came up with you really didn't have to pass it anymore.
Speaker 1: What--so--was it the NAACP that sued the, the--Memphis State?
Speaker 2: I thinking it is, NAACP had something to do with that.
Speaker 1: And--and they invalidated the other exam (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And other people could come on without having to take it and that's how you got more blacks involved and more people of color involved in going to Memphis State University.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were--you and--what seven other people passed the entrance exam?
Speaker 2: Actually it was five, because we entered. See I graduated in '58 [1958]. It was five. And I went on into trying to get in and then the court decision decided that they did not want us to attend because they said the community was not ready for it.
Speaker 1: This is the Memphis state court or, or city court?
Speaker 2: The Memphis dean and Dean Robison [R.M. Robison] and I think it's Mr.--President Humphreys [Cecil C. Humphreys], who said--
Speaker 1: Tennessee--the State of Tennessee's court [Tennessee Supreme Court] decided this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they did--they eventually took it to the State of Tennessee and the State of Tennessee decided to let, let it cool off for a while. And I ended up going to LeMoyne for one semester. All of us who didn't--who had passed and were not acknowledged at the Memphis State University when we were passed when it was five of us, we went to the univ- LeMoyne College.
Story_ID: 613077
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back and do a fact check here. You graduated from high school in 1958?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, and which one did you graduate from?
Speaker 2: Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Hamilton High School, okay.
Speaker 2: I had moved back home then in the tenth grade with my father [James Kneeland]. I had come out of Douglass [Memphis, Tennessee] and moved back home.
Speaker 1: Okay, you went to Douglass Elementary [Douglass Elementary School; Douglass K - 8 Optional School, Memphis, Tennessee] then went back to Hamilton?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess you would call it Douglass middle school now.
Speaker 1: Okay, middle school, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was at elementary.
Speaker 1: I just wanna be sure 'cause I know that you were at Hamilton [Hamilton Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] in the beginning, then you went to Douglass, so I wanna make sure that it came out (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hamilton, Douglas and back to--back to Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from Hamilton in 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at LeMoyne. So fall of 1958 you was--you were at LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes. First semester until--
Speaker 1: Okay, wh- when did you find out what?
Speaker 2: Waiting to find out what the new decision was going to be. And that is when Constance Baker Motley got involved. And Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] got involved. And they decided that they would, and A.W.--I just said A.W. Willis and Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] who were lawyers, we would meet at Mutual Federal [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association, Memphis, Tennessee] every weekend, sometimes we were there two and three nights trying to iron this stuff out. And of course Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] would bring me home because I lived near his home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were waiting for a court decision basically or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they finally got it--they got it passed and we were allowed to go [to Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] for '59 [1959]. By that time, three or four others had applied and passed the test. And they went, and that's how you got eight people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how you got the eight [Memphis State Eight].
Story_ID: 613078
Speaker 1: What instructions did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] give you, you all as students, you know, going into that situation?
Speaker 2: They told us to look nice, dress appropriately and that we should be going there. Now I had--I rode with another friend of mine, Sammie Burnett [Sammie Burnett Johnson], is who I rode with. She would come back from Walker Homes [Memphis, Tennessee]. She was from Booker Washington High School [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] though. And I rode on to the school and we met up as a group, and we were ordered to the--we were ordered to the Dean Robison [R.M. Robison], R-O-B-I-S-O-N, office. And everything--and they had plainclothesmen and police as we were going on the campus.
Speaker 1: Th- that followed you--that accompanied you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that accompanied us into the school. But we did not do regular registration like they do in a college, college environment. Because see, I was--I had already had exposure at LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] on registration and of course, I had a great experience there and I did not want to go to a new kind of environment. But, you know, my father [James Kneeland] was saying, "Hey, I can't afford to send you anywhere else." And I said, "Well, I got a scholarship to go to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] in music." And he said, "I'm sorry, I can't afford to send you there. I can't--room and board, and transportation," he said, "and I'm getting sick, I just can't afford it. So I pay my taxes, you will have to go to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] and you will have to come out of LeMoyne," 'cause they only--the fraternities and sororities only did it for the time that we were on hold, since we were on hold.
Speaker 1: So did, did you enjoy LeMoyne?
Speaker 2: I loved it, I loved it. We had so much fun. We were able to socialize, we were able to work together, we were able to study together, I could go to the library, I could participate in the sports, I played basketball. I loved it. And because that was my personality, you know, because my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] and--on my mother's side, our personalities are very outgoing. And I loved it. But when I found out--my, my dad said, "Okay, I'm going to take you out to Memphis State, we're just gonna ride out there." He had a Ford, a '49 [1949] Ford, and we rode out there. But I had never seen that environment at all.  I didn't even know what East Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] was like.
Speaker 1: But did you like it when you saw it?
Speaker 2: East Memphis?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't see anybody my color out there. They were all white. And the only people I could see was people standing on the corner catching the bus, that had worked in the homes, catching the bus going home. And I--I thought that was strange, but I asked dad, I said, "Dad, why are these people standing on the corners catching the bus?" He said, "Well, they work in these homes around here." I said, "Oh, okay."
Story_ID: 613079
Speaker 1: But then, I used to ask my father [James Kneeland], "Dad how much do you make working for Rhodes and Jennings [Rhodes Jennings Furniture Company]?" Because it was about to stick to me then, you know, about how much people were getting paid. And he said, "Oh, I make enough to take care of you." But after he died, I went--he had a whole suitcase full of, full of stubs. My dad only made sixteen dollars a week. And I said, "Why is he making sixteen dollars a week?" You know, but that's when, I was married then when I found this. And I said, oh my god. And then that's when I said my daddy must've really struggled to give me what I--what I--and so when I really got ready to go to--
Speaker 2: Well that's interesting, I just wanna pause it there for a second, no- not, not the tape but the, the--just to think about that. 'Cause during the same era, if you were in Detroit [Michigan] say working for the auto plant you'd be making about a hundred dollars a week. So this is the difference, I guess, when people talk about the migration of why people came north?
Speaker 1: Moved to--to Detroit and places like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dayton [Ohio] and Detroit or Toledo [Ohio] or, or Chicago [Illinois] or someplace. You can make $100 a week or 80, you know, $100, $120 a week as opposed to making $16 a week, working hard every day.
Speaker 1: Working hard every day after they take--now this was after they take out whatever they had to take out.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I just thought I'd just say that so whoever watching this would know the difference.
Speaker 1: Yeah and see when they gave bonuses--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): You could spin off of that how your--on your mother's [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] side, that's what her brothers did, they were part of the migration. They went to Cleveland [Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh they left early.
Speaker 2: They went to Cleveland, okay.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah they left, went to Cleveland, and didn't come back.
Speaker 1: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Right, never came back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, your [maternal] cousin [Yvonne Robinson Jones] is saying your cousins went to Cleveland and didn't come back.
Speaker 1: And the more I think about it, now I see why.
Story_ID: 613080
Speaker 1: And so, well then you have the group that just--was just trying to make ends meet and the ones that I--the other seven [of the Memphis State Eight], they were all poor--from poor families. Now only one that was from a family that could probably have sent him somewhere else was Ralph Prater, because his father--his grandfather was a doctor out in the Hyde Park area [Memphis, Tennessee]. And he was the only one that had a car that would take us to the bus stop, until the football boys started messing with us, and you know, putting sugar in his tank, and throwing oranges and all that stuff. But anyway when we got there, we were regis- you know, I was just standing in line choosing my courses and finding out who I was gonna be in the class with and all of that. But the other students were not because they had not started yet, they had--they didn't graduate until '59 [1959]. But the '59 [1959] students didn't know about this. But the '58 [1958] students knew about it because, you know, we had gone to LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]. So LeMoyne, there was a teacher, an English teacher who was a strong supporter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and her name was Mrs. Merriweather [ph.]. And she taught us and then you had Miss Frances Williamson [sic.]. All of these were strong supporters of LeMoyne.
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Juanita Williamson.
Speaker 1: Juanita Williams, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): (simultaneous) Williamson, Juanita Williamson.
Speaker 1: Juanita Williamson. What was Mrs.--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): Williamson became a recognized linguist.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, what was Miss Merriweather's--
Speaker 2: (YVONNE ROBINSON JONES): I don't know the Meri- all I knew was Juanita Williamson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Juanita Williams and she taught, you know, English I think or yeah. But anyway, all of those people, they encouraged you to get out of LeMoyne and go to Memphis State because they knew about it. And we tried to--and then you had Metropolitan Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennessee], Reverend S.A. Owens' church, who supported us and told us--which is right next to LeMoyne, to go from LeMoyne to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. So when we got there and it was like the other five of us, five plus three or more 'cause some of them just dropped out, said we're not going and they didn't go. But we were the original eight and when we walked into--they had selected our books and they--and that's when we had our pep talk and orientation with the dean [R.M. Robison] who told us he wanted us off their campus by twelve [o'clock]. He did not want us socializing. He did not want us to go to the libraries. And he did not want us to hang around that area and be off the campus by twelve. Don't go to the lunchroom. You can't participate in any sports. And so, you know, I did not like that because I had been introduced at LeMoyne. And the others didn't know any better because they di- they hadn't been in East Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] either, none of us had.
Story_ID: 613081
Speaker 1: So, now after the dean [R.M. Robison] gave you all his rules of what he didn't want you to do and to get off campus as fast as you can (laughter), what did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tell you all?
Speaker 2: Well, the NAA- we told them about the registration process and the NAACP said, "Look, if you don't like what they have picked out for you go to them and tell them. And for your courses, your orientation and everything, and tell them that you are not happy with that. And if they say anything to you, give me a call." Well, you know we were so tense that we didn't do that. We just took what they gave us and went on.
Speaker 1: So you didn't tell the NAACP what the dean said or anything there?
Speaker 2: I didn't tell them.
Speaker 1: You, you didn't tell them, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--we told them, but I said--the NAACP said, "If you don't like what you got in terms of courses and--go and tell the dean that you don't like it and the administration," as they would say. But we didn't do that. We just took what they gave us and went on.
Speaker 1: But the NAACP didn't know that you all were just taking stuff you didn't like?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't know.
Speaker 1: That's what I--that's the point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were saying, "Okay, so how was your day?" Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] every day, "Did you go to the cafeteria?" "No." "When you going?" "We, we don't know Mr. Turner. We, we don't really have time. We gonna have to get off the campus by twelve [o'clock]. We don't even have time to go to the library." And he said, "Well, I don't know why you can't, go on to the library." Well we ignored him because we wanted to get off of that campus like we were told. We just didn't do it.
Speaker 1: Now were you all afraid of the students?
Speaker 2: Sort of. Because--actually we didn't have very much socialization among each other. We were never in a class together, it was always one of us. And when we would go in, we would be sitting, if you sit in the middle you're gonna have seats vacant on both sides and behind you. And we used to wonder why people would be getting up. You know, how we had--how you go into class. And that's what would happen. And then we also--
Speaker 1: But, but did you really wonder why?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You didn't expect that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We wondered why and but we didn't--we just told the NAACP about that and of course they just said, "Well, you can't do anything with the people that move. But if they bother you, you must let us know." Well they didn't bother you, they just treated you indifferently. And you had to not pay attention to it. And when I, I noticed in my class, see I was the only one in there so I didn't have anybody to talk to in my group. I raised my hand and sometimes the teacher would just overlook it and somebody else would've answered the question. I didn't like that. So I ended up staying at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] under these conditions for about two years and then I quit 'cause it was too much for me. Some of the others dropped out in the first year and went somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Did anybody finish there?
Speaker 2: Yes, Luther McClellan [Luther C. McClellan] was the first person to finish and he was from Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And he finished and he was chemistry, mathematician and he started working for the government and he went into their service. And he did finish. The one--the next person to finish was Eleanor Gandy and she was from Douglass High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And she majored in French. Now they went straight through. The rest of them, let's see, Sammie Burnett [Sammie Burnett Johnson] left in--after one year and she was my partner. And Ralph [Ralph Prater] finished, and I think he went--he didn't finish, but he went to Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.] and got a law degree there.
Story_ID: 613082
Speaker 1: That's Ralph Prater?
Speaker 2: Ralph Prater, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You said that they put sugar in his gas tank?
Speaker 2: Oh, one day we were going home and he was trying to get the car started. He said, "I know there's nothing wrong with my car 'cause I just had a tune up." And so he tried to start it 'cause he was gonna take us to the bus, we were gonna miss our bus because it was about a couple of blocks up the road and he was just giving us a ride. And we could get a chance to interact with each other. But then we--Luther [Luther C. McClellan] and--not Luther but James Simpson [sic. John Simpson] and they looked and said, "Man, you got something in your tank." And that's when he found out that he had sugar in his tank. So somebody had to put it there. We don't know who. But anyway it was there. Another incident that happened is that Sammie [Sammie Burnett Johnson] and I were walking to catch the bus and we wal- went through what they call Jones Hall [Memphis, Tennessee]. And at Jones Hall, these football boys were standing out there and they said, "Okay, you niggers need to get outta here, we don't want you here." And of course, we were furious. We didn't know what to do, so we kept walking real fast and, and Sammie told me don't look back, we're just gonna walk and do what we have to do, and I did. Another incident that happened is the orange situation where some of the par- of Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] they said that they--oranges were thrown at them. And it was little irritating stuff like that, just irritating. So that pushed a lot of them away to go to other schools, to just leave that kind of environment. What got me out is that I got married and I had three children right away and I did not want to go under that kind of stress for life. I did not think I had a normal college life. I had experienced it at LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], but when I went to Memphis State it was a whole lot different from what I was used to.
Speaker 1: What was the, the feedback that you received from Mr. Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? What did they say about--did they have anything to say about you all not staying in school?
Speaker 2: Well, sort of you know, by that time I wasn't working for him then, you know. I was at home being a homemaker. But I started school taking three hours, six hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I wanted to go back to when you all--when the, when the first, the black students first started dropping out of that bad situation at Memphis State. Did they--did they try to gather you all together and talk you back into going?
Speaker 2: Oh sure they talked to us a lot, but we just decided that this was not for us. Luther wanted to because he was very smart and he wanted to stay because he, he wanted to be a part of--he wanted to go on and get a higher form of education. And when he went in the [U.S.] Air Force he really did.
Speaker 1: Now did--did anybody--I'm sorry, but did anybody from the NAACP ever go up to Memphis State and talk to the dean [R.M. Robison] or the president [Cecil C. Humphreys] about how you all were being treated?
Speaker 2: You know what, I really don't think so. But I don't really know, because when I told my parent [Jones' father, James Kneeland] about it he said, "Well, you're just gonna have to keep going and do what you know to do." But by that time I had met my husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] and I was ready to get married.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I just wanted to make sure I--how that worked 'cause if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember that. I do remember that the first year that we were there, they used to call us all together and we would go down to Mutual Federal [Mutual Federal Savings and Loan Association, Memphis, Tennessee] and have those meetings with those lawyers. But I really don't know what came out of that because it was at that time that the State Board of Education [Tennessee State Board of Education] allowed us to come to that school. And then I think they just said everything was okay, unless we complained, nothing else was done about it. And we just scattered. Now what? (Unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well that--that's important 'cause I think we do need to know the dynamic of how the NAACP was working. And if they, they put you all, they, they organized you to go there, it seems like somebody would've, there'd been some follow through?
Speaker 2: Mr. Turner was trying to, you know. But you know, as I left and I wasn't working there anymore, because when I went to school, you know, I couldn't work. I had to spend most of my time studying. I just couldn't.
Story_ID: 613083
Speaker 1: How were your grades at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: They were not that good because when I got an F in English I said, oh my god, you know, I gotta do better than this.
Speaker 1: Had you ever had an F in anything before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you think by any stretch that you deserved an F?
Speaker 2: No. Actually I tried to go to see the teachers to get some counseling, but they were never available. So I didn't get any counseling and I didn't know anything about a counselor, if they had one, I didn't know anything about one. It was like you were there by yourself. You were thrown in a briar patch, so you live in it. And I'm saying oh you know, I'm not used to this. So, no. There was nobody there to pick you up. And you didn't wanna go to the dean [R.M. Robison] because he was, he was not a good--didn't have a good personality for you, didn't want you there anyway and when the state department said we had to go, that's when the law took effect. And that's what happened.
Speaker 1: So did you feel as a student that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had any con- any power in that situation at all, other than it get you in the door?
Speaker 2: At that time, I was thankful for the NAACP for what they did, but I didn't see a follow up with them. There may have been some with the others who graduated, but see I didn't stay any longer than two years and then I came out. I had one professor that was interested in me and his name was Dr. Feisel [Victor Feisel] in biology. And he would let me come into his room and I--because I wasn't understanding anything. I wasn't understanding anything about the science of biology as it got to lab work and all of that stuff. I just didn't quite get it. But I went to him and he helped me, and he was one--about the only one that I can remember that really reached out. Now some of the others may have some other wonderful experiences. But my college life to start off was just not good after I left LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 613084
Speaker 1: In latter years, did anyone ever apologize for that to you or, or the other students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Raines [Shirley Raines] and that just happened.
Speaker 1: Now who is Dr. Raines?
Speaker 2: She is the president now [of the University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh, she wasn't president then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She was, was she on campus? She was--
Speaker 2: No, she came from somewhere and I don't remember. But I think she came from University of Tennessee [sic. University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], but I'm not sure. But whatever it was, no--she was the one that said that she was going to take that test along with [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury who was the assistant to the president. And at that time, he was one of the civil rights activist in the city. Because he, he was one of the strong anchors of WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] which was a black radio station, and of course, Art Gilliam [HistoryMaker Art Gilliam, Jr.] of WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], and they started, you know, boosting it up and saying, you know, we got to do something and then they did it. When she--that's part of the picture up there, that's what they gave us and they honored us back, oh about 19--like 2002 I think is when that happened. And that's been--that was fifty years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's one way to do it.
Speaker 2: It was fifty years.
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], yeah, 2009.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fifty years and they invited us and set us up at the Holiday Inn on Central [Avenue] for a whole week and took us for a tour. And then they had a summit and they interviewed us at WLOK and I got several interviews with them, private interviews, group interviews and we invited the students to come. And the students that were there they said, we said, "You know, you all wouldn't be here had it had not been for us, and that's what makes us happy. Because we think we have paved the way for you all to come to an integrated situation." Because you know when I went to register in the dean's office they would not let me take PE [physical education]. And when I got ready to graduate, I couldn't graduate because, you know, that was in '74 [1974] now, I couldn't graduate because I didn't have that on my schedule for, for taking what I was supposed to take. And so I told them, I said, "Oh no," I said, "you cannot do this to me because you all were the ones that decided that I could not take PE. It wasn't me. I didn't make that decision." And I said, "And if you don't get me straight for graduation," because I was more mature then, I said, "I'm gonna call the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and they will make sure that I should be able to graduate, and if they have to take it to court." Well, they waived it and I was able to graduate.
Story_ID: 613085
Speaker 1: So now, I'm ready to go on to the next question, see that was good, thank you, thank you. So where did you meet your husband, how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: My girlfriend, Sammie Burnett [Sammie Burnett Johnson], one day she said, "I got somebody I want you to meet." And that that was in the Walker Homes area, that's in the southwest part of Memphis [Tennessee]. And she said, "Have you ever heard of S.L. Jones Supermarket [Memphis, Tennessee]?" And I said, "No," because I'd never been to southwest Memphis. And she said, "Well, I got a friend I want you to meet," and he went to Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] with her. And that's where, you know, she graduated from. And so I said okay. 'Cause I had broken off with a friend of mine who I had met. He was in the [U.S.] Navy and I had--had that relationship just--I had to break--and I met him because he would come by Mr. Turner's [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] office from the Navy, I met him out on Hernandez Street [ph.], and I've forgotten his name, I think it was--. But anyway I had to forget his name 'cause I'd met Rufus [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.], and Bernard Wisdom was his name. And he was from Indianapolis [Indiana] and he told me he was going to some school as an aeronautical engineer and I fell--like I like the way he was talking and the way he carried himself and all of that stuff. But anyway, I met Rufus at her house and he came by and I met him and I sort of liked his persona, his way of, of talking, the way he talked to me. And what really got me interested in him is that my father [James Kneeland] told him he had to have me home at twelve o'clock, and he did. And I didn't have to fuss with him, whereas the others, I had to really get very hard with them and say, "Hey, you take me home, I'm getting outta this car." But my hus- Rufus didn't do that. He had four sisters at home and he knew how his parents were with his four sisters. So that's how I met him. And I told Rufus, I said, "I am going to be going to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] because I've got to come out of Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]." And he said, "I don't know why you gonna do that," he said, "I can't wait 'til you come back here." He said, "Why can't we get married?" I said, "I'm not ready for that," and so I say, "You have to let me think about that. Number one, my father has got to think about it," and I didn't know how that was gonna work out. But it worked out and my father told him, he said, "Hey, I don't mind it, but one thing you got to ensure, is that you make sure she gets her education," and he said, "Well, I will do that." Then I met his family and his mother [Ida Crawford Jones] and dad [S.L. Jones], and they were all--now they were prosperous businesspeople in that part of the ci- town, southwest Memphis. And he had a supermarket and he had a nice home. And they--he was a community activist--he was a community activist with A.W. Willis and Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] and all that. So, my husband had gone to Michigan State University [Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and he graduated from Michigan State University. And he had another idea of how civil rights was supposed to work, because he was doing it at his school, Michigan State University and he had a lot more socialization at his school then I did.
Story_ID: 613086
Speaker 1: When did you all get married?
Speaker 2: We were married in 1962--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Greenwood C.M.E. Church [Memphis, Tennessee] with my cousin Omar Robinson, Jr. escorting me to--with--and gave me away because my father [James Kneeland] at that time had gotten too sick to go to the wedding and he had empyema. So he could not be in crowds and he could not smell a lot of perfume and all that stuff. He was allergic to that, so--and he did not go to my graduation [from Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. And I played for my graduation, I said, "Please dad, this is my performance, you have got to go." He said, "I'm not going." But Omar had trained me, he had trained me to do a good job with that piece that I played for my graduation and everybody knew that I could play piano, I was very skillful at it and it was because of Omar, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me go back a little bit because we jumped from wedding to graduation (laughter). And so, so when you got married [to Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] you had three children in a row you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one which is--her name is Gladys [Gladys A. Jones], I named her after my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland]. Then I had Rufus, Jr. [Rufus E. Jones, Jr.]. Then I had Ida [Ida L.J. Pittman] who was named after my husband's mother, her name is Ida [Ida Crawford Jones], and his sister is named Ida [Ida Jones Williams].
Speaker 1: Ida's a popular name in the family.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah and these children are confused, these grandchildren, Aunt Ida, Aunt Gladys, a--Uncle Rufus, and all of that you know. They are, they--they're trying to figure out how--what am I gonna call Aunt Gladys [Gladys L. Jones], his sister and what am I gonna call my daughter Gladys.
Story_ID: 613087
Speaker 1: You went back to Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] in 1968, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And that's the same year Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. Do you remember what was going on, do you have any memories about Dr. King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, now you--by this time I was right into the movement. And I was marching and marching down Beale Street and when they said that Dr. Ki- I think I had--I had my son [Rufus E. Jones, Jr.] in sixty--'63 [1963] and when they told me that he had gotten killed, I think he got killed in '63 [1963] didn't he?
Speaker 1: No, Dr. King, the March on Washington was in '63 [1963], and Dr. King was assassinated here in 1968. It was April 4th, 1968 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah. Well I was downtown, my children were like three and four year olds and I was downtown. I did not take them this time. But I did put them in the movement when we were marching down on the lunch counters like Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] and Shainberg's [Memphis, Tennessee], and they were in their little scooter--little baby pushcarts, I got pictures of that. But on this, they--when he died I left them at home that day, 'cause I had gone to hear Dr. King speak at the Mason Temple [Mason Temple Church of God in Christ, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Was that night before he was killed?
Speaker 2: The night before he was killed and I was determined I was gonna go to the march that he was gonna have for the garbage strikers, strike workers. And I was determined I was gonna go, but I didn't wanna be carrying no three year olds or two year olds with me. But when I did, we went to Clayborn Temple [Clayborn Temple A.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee], that's when a lot of activities started and you had the--I believe it was the National Guard called out and all of that.
Speaker 1: So, where were you when you found out he had been shot?
Speaker 2: I was at home. But I was getting ready to go to--he was supposed to speak, it was April the 4th. He was getting ready to go to hear him. And then when I heard that he had gotten shot, I just said no, unh-uh. And then the--they started burning and looting, and at that time we had another supermarket that was called Lucky Food Store [sic. Jones Big Star, Memphis, Tennessee] and I had been working there, but that's when the people starts--were quite violent doing things and I just decided I didn't go that night. And I didn't go to his, his burial, I mean his funeral, which I think was in Atlanta [Georgia] and they had buses and buses to take people there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know Reverend Kyles?
Speaker 2: Sure, Samuel Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles], yes, I do at Monumental Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennessee]. And that's where the movement took on another face because Monumental was the place that we could go and have these meetings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Story_ID: 613088
Speaker 1: You graduated finally from, from Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] with a, with a bachelor's of science degree.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did, did things change, in, in 1974 you graduated, but did things change any from the time that you stopped going to when you started back in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was about, when I went back there were like about 100 blacks that were there. And they were trying to get ahold of themselves, you know, they didn't like it but they went because economically that was the place to go.
Speaker 1: They--were they restricted that they couldn't eat lunch or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. After the first or second year, all of that stopped. You know, they could go on and do, we went to the library, went--they took sports. And they really were looking for the sport people then, because they realized that they--the schools were producing some great athletes and that was the only way they could win a game, of having black athletes play on their team and that's when it start really getting better.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think athletics played a big part in?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it played a big part. And you had I'm trying to think, Penny Hardaway and all that group and that were there. We had Larry Finch who was a dynamic coach, and it really worked. You didn't--now we could not be a part--that's why I'm not a part of a sorority now, even though they tried to get me to be because they supported us, they sponsored us. But there were no sororities or fraternities on campus.
Speaker 1: When you were there?
Speaker 2: When I was there, even when I--in '74 [1974] and '76 [1976] there were not, there may have been one or two chapters, but I wasn't a part of it because I had too much responsibility by that time. I had three children [Gladys A. Jones, Rufus E. Jones, Jr. and Ida L.J. Pittman] and that was hard. I could barely take my little kids, and I would go there and work at night in the library and leave my children at the library to go to class and tell them, "Hey, you all get your homework because when I come back I'm gonna check it." And they were very mannerable, the three that I had, I had three, I didn't have four, I got four now. But anyway, they went there and they stayed until I got outta class.
Story_ID: 613089
Speaker 1: When you graduated [from Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] with your B.S. in '74 [1974], you said, you were telling me off camera, you couldn't get a job right?
Speaker 2: No. They I, I had to substitute until I was able to get one.
Speaker 1: Your master's--your bachelor's is in education, right? Elementary education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was in ed- yes, in both of them were until I got administration and supervision at Trevecca [Trevecca Nazarene College; Trevecca Nazarene University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, but you--they wouldn't hire you, and you, you suspect this is because of civil rights work?
Speaker 2: I did not know, but I suspect, because at that time I would apply and I just--they wouldn't have a position for me. And I eventually got hired permanently at Wells Station Elementary [Wells Station Elementary School] out in the north part--out in the Douglass--well it's near Chelsea [Avenue], north part of, of Memphis [Tennessee], northeast.
Speaker 1: Now is that after you got your master's or before?
Speaker 2: When I got my bachelor's [degree]. When I got my master's degree I went to another school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I think it was Gordon [Gordon Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee], I was still in North Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. And then I ended up with eighteen years at Lester elementary [Lester Middle School; Cornerstone Preparatory School Lester Campus, Memphis, Tennessee] where I got a great send off for a demonstration school, it was just more like an optional school and I learned a lot from there, teaching in the inner city area called Binghampton [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well what--how--well you retired as a teacher, did you like teaching?
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was very--at Lester I didn't have to teach everything. So I was the science and math teacher for all the grades, two through six. And that's where I really thought--but I got tired of driving. That's where I had to drive twenty-five miles every day to school and I decided to go close to my home, which was in the southwest part of Memphis and--over there where I met my husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] with the girl Sammie Burnett [Sammie Burnett Johnson] in the Walker Homes [Memphis, Tennessee]. It wasn't Walker Homes then, it was George W. Lees [George W. Lee Homes] up--and that's where we have a home also now. But anyway, I went to a school called Walker school [A. Maceo Walker Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee] and I just couldn't get with it because they were not--they were--they were not moving fast enough. They didn't have a vision of teachers working in a departmentalization environment and that's what I was used to for eighteen years. And so, I said it is time for me to go. So I left after two years.
Speaker 1: And, well what did you--now?
Speaker 2: In 1999.
Speaker 1: This is in '99 [1999], okay. What did you do after you left?
Speaker 2: I did--I have my husband. I--
Speaker 1: Oh that's when you retired, actually?
Speaker 2: I retired to take care of my grandbaby, the one that you saw walking around here, Cannon Michelle [ph.]. She's eleven now and I retired to take care of her in North Carolina. So I would go there for two weeks and come home for two weeks while my daughter worked.
Story_ID: 613090
Speaker 1: What was your philosophy of teaching? Or did you have a teaching philosophy when you were a teacher?
Speaker 2: Sure. I had a teaching philosophy and my philosophy is to train these little children, black or white, to learn as much as they can and develop the discipline for study. And train them to do when you--yeah, when it was not correct, redo it and to stick to it until you got it right. That was my philosophy. And of course, I am from the old school and I believe in punishment, and because that's how I raised my children and all my children have done well in school. My son [Rufus E. Jones, Jr.] graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. My daughter that's here now graduated from Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And they all got their doc- my daughter with her mother--Kaylin's [ph.] mother, graduated from University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and UT, and she has her doctorate. And I did that because going to that campus school, and me putting them in that environment and they saw people working and studying so they knew they had to get it. And just like my father [James Kneeland] talked education for me, I talked not only education to them, but I told them if you're gonna do something in this world, you're gonna have to know what the world is like and you must study and do your best. And you, you--you're going into a more diverse kind of situation. If you wanna go to Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] you can, because it was good for me, but if you don't wanna go, you don't have to, and they chose not to go. So that's why they spread all over different places. And they said, "You know what, ma, we don't wanna go to Memphis State 'cause you kept us there too long. You kept us there--," sometimes it would be nine or ten o'clock before I would get them home, but they wouldn't have gotten their lesson and I would've had time to screen their work so that they would have it. So when they decided to leave elementary school, my son left out of Bellevue Junior High [Bellevue Junior High School; Bellevue Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee] and he was recruited to go to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], and that's how he ended up on the East Coast. And he--not only did he go to Andover, he--Andover, Massachusetts, he went to Harvard and that's where he is. Then he went to Lehman Brothers [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.]. And those are the kinds of train- that's the kind of training that I gave him and my daughter [Gladys A. Jones]. She has traveled all over the world. She went to work at (unclear) Mentor Scholar [ph.], she was one of them and she ended up going to Cameroon working for a whole year. And graduated from Emory and getting her master's [degree] out of American University [Washington, D.C.] and then getting her doctorate out of Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And then the other one, she's a chemical engineer, Ida [Ida L.J. Pittman], and she has three children. And those are the children that I am working with now. They were just here yesterday. And I make sure that they study. And Dorothy [Dorothy Jones], she went to University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] in finance and business, and now she's the director of marketing for Frito-Lay [Frito-Lay, Inc.]. So I instilled in my children and now I'm trying to get them to instill in their children, and I help them with my grandchildren now. But it is hard, it's hard now because you don't have the support group from the peers that your children are involved with now. And you don't have the teachers. They do not stress redoing stuff and I do.
Story_ID: 613091
Speaker 1: What did you think about the No Child Left Behind bill [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001]?
Speaker 2: I just think it's a way--it's what they say, but I don't think they implemented it right. I never did like the implementation of it because children are still left behind, especially our black children. Teachers are not interested. They do not push academics as excellence. They do not do that. And the kinds of teachers that I see coming into this area, that took my place that--when I left in 1999, I would not have graduated them from Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] if that's where they came from. You've got a few good ones, but they're not interested in science and mathematics and that's what I was interested in, and that's what I taught most of my career. And I won science fairs and I did post- projects, and I demand projects. And of course the teacher--the principal said, "The parents are complaining that you have them do too much projects." I said, "Unless they do it and understand the discipline of doing a project and getting the work done, you know, they will never learn when they go into the world."
Story_ID: 613092
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any students that you've taught that you keep in touch with now or who went on to do something, any, any favorite students?
Speaker 2: Yes. I have a young man by the name of Jonathan Blanchard and he acknowledged me about a couple--maybe a year ago. He's a bass vocalist and he lives in Atlanta [Georgia] now and he has his master in music. And he's very good. And then I had--I got on airplane about three years ago and this lady, this little girl came through (unclear), and she said, "Miss Jones [HistoryMaker Marvis Kneeland Jones], is this the Miss Jones that taught at Lester [Lester Middle School; Cornerstone Preparatory School Lester Campus, Memphis, Tennessee]?" I said, "Yes, I am." She said, "Oh, you were my favorite teacher." And then I've, I've had so many of them come by and see me in the grocery store and they say, "They don't teach like they used to." And we went on trips, I took them as a second grade group and third grade group to Washington, D.C. to see Jamestown, Virginia, to see the thirteen colonies. You know, I did all of this, but I don't hear of students doing that anymore. They may do it, maybe through some other group. But in the classroom, some te- some parents that I had taught their older children, especially Cassandra [ph.], I taught her oldest girl, said, "Miss Jones, they don't have teachers like you taught me." Her, her oldest daughter I taught her and she--she's at Middle Tennessee State [Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, Tennessee] right now. And so I said, "What--why?" She said, "They just don't do--they don't take us anywhere, they don't wanna go anywhere." I said, "We have still got abundance of children that not gonna know anything. You know, they don't get outside their neighborhoods." So that No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], is a good concept, but it's not implemented, particularly good for me and for what I see, I really don't know.
Story_ID: 613093
Speaker 1: Now you, I was reading that you, you were like--you participated in the voter registration and you--as a ward precinct representative here [Memphis, Tennessee] in 1980 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I did. That's where neighborhood night out [National Night Out], you would have me working, and I work with--my husband [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] is a--was a former Tennessee legislator and he worked, and he retired in sixteen--after sixteen years.
Speaker 1: When was he elected?
Speaker 2: Oh, when was he elected?
Speaker 1: Yes. I might have it here.
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I don't remember, it's in my resume. I think he was elected back in 1984 [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he worked for sixteen years and retired. 'Cause you know we had a supermarket [S.L. Jones Supermarket, Memphis, Tennessee], his supermarket was the first comprehensive black owned supermarket in the State of Tennessee. And I got him on your list to be interviewed. But then also, he became a lobbyist and I'm not sure if he was the first black lobbyist, but I'm thinking he was, and he worked out of Tennessee and he just retired in March.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a responsibility as the wife of a state representative (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, of course I got him elected (laughter), for sixteen years and then I worked in the community. And I, as a lobbyist, I served as a personal--a person that kind of keeps things going in the office (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Assistant?
Speaker 2: Assistant. And I was--I got it in this thing oh, (unclear). Oh I can't remember it right now. But, that was all of that, that you have to do to be--make sure he does and presents himself well.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any, any highlights of that--of those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would go out to Nashville [Tennessee] on a Sunday and come back on Thursday. And it was a lot of work because, you know, he and my daughter [Gladys Jones] were in it together and my son [Rufus E. Jones, Jr.]. They had, had what they called REJ and Associates [Nashville, Tennessee]. He had to do a whole lot of work to get bills passed for the legislator--legislature [Tennessee General Assembly]. And of course you got to be on target to go to all of the receptions and different activities to make sure that he is represented well. And I did a lot of that for the company.
Story_ID: 613094
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in the election of Mayor Herenton [W.W. Herenton]?
Speaker 2: Yes. Oh this year?
Speaker 1: Well, not--
Speaker 2: No, not this year. But when he was trying to get elected I did.
Speaker 1: So, this was in the '90s [1990s], right, in the mid-'90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Yes. He came out of superintendencey and went into as mayor of the city.
Speaker 1: He was elected, was it '92 [1992] he was elected or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't remember when that was, but it was a long time, fourteen, maybe two or three terms or something [sic. five terms].
Speaker 1: How did that--how did you feel about that. I mean, I think he was the first black mayor in the city, right of Memphis [Tennessee], Herenton? How--how did people react to that?
Speaker 2: They loved it for a while. You find out how it's gonna work this time, I don't know. But they loved it for a while. He was a pretty good mayor because a lot of the projects that you see going on around here and a lot of their subs--and down there on the river--that river was designed through his leadership. And his leadership for the new houses, he tore down all the LeMoyne Garden old homes [LeMoyne Gardens, Memphis, Tennessee] and refurbished them. And Cleaborn [Cleaborn Homes, Memphis, Tennessee] and a lot of their sub, and Hurt Village [Memphis, Tennessee], all of that was cleaned up with federal money due to the administration of Mayor Herenton.
Story_ID: 613095
Speaker 1: Now did you work with the Fords at all?
Speaker 2: Yes. I worked with them, most of the Fords elected, were elected through the work that we did with them.
Speaker 1: Is there a direct link between the old--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] civil rights organizing and the political movement?
Speaker 2: Well, the Civil Rights Movement is not as pronounced as it was during the Rosa Parks era. It--it's--it has done some really good things under the auspices of--since Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] left--of Johnnie R. Turner [Johnnie Turner]. And her husband [Larry Turner] was a legislator and he died in October, so she's tak- she's running the campaign right now. So, yes, they, they are trying to push education. They're trying to make sure that we get some of the best teachers. And with budget cuts, it's very hard to do anything in the schools now when they just laid off 350 teacher assistants. I don't see how you can teach school without having a teacher assistant, because I had one at least for half a day. And I'm just not sure that I could do the teaching that I used to do right now and not have somebody to help, you know, with the children. Especially when you got over two or three hundred children that you got to see almost every day coming to you for an hour. And so I just don't know. And right now I think we're falling a little short on the curriculum. And we need to go to school all year round. That is what's gonna make black children and maybe His- Hispanics learn better and more efficiently. So that when they go to a college, they would have the basic skills that they need. And I'm thinking that they don't have it now, and it takes a lot of counseling in order to get them on track. And then when you see the graduations come out, you see oh my god they're going into easy curriculums, curriculums. We need more mathem- mathematicians, we me- we need more people who are in business and finance and all of those heavy disciplines for us to move on ahead. And I don't see it happening as fast as I would like to. But I'm thinking that it will get better. Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] said that community service is a must. You teach children, and students and teenagers and college students how to give something back to the community and work with your community. Cleanup your community and stay off the streets. And I think a lot of the bad things that are happening now is that parents are too busy working or they don't really have the interest. So we need some parent training, some parent training about what academic excellence is all about and how you get it and keep it up. I don't think we have that. But that's what the effort should be now, is for academic excellence and a push for that would train our children. We don't--we're losing too many teachers and we're losing to--the funds and stuff that was available to do this. We don't have it. We needs after school tutoring with good teachers. Now, I would say that 50 percent of the teachers here need to go back to school because they don't even know anything about science and math. They're in there, in the classroom, but our students are not learning it. They're not--don't even have an interest in it. We need to copy after Japan's way of teaching and make the discipline for getting your studies and then going on out into the world. That's why you have more Indians and more Japanese students and Asian students going ahead and being in charge of different programs. And that's why you don't see enough black entrepreneurs getting into the movement, and we've got to do better. I think if Obama comes around another year, we're gonna see a--see a change because the poor guy can't do a whole lot of change in, in one second. He needs time. He needs to find out where his strength is and the strength of his employ, because you would not have had Shirley Sherrod in the predicament that's she's in had somebody been on target for what's happening here with that. And I wasn't pleased with that at all. But I hope it gets better.
Story_ID: 613096
Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in Memphis [Tennessee] and in the rest of the country?
Speaker 2: I just told you.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I want them to get into the mathematics, skip--it's okay to be in sociology and education. When I go to Memphis State [Memphis State University] now, or University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], most of our students are graduating from education. When I get ready to see doctors, like my [maternal] cousin [Yvonne Robinson Jones] over here, I don't see a whole lot of people walking out with color in the doc- with a doctoral degrees. I don't see that. And I don't see them coming out with cum laude degrees--magna cum laude degrees. I don't see that. And I don't see enough black people coming out of science and math, and business. So, we have got to emphasize that. I talked to one of the ladies that works here, her daughter, she's the one that I taught, she's majoring in psychology, which is fine and good. But are there any jobs in psychology? Go where the job offers are. Pick that for your major and work at it. That's my philosophy.
Story_ID: 613097
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well, no because I've always had this philosophy of doing your best and performing on an academic excellent style. And it's trial and error. But just don't make too many mistakes in what you chose to do for your life. Because life is too short. So if I had to do something differently, in order to go to school I would think that the students that come out of high school now may not want to go to a college, but they should get a trade. We should offer more trade school. That's what I would do differently. Get those students into a trade school, so they can learn how to be plumbers and electricians.
Speaker 1: I was asking you what you would do differently if there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I would do differently?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there anything you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: No, all right.
Speaker 2: No, I'm retired now. I wouldn't do much different then what I did because I've worked hard all of my life, you know. I wouldn't work as hard. No, I was once teaching full time, going to the deli of my husband's supermarket [S.L. Jones Supermarket, Memphis, Tennessee], work there until eleven and twelve o'clock at night. Play for my church's chu- play for my church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee], play piano for my church services--play the organ for my church services. I wouldn't work as hard. That's what I would do differently. But I think my children by now, but I can't say that, because the corporate world has really gotten hard for people who are in it and they work as hard as I do, but in a different sense, in a different way, because we had different kinds of jobs.
Story_ID: 613098
Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back at your life again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy would be to work hard, yes work hard. Choose something that you like to do. Choose a career that you like to do. And my legacy would be to do the best that you can. Pray about it, put God in your life, and you will get there. You will definitely get there and that's how I made it.
Story_ID: 613099
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't discussed before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that you have just about asked everything except for Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], would I encourage people to go there now, yes. Do not count it out. Go and major in your--but I would think that they need to choose curriculums where the jobs are, because now we are in a different era and jobs are so hard to find. And now you can't find plumbers and electricians and people who are interested in developing their own business. We can't find that. And that's why making new cars--com- be creative in your work. Come up with a business that you are creative with and do that business or find out how to do it. And with the professors that we have and the colleges now, they ought to be training. They ought to be really putting students--and say, "Hey, I'm gonna prepare you for a care--a career," and there ought to be on the job training for those careers. Internships, money for that. That's what they ought to have. And that's the best that I can say.
Story_ID: 613100
Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as being one of the first to integrate Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], to pave the way as a pioneer for others to go and to others to go to other places, not only to college but to other new careers. I would like to say that I believe in community work and that's what I did, and that's what I do. And I still do it. And I just feel like that I should be remembered that way. And I love working with people. I love working with children. And I love to be a part of the community and I'm a ac- I'm still a community activist, and I--people know me as that. They know me as Rufus Jones' [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] wife, and first Memphis State--that integrated Memphis State. They know me as my church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee], as the pianist. They know me--actually because I've been in the paper so much and different magazines, and different groups, I have been sorted out and even when I don't know people and I go down the--in the--downtown, in the grocery store, they say, "Did I see you in the movie somewhere?" I said, "No, not in the movie, but you may have seen me in the paper." "Oh yeah, aren't you the first, you went to Memphis State." I say, "I am." They say, "Oh that had to be rough though, right?" I said, "Well, it wasn't a very easy thing to do, but I'm proud I did it and I hope that if you didn't go to college at Memphis State that some of your children went there, are going there or will be going, because that's why I did it." Because I wanted to pave a way to make life better and have a better quality of life for the people who are in this world, especially for my black people. And so I'm hoping that we have another Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] year and I think he can kind of make the change that he wanted to make and he has definitely got my support. And I would like to see the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to step on it a little bit harder and support him, and cut that Tea Party out and see if they can hush them up a little bit. Because I'm scared, I am really scared even at this time of, of his presidency that unless we make a hoopla and a whole lot of noise like we did to get him elected, that we may be sorry. And that's what--that's why I am talking like I'm talking because I think he is going to do--he's young and he's going to do what he thinks is best. He's still learning and he can't do everything in a year. And he can't do everything in four years. It took eight--twelve years for somebody to mess it up, it's gonna take about that much time to kind of get it straightened out even educationally, even with the job situation, because the people don't have jobs because they don't have the skills. And somebody's not teaching them. Somebody is not giving them the skills that they need to learn how to fix cars and how to do things other than walk the streets. We got to get our people off the streets and give them a job to do, and train them to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: You're welcome. And I enjoyed giving you my best insight on what I think we need to do to make this world a better place.
Story_ID: 613101
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my [maternal] grandmother and she was the one that I lived with during my junior high years. Her name is Nina Ann Robinson [Nina Robinson].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is my baby picture when I was six months old, when my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland] had taken that--had me to go to--I mean took me to the Blue Light picture, photo [Blue Light Studio, Memphis, Tennessee] and they took that picture of me. And at that time my name is Marvis LaVerne Kneeland [HistoryMaker Marvis Kneeland Jones].
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken of me at four years of age. My mother enjoyed dressing me up and so she had another picture taken of me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This--I, I am a part of my community and I work very hard in it. And every time we have neighborhood night out, I would dress up as a clown and work with those like--Miss Pat Ware [ph.] who is the president and the coordinator Mr. Swift [ph.]. And that's for the neighborhood--Shelby Heights neighborhood night out [National Night Out].
Speaker 1: This is when we had neighborhood night out and the policemen and the people who were over the District 86 is Barbara Cooper. I am posing with the people that I took pictures as they would come into our neighborhood, Shelby Heights neighborhood watch [Memphis, Tennessee]. I, I would dress up as a--are you still recording?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, keep talking.
Speaker 1: I would dress up as a clown for the children, and oh we could draw a whole lot of children with me in a clown suit. And they would come by and participate and we'd tell them about what the policemen were there for to reduce, reduce crime and the policemen were their friends.
Speaker 2: That's Mr.--that's a neighborhood watch picture of Miss Pat Ware and Mr. Richard Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now you're not in that photo, right?
Speaker 2: No, but these are just my neighborhood watch--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Co-workers?
Speaker 2: Workers. It took a lot of work to get neighborhood watch, to get people involved in their neighborhoods. And we would have to knock on doors and get the people motivated, but we tried to do that.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me receiving an award at a function for neighborhood night out watch, for being a very active member through the years. That's my president, Mrs. Pat Ware and myself, Marvis Jones.
Speaker 2: That picture is after fifty years from graduating from Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. Dr. Shirley Raines presented me with a certificate of--for coming as an integrated person, as a pioneer into the program of integrating Memphis State. And I'm there with Mrs. Maxine Smith [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith], which is a civil rights activist who also was a mentor of mine as I entered into Memphis State University, thanks to Dr. Shirley Raines.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of the Mayor Herenton [W.W. Herenton] and Mayor Wharton [HistoryMaker A C Wharton, Jr.]. The county mayor and the city mayor also recognized me as an outstanding pioneer from Memphis State University.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one's which, the taller one with his arm around you is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mayor Herenton is to the right and Mayor Wharton is to the left of me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so this one's Herenton, okay?
Speaker 1: Yes. The tall one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here, okay, here is my great-grandfather, Jerry Williams, who is of the third--he's my paternal grandfather [sic.], the third generation of Mandi, which is from this period. A genealogy history was compiled.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here you have the Memphis State Eight leaving the campus after the first day of integration, and we were leaving just a little bit before noon because we were ha- we were told we had to get off the campus by noon.
Speaker 2: These are the people, I am in the center here and the person to the right of me took care of me when my mother died. I did not get a chance to go to the funeral, so she was the one that made the announcement. And during the courses of the summer, my Aunt Callie Mae Robinson [ph.] took care of me until I graduated from high school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee], during the summer.
Story_ID: 613102
Speaker 1: These are the people that worked with me very diligently during the time of, of church [Greenwood C.M.E. Church, Memphis, Tennessee]. My choir director, my Christian education worker, all there at this event, and they are holding some of my little grandchildren.
Speaker 2: In this picture I am hooded at the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], that was called Memphis State [Memphis State University] with my master's degree, from my master's degree in education.
Speaker 1: This is a product of my work and my service at my school. I taught math, science and social studies. These are the children that I taught. And on this one, it looks like we are studying about measurement and using Coca-Cola as part of our measurements with liters and whatever, whatever (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) What school was this?
Speaker 1: This school is Lester Demonstration School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About what year do you think that was?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Or what decade?
Speaker 1: Oh it was in the ni- it was probably, I would say 19--probably 1996.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, not '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: I didn't graduate. I left that school in 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, not '99 [1999], really? You're younger then--you're younger then, that's only ten, eleven years ago. You're younger then--
Speaker 1: Okay, well maybe it was 1990. It's 1990 or something. I did so many of them, I can't remember, I did them every year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That looks to me like it's the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s]. Could that be?
Speaker 1: I worked there eighteen years, so I don't know. I grad- I left that school in 1997. So I would say somewhere in the 19--early 1990s.
Speaker 2: Here I am getting forty-five hours above in administration and supervision at Trevecca Naz- school of the Nazarene [Trevecca Nazarene College; Trevecca Nazarene University] in Nashville, Tennessee. Which is their highest degree that you can get, and of course I was a career level three teacher. So I was able to get recommended and commented--I got recognition for that merit award.
Speaker 1: Here these are all of my cousins, my first cousins who are the descendants of Omar R. Robinson, Sr. [Omar Robinson, Sr.] and Sarah Robinson. They are all of my first cousins who took care of me and mentored me. And the one, that man that's sitting is my--Omar, Jr. [Omar Robinson, Jr.] who gave me away when I got married, and the rest of them took me to the parks and sort of made life a little bit easier for me as I grew up as a junior high student.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You said the man seated on our right--
Speaker 1: Right there, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --is the man who gave you away, is that correct?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is the fir- this is school at Wells Station school [Wells Station Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee], and it's my first school after I was hired by the board of education [Memphis City Schools Board of Education; Shelby County Board of Education]. Somehow and another I had to stay out, they would not hire me. I would always have to go to do substitute work and I think it was the reason because I was in the civil rights and sit-in movement, the reason why it took them so long to hire me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This picture is probably the most impressive picture for me because it took so long for me to get a headstone for my mother [Gladys Robinson Kneeland]. I could not remember where she was buried and I had the cemetery, which is Mount Carmel Cemetery [Memphis, Tennessee], it's now closed, and they're not burying there anymore. So they could not find a headstone for her. My father [James Kneeland] had shown me the headstone, but I could not find it. So at this dedication to her, I had all of my children and all of my grandchildren that you see in this picture and my minister, and other cousins, Samella [ph.] and Maurice Watson [ph.] who are my gran- on my, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: After I graduated from school, or during the period of gradu- leaving Memphis State University, I was married to Rufus Jones [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.] and that's why my name now is Marvis LaVerne Kneeland Jones [HistoryMaker Marvis Kneeland Jones]. And we were married in 1962, and this is a ph- photo of that. We have been married for forty-eight years. So we're almost hitting that fifty.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my dear mother. My son Rufus Jones, Jr. was honored in taking a small picture and having it blown up in New York. And he sent that to me and gave that to me as a present for Christmas and I was so happy to get it. My mother died in 1949, and I was eight years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Here you have a picture of our four children. And they've all been very instrumental in getting, becoming educated, getting the highest degrees. The one, Gladys is named after my mother. Oh this, how do I name them. Okay, that one is--top to bottom, okay. That's Dorothy Denise Jones [Dorothy Jones], she's a director of finance at, at Frito-Lay [Frito-Lay, Inc.]. That's Dr. Ida Jones Pittman [Ida L.J. Pittman], she is a chemical engineer supervisor. Rufus E. Jones, Jr., who is--works for CastleOak investment company [CastleOak Securities, L.P.]. Gladys A. Jones, Dr. Gladys A. Jones, who is a doctor of education and business administration, and she works with her father in his--in his business, REJ and Associates out of Nashville [Tennessee].
