Story_ID: 648405
Speaker 1: So we'll begin, I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Scott Stearns.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  Did I say today's December 16, 2016, and sir would you say and spell your name, tell us your birthdate and what you do.
Speaker 2: My name is Walter Jackson [HistoryMaker Walter C. Jackson], it's W-A-L-T-E-R, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.  I was born January 21st, 1940; and I'm a sculptor.
Story_ID: 648406
Speaker 1: So we'll begin with what we call People magazine type questions, quick questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably a dessert, German chocolate cake.
Speaker 1: How about color?
Speaker 2: Color, probably black.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Time of year is fall.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anytime I go in my studio is a vacation.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Well one I'm accused of all the time is: it is what it is until you change it.
Story_ID: 648407
Speaker 1: So I'd like us to talk about your family, and we'll talk about both sides of your family.  Let's start with your father. If you--tell me his name when and where he was born and about him, and we'll talk about him and his family.
Speaker 2: Okay my father name is Willie Edge Jackson [Willie Jackson], he was born in Durant, Mississippi and that is in the township because it's in the country outside of the city itself.  He was, I guess a farmer like his parents 'cause it's a rural area and he was born in a, he was born on a farm.  And--
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1918.
Speaker 1: And he, they lived on a farm as well?
Speaker 2: He lived on a farm yes.  And, and I, I didn't know my father in the early years because when I was born which was 1940, my father went into the service, [U.S.] military World War II [WWII], and in about '42 [1942].  So I don't really have any memory of him until he got back from the service, and that was in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time his mother had passed and we were living with my great-grandmother [Emma Roberts] and so when he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, on my, on my mother's [Ruby Meeks Jackson] side, yes.  And so my first experience with him is, when he got out of service he came to the house.  And we have this big house with a fence around it and I had this dog that I had since I was about two years old called Penny [ph.].  And Penny didn't allow anyone in the yard, so you know my father came up to the gate and he was dressed in his military uniform with this knapsack on his back.  And the dog was going crazy you know and he was yelling, "Somebody come out here and get this dog."  Well they were expecting him I guess, but I wasn't, I didn't know a thing about it.  So that was pretty much my first experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were how old?
Speaker 2: At that time I was about let's see he got out of service in '45 [1945]. I was five years old, five years old.  And he was--
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Have one brother.
Speaker 1: Older or younger?
Speaker 2: Older.
Speaker 1: Did he know he was coming?
Speaker 2: I don't think so you know and, I was thinking about this because I don't remember what my brother's reaction was at that time.  Or if he was at the house even. All I can remember about it is that there was a man standing at the gate saying he wanted to get in.  And the dog was going crazy and I was, talk- called my mother and say you know, "There's this strange man out here. There's a strange man out here," (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you react once you, once he crossed into the yard, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I don't remember actually having much of a reaction at all other than here is a stranger.  And because what, what struck me was when he came in when, when my mother came out and she saw him, she immediately start smiling all over the place, and she just ran to him.  And I remember that image and I don't remember what I was thinking. I was just looking at it trying to understand what it was then, what it all meant.  And then he gave me one of his bags to hold, to take in the house and, and I did it, 'cause they asked me to do it but.  Exactly what my feelings was, I, I--it was like this is a stranger and my mother knows him.  And she's reacting very positively to him.
Story_ID: 648408
Speaker 1: After he [Jackson's father, Willie Jackson] returned home what work did he do?
Speaker 2: He did some farming for about a year and then he moved to Jackson [Mississippi] so I assumed they had the discussion about it.  Because only thing I remember is that he left one day to go to Jackson which is about sixty miles south of where we lived.  'Cause this was a farm and Jackson is the capital of Mississippi.  So he moved down there and got an apartment, he worked as a laborer at a meat packing company.  And we then moved to Jackson and this is where basically grew up from the time I was about six years old, until I left in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: And, and so you said his parents were farm- well his father was a farmer, was it, did his mother also participate in farming?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and do you know how far back, how far back can you trace his family?
Speaker 2: I can go back to his grandmother, my great-grandmother.  Well I know I can do that because I, you know it's not like in the personal sense that I know, I didn't know her.  Because she died the year I was born, she died in 1940. I was born in 1940.  But from records we have in the family, we can go back to his mother's mother.  And his mother's mother which is my great-grandmother was born in 1837. I believe it was '37 [1837] or '39 [1839].  I may not remember all these dates now I think you have to look them up.
Speaker 1: Okay so was she enslaved?
Speaker 2: She was and as far as the record we have she was, landed somewhere in--near Savannah, Georgia, and we're not sure how she ended up in Pickens.  But she was sold at some point to a family called the Peppers who lived in Pickens, Mississippi.  And she had three daughters which was my grandmother, named Martha [Martha Jackson]; Martha, Maggie [ph.] and Mary [ph.] was her daughters.
Speaker 1: And what was her name your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: Lydia [ph.]. That's the only name we have record of.
Speaker 1: Did your father, members of his family, talk about what they knew about slavery in the family?
Speaker 2: No not, not really and I think that's one of the things I probably regret more, most.  Because I never really asked the questions, and there was not much discussion of it.  And since I really didn't know in terms about my father's side, my father's family that well because like the most--for the most part we lived with my mother's [Ruby Meeks Jackson] family.  And that's where I grew up you know until the age of six and then we moved to Jackson.  And we would meet them occasionally and they would visit and this type of thing, but I really didn't know them as such.  And that's something that has happened more recently starting back in probably in the '80s [1980s].  Where everybody got into family reunions and things and we started trying to piece this stuff together.  But at that time you know a lot of people are already dead and so a lot of answers were gone.
Speaker 1: Did, is the farmland still owned in the family?
Speaker 2: Part of it is.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 648409
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother her name is Ruby, R-U-B-Y, Ruby Jackson and Ruby Meeks Jackson her maiden name was Meeks.  She was born in Kosciusko, Mississippi, now which kind of leads into how we ended where we were in Durant, Mississippi.  My great-grandmother, who my mother lived with 'cause my mother's mother, my grandmother, 'cause--can get all these grands straight--had my mother at a very young age, I don't remember the age and 'cause I don't remember anyone telling me.  But what I do know is that my mother grew up not with her mother, but with her grandmother.  And as a result of my early years was also spent with my great-grandmother, my mother's grandmother.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Emma, Emma Roberts.  Now what's interesting about this is that my great-grandmother who was married, she was Emma Carson when she was in Kosciusko.  And I don't know what happened to her first husband, Mr. Carson [ph.], don't even know his name, but she married a, a Roberts, Mose Roberts.  And they bought this farm in Durant which little over a hundred acre land, of land, and they moved there and this is where I grew up.  And this is the interesting part and the part is so much a part of what I am.  My great-grandmother lived in the house in, on the (unclear), in the middle of the farm.  On one end of the farm the eastern side my grandmother lived in a house, and on the western side my great aunt.  So all the family was on this farm and we were in the middle, I mean my mother and my brother and I and with my grandmother.  Now I can't tell you a lot about Mr. Roberts as everybody called him, because he died, I was less than five years old.  And I don't really remember a lot about him and except one or two things that was very precious to me as I think about him.  My brother had an interesting relationship with bread; he did not like cornbread.  And one day we, there was no flour in the house to do anything else but make cornbread.  And he was just not gonna have it and Mose went out, 'cause only travel at that time was either on horse I don't know why, you hitch up a wagon and go to town.  Town was about ten miles I guess from the farm.  And Mose would go out, hitch the wagon, get in it, drive to town, as he would say, "Because this boy does not want cornbread, and there's no reason why he should have to eat it."   And I always remember that about him and that's one of the few things, and the day they came to, the ambulance came to take him out of the house.  'Cause he died in the house, he had been ill, and that is pretty much my memory of Mose Roberts.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he passed?
Speaker 2: You know I really don't know and if I was doing anything it would be a guess, and it would be somewhere in fifties or sixties somewhere in there, maybe fifties.
Speaker 1: Can you spell the name of the town that the where your--I don't but it begins with a K.
Speaker 2: Kosciusko?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me that one (laughter) not really (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so it's not just me.  Kosciusko is it though right?
Speaker 2: Yes I have to actually write it down and then I can work out all the Cs and S's the Ks.
Speaker 1: Was that a farm town too?
Speaker 2: Yes that whole area is basically very rural area. It's a different county because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Than where? Than Pickens [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Kosciusko yeah, Kosciusko is in Attala County [Mississippi] and Durant is in Holmes County [Mississippi], but they border each other.
Story_ID: 648410
Speaker 1: And how did your parents [Ruby Meeks Jackson and Willie Jackson] meet?
Speaker 2: I really don't know. To be honest, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of those questions that I don't ever recall asking.
Speaker 1: Do you know when they got married?
Speaker 2: They got married in, I guess it would be I was trying to, trying to think, my father was about twenty years old when I was born.  He's about eighteen when my brother was born, so I knew they were married then, so you have to do the math (laughter) on that from--
Speaker 1: And where did they live after they got married?
Speaker 2: They lived for the first year, before he went into the [U.S.] military with his mother with, with Martha [Martha Jackson].  And after Martha died which was in 1940 and he went into the [U.S.] Army, they moved to my [maternal] great-grandmother's [Emma Roberts] house.
Speaker 1: And what did he do in the Army?
Speaker 2: He was in an engineering division. I mean, they did construction as I understand it, basically what the African American troops did at that time, they constructed roads, bridges and things.  So that the Army could move (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stateside or ev- where, wherever they went?
Speaker 2: Wherever they went when he was--see 'cause he spent most of the time in, in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He trained in, I've forgotten the name of that base now which was in southern Mississippi and then they shipped out.  'Cause I know they came through New York [New York] he talks about that, and then they shipped out to, to France.
Speaker 1: And so you said he came back when you were about five?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you all, as you--as a family moved where again did you say?
Speaker 2: To Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: To Jackson, which is the capital.
Speaker 2: Which is the capital.
Speaker 1: So now you're in the big city?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 648411
Speaker 1: When you, whether it is there or even earlier, I want you to go back to your earliest childhood memory. What would that be?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory you know I'm not sure I can do a memory as such because there are a number of memorable events and things that happened.  And they all seem very significant to me at this time.
Speaker 1: Well you can share more than one.
Speaker 2: And because you know the first mem- I mean not the first memory, but one of the memories of and, and maybe they are just the experiences of growing up in the country.  Because we spent like I said a lot of time with my cousins and my aunts and uncles.  Because my mother's mother, like I said my mother's [Ruby Meeks Jackson] the first child and she was very young when she had us.  So I have an aunt who is about three, four months older than I am, and uncles who are a year, two years this kind of thing.  And so I grew up with this family and on the other end I had some cousins who are about my age.  And we were always, when I think of my experience, I think of their experience, because they were always there, everybody was there.  And--
Speaker 1: Were they living in the same home?
Speaker 2: No, like I said it was these three houses [near Durant, Mississippi] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --and, but everybody got together ev- every not almost, but every day. It was like you take care of the chores and after you have, as they said, supper, then you go to one house or the other.  And you spend the evening.
Speaker 1: So supper among the three houses would be at one place?
Speaker 2: No I'm talking about individually supper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometime they'd get together but most it would be individual.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And individually, and, and then after eating we'd all go to my grandmother's [Jackson's maternal great-grandmother, Emma Roberts] house, and they would spend the evening there.  The older people would be talking and kids running around all over the place.  On other evenings, we might go to my great aunt's house, so it was really pretty close family.  And our world existed for the most part on that farm.
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: And, and it, the experience, a lot of things that happened on the farm like one of my greatest experiences, maybe one of the reasons I like fall, is that in the fall of the year after harvest and everything it would be hog killing time.  And that was always very festive kind of event, you know because it wouldn't be just one family.  We decide we gonna kill some hogs and get ready for the winter years [sic.], it would, everybody would come together to do it.  You know we'd be at this house, we might do it this week and next week we go to the next house, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And were these hogs that you raised?
Speaker 2: Yeah that we raised, yeah, it was, it was a working farm, small subsistent farm basically, but with hogs, chickens the whole nine yards.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the ritual around the killing of the hog?
Speaker 2: Well it, you know I, it's interesting 'cause I don't know if it was so much a ritual or just something that evolved as I remember it.  But it was easier to do the work with everybody being involved, and as the result of that, they all just decided, "Oh today we're gonna you know kill your hogs.  And tomorrow we will do ours." And et cetera.  And the whole business of killing it, cutting it, making the sausage and things of that nature, and then doing the sampling.  'Cause the kids loved the sampling, you know, it's like you do those sage sausage and then you fry some of them up, and see if you need to do some different seasoning.  And that was always great for me. It was just a fun time.
Speaker 1: And did you help?
Speaker 2: Depending on who you talk to (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I thought I was being helpful and yet basically I guess I was in the way.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Or like, like a lot of--
Story_ID: 648412
Speaker 1: So just the, the process of preparing the hog, because it would last the, through the winter, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: I know that there, I, I'd like for you to share salting, you know, was, was some of it, did you have refrigeration so you could freeze some of it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, right?
Speaker 2: And it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you do to preserve it?
Speaker 2: It's salt. There would be bags and bags of salt and especially for hams, shoulders you know and fat meat as they would say or bacon what you call.  That was all salted and it would be a big bin in which was completely fill- lined with salt.  And then the meat would be placed in it and then more salt on top.  Now I don't really remember the whole process on how that was done, but I know initially it was completely covered in salt.  And then they would, they would last a certain amount of time and then they would take out or take some of the salt off.  And once it got cured, you know you could then take it out of the salt then and they just hang it in the, in the, in the, the little house.
Speaker 1: What are the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Smokehouse as they would call it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648413
Speaker 1: What are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember during your childhood [in Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: The more pleasant ones during the holidays when cooking was happening because in most country homes I mean they do a lot of cooking of cakes and pies and all kinds of stuff.  And it's just those aromas that were really wonderful, and I still think about that every time I walk past a bakery or something (laughter), you know, so.
Speaker 1: So the sweets?
Speaker 2: Sweets, absolutely.
Speaker 1: What about the sounds?
Speaker 2: The sounds maybe not so much, sounds I would relate more to like I'd say preparing meats and things.  The, 'cause some of those sounds when you think about them are kind of horrific to some kind of extent.  The, the slaughtering of an animal is and--as you get older you develop a very different attitude about that.  But you know as a child it, you're involved in it and it seems like a, a lot of fun in what everybody's doing.  But I think those are sounds I remember in not you know, really pleasant ways.
Story_ID: 648414
Speaker 1: Was your family religious?
Speaker 2: Somewhat, yes; not, not strict in it, but yes they were, they believed in God, went to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: What church?
Speaker 2: We attended Georgeville Methodist C.M.E. Church [Georgeville Methodist Church, Durant, Mississippi], which, again was about a three mile walk from, from the farm.
Speaker 1: So everybody walked to church?
Speaker 2: Yes, or they would well not everybody, the kids would usually walk.  We'd go earlier for Sunday school and my [maternal] great-grandmother [Emma Roberts] would come usually in the wagon; they would hitch up the wagon and someone would drive in.  And then we'd get a ride home.  And that was kind of interesting too because for the first few years of my life you know only transportation in that area was horse and buggy.  Or horse and wagon, actually wagon, and finally a man who lived, it's a little ways from us bought a, an old car. I don't know what kind of car.  It was the kind you cranked it up to get it started.  And we were all so excited about that you know, and he would, he lived on one side of us.  His farm road was on the eastern side of our farm and the church was to the west.  So he had to come by on the way to church, and he would come by every morning, and he would give us a ride.  But he would never stop because he didn't wanna have to crank it up again, so he'd slow down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had to jump.
Speaker 2: --and you, as a child you know you got to catch and jump on there (unclear) (laughter), so.  And it, it was fun for us you know we all loved doing it you know.
Story_ID: 648415
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to school at, from the elementary school, Smith Robertson [Smith Robertson School] in Jackson [Mississippi].  I did go for and I don't think I mentioned it for one year at a one room country school called Shady Groves [Shady Grove School (ph.)] out in the country, just a year before we moved.  And I was five years old at the time, not old enough to go to school when it started, but I was gonna be six, 'cause I was born in January.  So I was gonna be six and my mother [Ruby Meeks Jackson] decided you should go, so we kind of convinced the teacher that I was six years old.  She didn't be, of course she didn't believe it and nobody asked for a birth certificate at that time.  So I spent a year at Shady Grove elementary school and then we moved to Jackson and I was six.  I started that year all over again (laughter) at Smith Robertson, so I was prepared, put it that way.
Speaker 1: So Smith Robertson elementary school was the first public school building for African American children in Jackson I read. That it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thi- I, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Of course that was way before you were going there--
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: --but it's historic in that sense.
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause now it is a museum, basically a historic museum. They--
Speaker 1: The, the school?
Speaker 2: The school is what, what was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh okay.
Speaker 2: What was Smith Robert, they turned it into that a, a community center and historical museum [Smith Robertson Museum and Cultural Center, Jackson, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 648416
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your elementary school experience.  So you're in Jackson [Mississippi], this is your first school there.  Is this a segregated school [Smith Robertson School, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We--
Speaker 1: And it's the big city, so what's it like for you as a country boy coming into the big city?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I don't know. I can't say that it impacted me one way or the other too much.  The only difference is that the people I did start to hang out with, the friends were not family.  And I think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a big difference.
Speaker 2: --that was, that was the major difference because what was interesting about that too is that we first moved to the house we lived in when we went to spend--'cause we lived for a couple months when my, my father [Willie Jackson] had an apartment.  And when we first moved there we went into the apartment and that was not gonna do as far as my mother [Ruby Meeks Jackson] said. It's--she just couldn't have it.  So we bought this little house and when we moved to the neighborhood, it's you have to kind of fight your way in with all the guys on the street.  And that was a new experience, and there was one kid called Frank Bonzie [ph.]. I never will forget Frank Bonzie.  'Cause he became a very good friend of mine, but Frank and I used to fight every day for the first month that we lived on the street.
Speaker 1: Now when you say fight you, you talking literally blows (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm talking about blows. Yes I'm talking blows. I mean you know we were six, seven year old kids, but I mean that was just the nature of it.  It was, I walk out the house and for some reason Frank just had to confront me (laughter).  And we would go at it, I mean for the first couple days it was like everybody was getting to know each other.  But for whatever reason Frank and I just kind of couldn't get, couldn't get along.  And I laugh about it now because in the end we became really close (laughter) and very close friends.  And so my friends then were people that I hung with on the street that we'd go to their house and we'd sit around and we'd draw all day.
Story_ID: 648417
Speaker 1: You'd draw all day?
Speaker 2: Yeah on days we would do a lot of drawing I mean and I, I just assumed all kids did this, you know.  'Cause that was our routine, cars, airplanes, almost everything.
Speaker 1: And were you drawing be- before you got to Jackson [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes and, and maybe in as a lead into that, let me just mention this.  One of the most, well one of the influential people in my life was my Uncle M.C. [ph.] we called him.  And M.C. had a really creative knack about him, everything he did, he was a great storyteller.  And I learned later on that a lot of the stories that he told was very much similar to those African tales about the ants and the Anasaz- not the Anasazi but the Anansi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --stories that they were very similar to that.  But what he would do, and we'd sit around at night, like I say during these visits back and forth to each other.  And he would have the kids all there and he would start telling stories.  And we would just sit there in amazement looking at him, listening to see.  And when he wasn't doing that he was always constructing some type of contraption for us to play on.  Spinning jennys and all kinds of things, and cutting off circular disc from a tree to make wheels and then we'd make these little carts and run up and down the street with them.  And put pine rods and in a tin can and attach it to it and light it up and do it at night with lights.  That was M.C. and his creativity that brought all of that to us, and I'd love to hang out with him.  And we would just do things and drawing.  So that's where a lot of the early stuff came from.  So when I got to Jackson then, it was just something I was naturally accustomed to doing, and I assumed all, several of my friends who would do it too.  They'd come to my house and we'd sit around there. We weren't shooting marbles, we'd be drawing, or I'd go to their house and we'd be drawing.
Speaker 1: And were you selecting different things to draw? Did you talk about it or just, what, how, how did it go?
Speaker 2: Well I think we were typical kids in a sense that you do cowboys you know horses and you do later on the airplanes, cars a lot of that.  And people, so it was just a lot of what I considered normal things that kids draw.
Speaker 1: Were you doing realistic work at that point?
Speaker 2: As much as we could make it (laughter).
Speaker 1: How realistic was it? Do you have any of those little drawings?
Speaker 2: No unfortunately I don't.  I'd like to think they were pretty good though, that they were pretty realistic.  I don't remember, I don't remember ever really struggling with that and thinking I can't make this look real. That was never a challenge for me, a problem.
Speaker 1: What mediums were you working in?
Speaker 2: Oh, at this time we were just pencils and crayons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648418
Speaker 1: When did you start taking art in school?
Speaker 2: I think I started taking art, it had, it was probably junior high.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we did drawing in, in elementary [Smith Robertson School, Jackson, Mississippi] but I don't remember class specifically in drawing.  If we did, I just don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Well I think in elementary school a lot of children, you know, there are things you have to draw.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is different from an art class.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Meaning in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That in that sense yes, we did that, but in terms of class time.
Speaker 1: So you get to junior high is Lanier Junior [Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi], so it's junior senior high?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It, it goes through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It goes from seventh through twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And at that school you have a formal art class?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What happens for you when you take art class now you've been drawing all this time and now you're getting formal instruction?
Speaker 2: Well let's backup just a bit on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause my first creative interest actually was music before, before art.  Art was something I did; music was a class I took.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I started that in probably eighth grade I believe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--
Speaker 2: --at--yes, and what had happened one fall or, I don't know, it was either late summer or fall.  We were hanging around the, the campus and the music teacher was there.  And we were talking, I was, I wasn't even thinking about taking any classes, and he start talking with us about music classes.  And so I said well yeah you know we're interested in music.  And interesting enough, you know, first I was talking to [HistoryMaker] Dick Griffin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh (unclear).
Speaker 2: --jazz trombonist now.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We started same time in taking trombone lessons.
Speaker 1: You were taking trombone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was taking trombone and it, it's well what's interesting about the trombone and I think it happens to, I've talked to other people it happened to a lot of people.  It's that it's not the most popular instrument you know and then when you (simultaneous)---
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's huge too isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah well for a small child with short arms I mean yes it can be a challenge.  But you know you wanna take, you wanna play trumpet or a saxophone or something, and in my case it was trumpet.  And you go in and then the, and the music teacher would say, "Well if you wanna be in the band, then you need to take trombone.  'Cause we got a lot of trumpet players," (laughter), "you know we really need some trombone players.  And you have a better chance of making the band." So, okay, I played trombone, so we start playing trombone.  And you develop an interesting kind of love hate relationship with the trombone (laughter).  It's a, it's, it's a strange, it's an interesting instrument.  So eighth grade, ninth grade and I was in the band in the ninth grade, and I was still doing drawings.  And I think ninth grade yeah I was taking up a drawing class, but I hadn't made the, the switch yet.  And, in the ninth, during the ninth grade I got real ill. I had pneumonia actually.  And I, it was somewhere along November or something when it happened, and so I was out of school.  And when I went back I, it was I don't know and it was already wintertime so I didn't go back that year, I just stayed out until the next year.  And so when I went back I decided not to do the trombone any longer, and decided I'd concentrate on art.  So it's pretty much that illness that took the trombone away from me (laughter) to some extent. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it phys- a physical reason because you're using the op-because you're using a wind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought it was a physical reason and, and you know as I look back on it, there was no real reason not to continue.  It's just that, I don't know, I'd lost all of my wind capacity, 'cause I, I was really sick and almost died went to high--spent almost a month in the hospital, oh it was a bad case of pneumonia, so when I start to recover, I don't know some extent and maybe I connected that with the trombone playing.  Because that year we, we played in that football game in our shirt in the cold in a shirt because we didn't have uniforms at that time.  So we're in black pants and a, just a regular shirt and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out in the winter, with no coat.
Speaker 2: It was, it was cold November, it was like November, so I kind of equated that with my illness. Probably didn't have much to do with it, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: Being outside in the winter without a coat, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I made the connection and you know it was kind of short. You take your coat off, you go out and you perform on the football field.  And then you get back in the stand, put your coat on and play.  But for whatever reason I decided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was it.
Speaker 2: --I wanted to concentrate on the, on the art then.  And that's when I really start feeling confident.
Speaker 1: And that's in the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: And that's ninth grade, yes.
Story_ID: 648419
Speaker 1: As you decide to take art seriously what then are you doing?
Speaker 2: I'm doing painting and drawing primarily.
Speaker 1: And what are you painting and drawing? What are your subjects? What is your subject matter?
Speaker 2: Subject matter? Oh it varied. They were people, you--always painting somebody portrait.  And landscapes, so it's basically that kind of thing, landscape portraiture.
Speaker 1: What type of paint are you using?
Speaker 2: Watercolors and oils doing basically the watercolors during the ninth grade. By the tenth grade, I was using a lot of oil paint.  And it was a little 'bout that time my father [Willie Jackson] had, was talking to people where he worked about his son painting.  So I got my first commission. Somebody had a calendar of--with an angel and, and certainly some kids.  And they thought it was a beautiful thing, so they asked my father if I would paint it for them, so my (laughter) my first commission was copy, a picture from a calendar.  You know they would pay me for it, and I think I made all of ten dollars probably to do this painting.  And, but it was interesting because after that then I start getting other people who wanted, "Hey I like that."  But it was always something they wanted me to copy, but for myself, I was--it, it portrait, landscape, things of that nature.
Speaker 1: These copies were they, did you do it to your literal best or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To my--
Speaker 1: --were they your interpretations.
Speaker 2: --to my literal best (laughter). It was like--
Speaker 1: To make it as much like a photograph huh?
Speaker 2: --make it as close to that image that they gave me, you know 'cause there would be a small thing, they just wanted a bigger picture of this thing.  And they wanted a painting, so you know it had to be as close as you, "Can he actually paint this?" Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you switch to your ideas as opposed to in, in terms of offering them to the public?
Speaker 2: That would probably be my junior year really in high school [Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: Yeah when it, I first started to thinking more about, and I think that was as a result of we had a teacher for in, one year named Billy Cook [ph.].  Interesting I remember certain people's names.  Who at the time had just graduated from Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], the art department and he's really a very good painter.  And his work was basically social commentary kind of imagery, but in a somewhat stylistic bordering on cubistic approach to it.  And that intrigued me and so I basically start borrowing some of his ideas (laughter) you know as a, as I studied with him for a year.  And so lot of the stuff then became mostly a kind of social commentary I think.
Speaker 1: Were you going to museums or art galleries as a child?
Speaker 2: No because the, we had a museum at that time. It, I don't even know if it was considered an art museum. It, it was more of anthropological stuff.  And I do remember going there once on a school trip, and galleries there were, there were couple frame shops in Jackson [Mississippi] that I recall.  Because I was fortunate enough actually to show in one, not to have a show but to have some work in, in, in the gallery.  But no not really.
Speaker 1: Then your exposure as a child was to you, you and your friends and, and these--and this teacher?
Speaker 2: And the teacher yes and there was artwork exhibitions and, 'cause there were student shows at Jackson State.  Probably so it was, either I'd go, oh and also I, to add to that, Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], 'cause Tougaloo was in that area.  And so I was exposed to some work at, 'cause Tougaloo had a very good collection of early 20th century work that had been donated to them.  And so I was able to see some of that, and to interact with the teacher there.
Story_ID: 648420
Speaker 1: So after you go to Lincoln High School [sic.], yes?
Speaker 2: Lanier [Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Excuse me, Lanier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It, it changed name later to Lincoln [sic.] I think.
Speaker 2: Oh, it did?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh that's what it says here, but it was Lanier when you were there, right?
Speaker 2: It was Lanier when I was there.
Speaker 1: And then when it's time to go to college are you making the decision that art is the path that you're gonna take?
Speaker 2: Yes it's pretty clear at that time that that's what I wanted to do, and in addition to that art is what got me a scholarship (laughter) in college (laughter).  So that helped pay for some of the bill--pay some of the bills.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: So wha- did, in terms of getting a scholarship for art do you have to submit a portfolio?
Speaker 2: Well the, the scholarship came, yes and also but basically it came through an exhibition that they have.  Like I say every year they would hold high school art exhibition, and the winner of that exhibition was pretty much guaranteed some funding.  Or if you were a senior in college, and so my senior year in high school I won that competition.  And the, the department head knew, I knew him and he knew my work to some extent, and there were, like I say there were two people at Lanier at that time, Paul Campbell a friend of mine who's a painter and myself.  And we had a lot of good friendly competitions in terms of who were the better painter (laughter)?
Speaker 1: And you won.
Speaker 2: That year I did. He had won the year before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or in the--
Speaker 1: And was your scholarship a full scholarship?
Speaker 2: It was tuition.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I was living at home, so everything worked out for me.
Story_ID: 648421
Speaker 1: And what exactly was your art, or is your major?
Speaker 2: My major was art education because that's the program they offered then.  And it was a bachelor's of science in art education with, then it was geared toward teaching art, becoming an art teacher.  Basically that's what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Well and I guess is that how you would be guaranteed work?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What are you learning at the school [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well you're, you're learning painting 'cause you, you're taking painting classes, drawing classes. There are a certain number of craft classes.  But the major areas there were painting, ceramics, had an excellent ceramics teacher and crafts.  And the crafts that was involved in I took things like leather craft, mosaic, making a mosaic glass and this type of thing and drawing.  There was no sculpture.
Speaker 1: There was no sculpture, nothing--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --nothing large scale.
Speaker 2: Other than painting, some of the paintings were fairly large, but no, it's no sculpture and, but what was interesting about that too though is that the painting teacher, who's also the head of the department.  And I think it was result of something we were doing in design class, 'cause there was sculpture in a sense of the 3D [three dimensional] design class you did some models, some plaster casting things of that nature.  And he came in one day with a limb, part of a tree about yay long (demonstrates) I guess, and said, "You want this? Why don't you do something with it." And gave it to me.  And he said, "I got some tools in here you can use." So went in and he laid out all these carving tools.  And that was basically my first real piece of sculpture. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this in your first year?
Speaker 2: It was I think probably my second year.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Second year there.
Speaker 1: What did you make?
Speaker 2: I, I did this, because of the way it was curved, shaped the wood I did this figure of, it's a female figure and I suppose it's cliche if you do a female figure.  With hands up over the head and because there was a knot right in there (points) I put that for the head right in there.  And it, for me it was a very symbolic thing (laughter). I, I didn't, I didn't know why to some extent.  But it was like this figure then emerging out of this, because I didn't carve it all the way down to the end, the feet.  I left part of it on and just kind of brought the figure up, so it started at about slightly above the knees and up.  And in the sense of the figure coming out of this form.
Speaker 1: How did your teacher respond to that?
Speaker 2: Oh he thought it was great, he loved it and you know was encouraging me to do more.  But at the time I really didn't do much more than that. Did some plaster things, but I was thinking of myself as a painter at that time (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 648422
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dick Griffin went to the same college [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] as you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you started in high school together [at Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and when, so he's studying music as you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --as you're studying--
Speaker 2: As I'm studying art, yes.
Speaker 1: Who else is in school with you?
Speaker 2: Someone who is fairly well known or was, is Frederick Waits [Freddie Waits]. He was a jazz drummer and unfortunately he passed away in the '80s [1980s].  And but Freddie as, as was probably one of the earliest people that we went to class, went to school with.  High school, who actually left Jackson [Mississippi], became a full time musician and knew, we all knew.  He was playing with Paul Winter's group originally and they came back to Jackson with the Paul Winter Sextet and we were all there to see Freddie.
Speaker 1: So he was the first one before, before Dick?
Speaker 2: Before Dick yes in terms of our class.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Classmates on that, yeah.  I think Freddie is as soon as I can remember Freddie was first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he complete college or he just went off?
Speaker 2: I think Freddie left Jackson as, I don't know if he ever finished or not, but he left I think during his sophomore year.  I think he came to New York [New York] after his sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Well and, and your friend Dick did great work, I mean he became a big musician working with a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the big artists, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 648423
Speaker 1: At the same time as you are in college pursuing your art, some interesting things are happening in the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Including the Freedom Rides?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and Medgar Evers was in school with you, correct, or he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was not in school with me, no.  Medgar lived on the same street I did in, in Jackson [Mississippi], 'cause we had moved from our first house out into--little bit on the outskirts of town and they had opened up a little development, a new development.  And Medgar lived three doors, three houses down from me.  And that 'cause one of the strange things, in a way tragic things at that time, 'cause when he was assassinated it was my senior year at college in Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  And I was at home that night finishing up some papers that I had to do to graduate.  And when the shot went off and 'cause of initially you know you, you hear this bang and you, you don't really think too much about it.  Or think, hm, wonder what that was, and then all of a sudden you could hear, I assume it was Myrlie [Myrlie Evers Williams] his wife, you know scream.  And then we all, and all the neighbors everybody ran out to see what was, what was going on, a very tragic thing.  And like it was pretty much during my senior year at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was '63 [1963] 'cause I graduated in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: So all this stuff is going on in the United States in the South--
Speaker 2: In, in the Sou- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you were?
Speaker 2: --in the South and in Jackson.
Speaker 1: And, and you're living so close to Medgar Evers, did you talk to him about the, what's going on, the civil unrest in the, in the country?
Speaker 2: Yes we're all I think very much aware, and involved to some extent in what was going on, but Medgar was very interesting in a sense that he didn't proselytize or try to convince you know, you gotta get out, you gotta do this.  He was not that way. He was very kind of, to some extent low key. You knew what he was involved in and you knew, 'cause he was in and out of the neighborhood all the--he was gone a lot.  And we all, we knew that in a lot of it he was doing investigation or going to get information about other things.  And, and you knew that some of that was dangerous, but you know it was not never really in the forefront of your thinking.  It was there and you knew it, you were aware of it, and so was he, but he never you know talked about it.  At least not with me 'cause I wasn't, can't say that I was a close friend of his. I was not.  But he was someone that I knew, that I interact- that I had conversations with.  And it was never, he never talked in the terms of that kind of danger or never any cautionary sense.  He would, it was a very natural kind of conversation you'd have with him about the issues and about things.  As though it wasn't as threatening and close as it was, and yet you knew it was that.  Now those years like '60 [1960] fif- and '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963] especially during the summer.  'Cause the summer of '62 [1962] I spent a couple of weeks that summer with voter registration, but I was, but that was through SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  'Cause I had two guys, two friends, a high school friend that knew, they were not involved in art, they went to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi].  And Tougaloo being a private school was able to have a lot of meetings, civil rights meetings and things of that nature, so I would go up with them.  And so they got involved with SNCC in about '62 [1962], and we did some voter registration around Jackson.  And middle of the summer I left Jackson and interestingly came up to Bear Mountain, New York and worked at a Girl Scout camp [Camp Laughing Water] for a latter part of that summer.
Story_ID: 648424
Speaker 1: You went to Bear Mountain for what reason?
Speaker 2: I took a job there at a Girl Scout camp [Camp Laughing Water] of all places. I, I knew someone who was looking for people to work at camps during the summer.  And they sa- they needed someone who could serve as a handyman who's pretty good with tools and things.  Being a sculptor, being an artist actually, you know you just develop those skills, and who could drive, who also had driver's license.  So I told (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is while you're still in college [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes I'm still in college, yeah.  This is my junior year I think it was, the summer.
Speaker 1: How interesting. So many people were coming to the South at that point.
Speaker 2: Right and, and the like I said that's what was interesting about it, because for the first few weeks of that summer we had been doing canvassing the city for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] doing voter registration.  And when the chance to make some money came along, I said, "Okay I'll do it for six weeks."  And so went off to Bear Mountain, New York and my friends, high school friends, they got very involved with SNCC.  And had went to Yazoo City [Mississippi] to do some voter registration in Yazoo City and it was like the things that they were telling me and you know I'm sitting there and in, in this camp where it's all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With Girl Scouts (laughter).
Speaker 2: --Girl Scouts and you know tree, grass all leaves, lake and this whole nine yards, and they are talking about bullets being fired into the house that they lived in, in Yazoo City.
Speaker 1: Because people didn't want the voter registration.
Speaker 2: People did not want the voter registration going on; they didn't want those drives going on.  And you know it was like every day, every night rather you didn't know what was gonna happen as they were explaining to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did any of your friends get hurt?
Speaker 2: No fortunately did not.  And but yeah, you've, you feel, well and, and not just feel you are completely out of it in that sense.  And you kind of know what it is and you go back and maybe the next summer you work a few weeks, but you're gone again.  But there was, like I say that type of turmoil was happening and right after Medgar [Medgar Evers] was shot, there were protests.  And a lot of the younger people were really prepared to do some major damage if they could.  But the older folks had said, "Well let's not do it that way, and we're gonna stick to the peaceful protesting." Which, which they did.  Even though still lot of kids got arrested for that.
Speaker 1: How involved were you?
Speaker 2: I really can't say I was involved that deeply, because for me it was, I participated in certain I, I'd go to certain meetings on the campus of Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  And get involved in some of that I would do some voter registration canvassing and that was pretty much the extent of it.
Speaker 1: As you were doing the voter registration canvassings, were you ever encountering people who were hostile because you were doing it?
Speaker 2: I hate to say, but yes and one of my memories in and it's not a pleasant one.  But it's not one in a sense of my person being in danger or anything; it was just the reaction I got from an older black gentleman when I went to talk with him about voting.  And his reaction to me was he didn't wanna talk about it 'cause he's been fine.  He's lived in Jackson [Mississippi] all these years and everything's been fine, and he didn't wanna stir up anything.  At the time I was just very upset, put it that way. Since then, I think I've begun to understand where he was coming from, maybe a little better what he was saying.  And maybe the fears that he had at that time.  But there were instances of that in, but you can contrast that with people who were very anxious and very happy to do the voting.  To sign up and you know where, what do you want me to do and where can I do it?
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Ruby Meeks Jackson and Willie Jackson], how, how did your family feel about you doing this voter registration canvassing?
Speaker 2: They were fine with it, they were fine with it, it was, was never anything of a major discussion about it one way or the other.  It was what was needed to be done and as much as I can do it.  Now if I had maybe decided to, which is some friends did actually quit school, and these were friends who basically were close with SNCC.  Who left school and went off to Atlanta [Georgia] and really got involved in it completely, there probably would've been some pushback.  Because one of the things my mother especially wanted me to do is finish college. It would--that was important to her that I got that degree.
Story_ID: 648425
Speaker 1: And when did you get your degree?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: And aft- after that what did you do?
Speaker 2: After that I got a job in Memphis [Tennessee] after sitting around for months, actually panicking because I didn't think I was gonna get a job anywhere.  And even what was interesting about that too 'cause the most of my friends had already gotten jobs and gone off, and I'm sitting wondering, okay what am I'm gonna do?
Speaker 1: And what kind of studies had they done in school?
Speaker 2: Well I, I'm thinking now of people who are in the art department.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Like, like I said one of my close friends, Paul Campbell who's a painter and I went to high school with [at Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  You know he graduated from Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and got a job at the local high school there, one of the high schools I think it was.  I was trying to remember where he, where he worked, I just don't remember the school's name.  It may have been Rowan Junior High [Rowan Junior High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  And someone else that I was really close with, she didn't, I didn't go to high school with her, but she was in college, in college together and she had gotten a job.  And it was like, "Where you, where you gonna, where you going?" "I don't know." (Laughter) You know and--.  The head of the art department sent someone by my house somewhere in late July to talk to me about a job down at Crystal Springs I believe Mississippi.  But I had had an interview earlier with a recruiter from Memphis and the same day this person came by I got a letter from Memphis asking me if I was interested in coming there to work in their art department?  So I--if I did, if I were, give them a call and so I called Memphis and we talked and, so I end up going to Memphis.
Speaker 1: To the high school?
Speaker 2: To the high school there and they needed someone to take over that department, and that was me.
Speaker 1: So your first job was running the art department at this school?
Speaker 2: At a, at a high school and so it was, it, it was basically a high school and the junior high school.  So the, it was two art teachers, a department of two.
Speaker 1: With how many students?
Speaker 2: Junior high because there was a requirement that they all take one class of art, so that one was gonna be at least thirty students per class generally.  The high school was pretty much elective, so my classes were generally around twenty would be pretty full class.  Sometime down as low as fifteen students, but somewhere between twenty, twenty-five, fifteen.
Speaker 1: And for the classes where it was required, were all the children engaged?
Speaker 2: It was a challenge to, to get them engaged, because the first teacher who was teaching the junior high especially that was not her first area of concern.  And she was having a difficult time with it, and so it was a challenge trying to get, and I, you know I'd have probably the same challenges with junior high.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: 'Cause (laughter) junior high is not as, either way you go it's a challenge.  But yes the, the beauty of high school is that most of the students are taking it because it's something they're interested in.  You do get athletes who take it because they think it's something that they can get an easy grade of and stay a qualified to just do sports yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that a rude awakening when they were in your class?
Speaker 2: That was a rude awakening, it was a rude awakening and 'cause I've had instances where coaches would actually come and say, "Well can you do something for me, you need to help.  I need to get him, I really need him." And it was like, "We don't do it that way. If I do that then what happen to the other students? It's not fair to them."  So no, we had to straighten out a lot of things. I'd like to think when I got to Douglass [Douglass High School, Memphis, Tennessee], one was that the art department was not a supply room for anybody who wanted to do bulletin board work and they needed paper or paints or what have you.  That we didn't operate that way, and that the students couldn't just leave class to go work on their decoration--that they actually had assignments to do.
Story_ID: 648426
Speaker 1: So getting them to take it seriously took some time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, that was the biggest challenge to establish a kind of different approach to what art is about, and why we do it.
Speaker 1: Quite different from when you were growing up and you thought that everybody chose to draw huh?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter) very different.
Speaker 1: Are, you, obviously you teaching the students how to use different media and how to do different types of art projects.  Are you, you are--the students reflecting in their work any of the things that are going on in their world you know in the, during this time?
Speaker 2: Absolutely some of them are and very much so because I, I know one of the things that I would ask in terms of number of the classes would be that they had to do that.  It was like, "Tell me--." To some extent it was kind of like an interview in an artwork, "Tell me something about yourself.  What do you do or what do you think of this." Because at that time there were a lot of things happening.  Still going on from the '60s [1960s] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is six- starting in '63 [1963] and I was there from '63 [1963] to '68 [1968]. When I first got to Memphis [Tennessee], public schools were segregated.  The same way they were in, in Jackson [Mississippi]. They desegregated public schools in Memphis in I would think it was probably '66 [1966] or '7 [1967].  'Cause we got the first group of white teachers at Douglass High School [Memphis, Tennessee] was '67 [1967] I believe.  And I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did teachers come before the students?
Speaker 2: Yes long before the students, 'cause in '68 [1968] when I left we had a grand total I believe of one white student, and about, there were at least five white teachers.  It, it, it wasn't, I don't think it was a, it was a good thing to do but I think to some extent the black schools gave the most as a result of.  'Cause when they start moving teachers around, the teachers we lost were some of the top teachers in the math and science area especially.  And the teachers we got were usually first year people just out of Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] with the degree.  So it just, the, the matchup.
Speaker 1: And where did those great teachers go?
Speaker 2: They went to the various white schools, that schools had been originally white.
Speaker 1: So this is just another example of the flip side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--
Speaker 1: --of desegregation?
Speaker 2: Desegregation yes, because in, in their telling, "Okay we're gonna, we're gonna, we gotta desegregate it so here's what we gonna do you know.  We can move teachers around." So we got at the black schools, at least at Douglass where I was.  We got two types of teachers, and I can't put everybody in the category as not being good, because there were one, a teacher that I know that I knew that was excellent. She was really good, really tried.  But we got teachers who were their first year and had varying degrees of interest in being there.  And we also got one who had been in every school in the Memphis school system [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District].   They couldn't get rid of her, so they said, "Send her to Douglass." She absolutely had no interest in being in any school, I don't, I would imagine, and definitely not in being in Douglass.  So this is some extent what we got and then that's why I saying it wasn't all good in that sense.
Speaker 1: Well it's, it's interesting 'cause the intention many thought was good.
Speaker 2: Right and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the outcome was often very different.
Speaker 2: The outcome, the initial outcome--and I don't know if it has gotten any better, but the initial outcome was not very good.
Story_ID: 648427
Speaker 1: And I suppose if you wanna be positive, you can look at it as, you can expect this probably to happen when you first do this desegregation thing.  It's, 'cause you're fighting against people who don't wanna do it, and that you hope as time progresses that it would change.  And that people become a little more objective in what they're doing and what they're doing it.  And would think at least a little bit more about the students, the kids.  But, but at, like I say during these, these years of the '60s [1960s] there, there were a lot of turmoil going on in Memphis [Tennessee].  'Cause this was the time, my last year there was when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in Memphis.
Speaker 2: Right I mean you were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was--
Speaker 2: Were you there when--
Speaker 1: I was there--
Speaker 2: --the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated too in '63 [1963], were you--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --there already?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So you were there for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was there--
Speaker 2: --these two, two of the events--
Speaker 1: Two, two of them, yes.
Speaker 2: --and what about Malcolm X, when did he--?
Speaker 1: Let's see Malcolm what time, when was, when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't remember.
Speaker 1: I can't remember when Malcolm, the day, I don't think that I was--
Speaker 2: I don't know when that was.
Speaker 1: --there when Malcolm.  I think that was later [sic.]. I just don't remember I think the dates on that.
Speaker 2: As a teacher you know when, the teachers are the guardians of these children that when, when these catastrophic things are occurring.  How were you engaging your students to support them through art?
Speaker 1: Well I'm not sure it was specifically through art as much as it was through let's just talk about what's going on.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And because some of these students were naturally more upset than others, especially with the assassination, and were prepared to do things that maybe other students weren't.  And you kind of talking to them in terms of, "Okay what is the, what are the objectives that you hope to achieve?  And how does this relate to what's going on now, you know and where can we push things and, to get the results that we know we need to get?"  So it was those kinds of discussions that we had 'cause at this time, I had developed an art club.  And I think a lot of that discussion would take place within these club meetings, we would meet.  And we would talk about what was going on at the school [Douglass High School, Memphis, Tennessee], what was going on in the town and we would talk about their involvement in some of those activities.  And the teachers' involvement or lack thereof and, because some of the kids were very upset with, with us as teachers and I can understand that.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: In the sense that we're, they did not feel that we were as active you know as we should be, and we should've been going out, closing the school down.  Things of that nature there, and you know you understand where's, where most of that, where that's coming from.  And some of it is very valid, and some of the criticism is very valid.
Story_ID: 648428
Speaker 1: Your school [Douglass High School, Memphis, Tennessee] now this, this occurred after you left, but I'm wondering what the seeds were like when you were there?  Ul- ultimately that school closed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a result of desegregation, bussing and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the great, the best students were bussed out and, white students didn't replace them.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the population went down, and that occurred in '81 [1981] but what was happening when you, at the point of you're leaving in, in '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Six (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) sixty-eight [1968] was it, could you see that this was, the school was headed in that direction that early on?
Speaker 2: It didn't really, couldn't really see that it was headed in the direction that what ultimately happened. But you knew the school was, was changing and that some of it wasn't necessarily good, because see the school was situated on the edge of the city.  It was right, almost in the county and it was to some extent pretty isolated from Memphis [Tennessee] as a whole.  And when they start do- the desegregation started, and the teachers start being moved out some of the better teachers.  You could see something was happening to the school that wasn't positive, but you didn't quite know where it was going or what might be the result of all of this.  Because clearly white students were not coming and this, the one student that we had, who I think is, was there because he lived to, in that area.  And his parents had decided for the best reason that they wanted him to just go on to school there.  But he was alone, he was alone; and so you knew something was happening that was not necessarily positive.  But no, I didn't have any idea that eventually they would close it.
Story_ID: 648429
Speaker 1: While you were in school there, you were also re-getting your M.F.A., right at the same, at--?
Speaker 2: Well no I actu- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or was that after?
Speaker 2: That, it was after, I, I left to do the M.F.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you did that full time?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did it full time.
Speaker 1: And that choice came to leave [Douglass High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. Why?
Speaker 2: Well the choice, I knew I was gonna leave when I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, that for me was gonna be a temporary and I always knew I was going back to school, I was gonna do, do the M.F.A.  And it was a matter of, of when to be honest; I didn't think I would be there five years.
Speaker 1: That was a long time?
Speaker 2: That was a long time, I, I'd give myself about three years to do it.  'Cause one I needed some money, I needed money to do it, I also needed to develop my own work a little more.  I didn't have a very good portfolio at the time and as a matter of fact, when I applied to grad school, and it's kind of, and let me just maybe tell this story.  Because it was the summer of '68 [1968] when I knew I was ready to go, but I hadn't really made up my mind to leave.  And I went back to Jackson [Mississippi] and to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University], and was talking with my old teacher, the head of the art department there, about what I wanted to do and how I was gonna go about doing it, and he said, "Well, have you ever thought of going to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee]?"  'Cause he had just gotten a brochure from them about their graduate program.  And he said, "You live there, you're in state, so your tuition would be, your cost would be cheaper."  You know as a in state, 'cause the University of Tennessee basically was a, if you were a Tennessee resident, it was pretty much free, school was.  You could, you had to pay a certain fee, student fees and stuff of this nature, but as far as tuition goes, in state resident, really didn't have to pay anything.  Which I'm not sure is the case today (laughter) anyway, but anyway said, "Well--," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably not. Everyone would be researching right away (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) it's anyway it's at, he said you know, "If you wanna go why don't you give that a try, at least write and find out about it." 'Cause I just got this brochure about it.  I said, "Okay," and so I did and you know they asked for portfolio and thing and I put together a portfolio.  Sent it off, they weren't that impressed with it and wrote me back and said, "Well we like some of your stuff.  And your grades are good and, but at this point we can't admit you to grad school, however, we can accept you as--." They had a category they called it.  I can't remember what it was, but anyway, "If you come in and work for the year and put together a portfolio and we'll review it and see what--," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you would study, you would go there to put together a portfo--
Speaker 2: Right and I can, yeah I can get grad credits in everything except studio courses 'cause they didn't think my work was sufficient at that point.
Story_ID: 648430
Speaker 1: Now do you think that you were taking yourself seriously enough at that point?
Speaker 2: I didn't have, put it this way, I, I, I didn't have any disagreement necessarily with them on that.  'Cause I knew the portfolio had to, that I had sent in and I also knew that I hadn't done the wo- I didn't feel rather, that I had done the work that I should have, to be honest.  And so when they said it, I said, "Okay, I know I can so I, I'll take this chance."  So I just wrote a letter to their board of education [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] in Memphis [Tennessee] and to- and took a leave of absence as opposed to resigning.  I took a leave of absence for a year, and went, went off to school, 'cause I thought, wow this is gonna be great.  University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] is very isolated mountain, this area and I don't know anybody there.  And I can just concentrate on work, work, work. You know which I did, and but at that time I had 'cause I was taking some painting classes and I still thought of myself as a painter.  And I took a sculpture class because I thought, well I don't want it a certain kind of structure in my painting. That I didn't feel I was getting.  And I thought sculpture would help me do it, so that was reason for taking that first sculpture class.  And once I did that, it was, why am I talking about painting? You know this is it, this is what I need to be doing, this is what I should've been doing.  And I start concentrating on the sculpture and then I then reapplied for the program in sculpture.
Speaker 1: And over the course of that year, what kinds of work were you creating in and around sculpture?
Speaker 2: My work was, it's abstract and it still is welded steel pieces, but it, it also has an anthropomorphic quality to it.  They were all images that, and to some extent still is, that suggest without being a life form or the possibility of developing into one.  The twist and the turning of the metal and it was, and again you, it was usually vertical shaped pieces that had a very figurative like quality to them, without being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the scale of these early pieces?
Speaker 2: They range from small pieces about twenty-four inches on up to the largest pieces that that piece I did, piece I did at that time, I think was about twelve feet.
Speaker 1: Oh big.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's pretty big, pretty heavy for steel (laughter) mainly, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I bet. And the materials were all provided by the school or did you have to find and provide?
Speaker 2: Combination. They had us, certain amount of material there that you could use and, and other things you'd have to buy, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have to create a thesis project?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your thesis?
Speaker 2: The, we did act- instead of writing a thesis, you did what was called an exhibition in lieu of the thesis.  And which was a combination of your work, your ideas, and a basic statement about that that accompanied the work.  And so you'd put up this exhibition, so it was up to you to make the choices in terms of the works that were gonna be in the show.  And you put it together and then they would, you do your orals [oral examination], come into and sit in the middle of your exhibition.  And in a chair while they bombard you with questions (laughter) about the work.
Speaker 1: So not only did you have to make something great, you had to be able to defend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had to--
Speaker 1: --it verbally?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that hard to do?
Speaker 2: No not really. It was relatively easy because you'd been talking about it over the years while you're there.  And interacting with the professors there and going to, doing these seminars and things about the work, so it was pretty easy in that sense.
Story_ID: 648431
Speaker 1: Talk about that experience of, of being before the judging of your, portfolio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay the, well the, the first experiences I was, like I said to get accepted into the graduate program [at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee].  And I had done a bio of work over that year and so I had it all set up.  In this instance just in the sculpture department and all of the, the committee who was gonna make this decision came into the sculpture area.  And they basically, 'cause I didn't really have to say anything at this point, it was just (gesture) here's the work and it's like it's my portfolio.  And they're looking at it and they got it aside, whether it's worthy in a sense.  And so that was a little nerve racking in the sense, they walked in and walking around looking at it and very few questions.  And you're not sure what people are thinking you know and then once they finished, they just leave and you know haven't anything to say to you.  You know they go off and decide what they're gonna do and--
Speaker 1: And this was the decision as to whether they were accepting you?
Speaker 2: Right whether they would accept me.
Speaker 1: A year in?
Speaker 2: A year in, and then the person I'd been working with, my advisor in the sculpture department I mean they gave him the news and then he came in with the kind of funny expression on his face.  'Cause I guess he knew I was anxious.
Speaker 1: Was this all in the same day?
Speaker 2: It was yeah pretty much the same day; it was the same day actually.  And of 'cause they came in that morning and toured the work, looked at the work, and then they left, so I assumed they met right after that, but it was afternoon when he came back.  It was kind of early evening when he came back down the sculpture department, and I was still there.  'Cause I told him I was gonna be down there, I'd be down, he said, "Well okay, I'll see you later on."  And he came in and he kind of looked at me and sa- then he start smiling said, "Welcome to the program." Just like that.  "And not only that but you have been accepted as a graduate teaching assistant." So I was gonna be able to pay a few of my bills (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: --and so I was accepted, became a, an assistant, teaching assistant at that point and I thought well okay, "When are we gonna meet and talk about my responsibilities?"  And they were really kind of loose about that, and all summer went by and nobody ever set up anything, fall came and it's like two weeks before class.  I know I'm gonna be teaching 3D design [three dimensional], so I go to the, I said, "Look is there a meeting or something, somebody--haven't talked to me about this program that I'm supposed to be teaching?"  He said, "Oh you don't know what you gonna be doing?" I said, "Well I don't know if there's anything, special way you want me to handle it."  "Oh no just, just write out a, a plan for it and I'll take a look at it and it's, it's all yours. You can design it any way you want."  And I was off and running from there.
Speaker 1: What did you decide to design?
Speaker 2: I, I handled it kind of much the way I thought I would like to have, if I had taken a sculpture class as an undergrad.  And that is we start off two dimensionally with just some regular, what we called chipboard at the time, cardboard.  And start designing something and then let it grow or develop into a 3D, so you're moving from 2D to 3D using one element or one big sheet of board.  You know so how do you construct this thing and then you throw out a few parameters around it in term that it must be continuous.  Because you're dealing with certain basic design elements that's lines and planes you know and, and space.  And so, it's a matter of how you develop that concept and since my own work was basically about planes, lines, space especially space, I tend to design the class around that.  'Cause that's what I felt strongest about.
Story_ID: 648432
Speaker 1: And was--how, how did that flow from your painting to sculpture in terms of, you said you're teaching them two dimensional.  You started out in painting. What, is there any relationship to the process you use with painting and into sculpture?
Speaker 2: No not, not in the process, no it was, the relationship would be more into structurally the way the painting was designed or set up.  And how the space elements worked in the painting that I felt more comfortable with in sculpturing.  That I can get those elements and speak to the same issues without trying to do the illusion of paint.  And like I say in the design class that first project I was interested in doing was again to take a flat material.  Something like a piece of board, cardboard and move that from that flat shaped you know length, width into a three dimensional shape length, width and depth.  By not gluing anything, attach anything to them by cutting it and folding it, so everything was just simply by it.  So you end up with one piece that had to be cut and fold in a number of ways so that you get a three dimensional object.
Speaker 1: How important is math to sculpture?
Speaker 2: Being really bad at math (laughter) I, I'd like to say not, but it is, it is important in the sense of be- again because of the way I work.  And I start out with a sheet of metal and I need to know how much and how am I gonna cut it you know and how these things are gonna fit together.  And so to that extent it's, it's pretty basic but.
Speaker 1: Because I'm wondering as you're creating pieces, some of your pieces are quite large; did you create things that fell over?
Speaker 2: I, hope not (laughter) not as, not as a finished piece no.
Speaker 1: But you know try, finding the balance I, I'm just curious is, is it in your work is the processing intuitive rather than mathematical?
Speaker 2: It's more intuitive and more of, of 'cause again I, I think of it to some extent as an additive process that--I guess way I usually start is I, I'll do a series of a quick sketches of ideas.  And if I was good at math I could, I tell myself anyway that I can take those ideas, those sketches and actually work it out.  So that I have a clear understanding of exactly how it's gonna look on odd size.  But because I'm not good at math I never really know what the backside, let's say is gonna look like, as opposed to the thing I first sketch out.  And I'm looking at it from, because it's two dimensional, I'm drawing this thing, and I know it's gonna be three dimensional.  And I know something happens when it wraps around.  I think I know what I want to happen when it wraps around, but I'm never 100 percent sure.  And the pieces that I'm 100 percent sure about are never as interesting me, because they're too predetermined.  So I start cutting and welding and building the piece until I get--first start with that basic shape.  And then to some extent sometime I go back in and take things out, add things on.  If I lose the balance on it as you say, then I add something different or tilt it a different way or cut it so that it still stands.  But the, some pieces for instance, you know, that, that's not a problem, because they're gonna be mounted on a stand.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it might be small on the base, near the bottom of it, spreading out into something that would be top heavy, and it might tilt over but--
Speaker 1: And do you do the mounting as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 648433
Speaker 1: Your work you describe as abstract, so how, what is your thought process when you are deciding on a piece you know that that--what it, from creative idea to execution of an abstract piece.  What are you, what are you thinking?
Speaker 2: I'll a- there're a number of things that I, I'm kind of interested in. Work, my work for me is kind of like the totemic elements that kind of defines to some extent a time or period.  And that it's just one thing in a long stream of stuff, so I, I tend to think of it as kind of a passage, a place in time.  And as you move from one part to another part or you move to this, through this thing.  I also think of it as sometimes physically as a passage in terms that a lot of my stuff is kind of opened where space becomes a very important part of it.  As you can either move through it or you can at least see through it or which deals with this kind of continuation in a sense.  And that operates on a lot of levels for me. It's the physical level of the thing and it's also the, the kind of personal level of development.  And there're a couple of things that I'm interested in, I mean several things, one of them being and one of my influences is African sculpture.  And the thing that attracts me about it especially work of the Dogon, the thing that attract me about a lot of African sculpture is that there seem to be a kind of interior energy in the piece.  That yes it's a static thing but not really 'cause it has the potential fo- to grow or develop into something.  Or actually to move and I've always liked that about it, that quality you know I thought I'd like for my work to have that kind of energy.  That I don't necessarily want the pieces in the section jetting all over the place and just, but I want it to sat there with the sense that it could ha- that something could happen to it.  It could explode, it could do a lot of things, get up and walk away, so that was always an important part.
Speaker 1: From the, from the early days?
Speaker 2: From the early days of the sculpture and the idea of totems or icons were always important to me.  And it was a matter of kind of fusing all of that in, into a statement.  And I thought well what I wanna do is to kind of do forms, do shapes, define space in a way that someone either could physically (unclear) interact with that object.  With that space as they move through, around the piece, they come--become to some extent a part of that piece.  That the piece doesn't just exist by itself, but that the viewer becomes to some extent a part of it.  And as a result of that some of the earlier things to kind of bring in that interaction.  I actually did a whole series of pieces that involved lights, movement, touch switches and things.  That I did a series of let at--excuse me of electronic pieces at one time, and using a lot of proximity switches or lights that interacted with sound and the voice.  And things that reacted to touch, especially light and pieces, so that there would be the kind of really physical interaction.  I don't do as much of that now 'cause I told myself that the work actually can do that without the electronics; and just let it do it on its own as it manifests.
Story_ID: 648434
Speaker 1: In, in the development of your work, when you finished your M.F.A. [at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee] you started teaching, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well teaching has been a big part of your career throughout.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: And that, and also there've been some artist in residence experiences, one of them at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York], which is a famous artist in residence program--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where you participated in 1982.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what the experience was like working there, and, and for you as an artist, you're not teaching now it's all about you and your work.
Speaker 2: Right, in '82 [1982], there were two things happening in addition to that residency. Studio Museum was moving into its current location; that was the first year of it.  So we were dealing with all the growing pains of that which to some extent made it a little more difficult let's say to function as an artist in residence.  Also that year, that same year, I had just moved into a new studio on 126th Street, which is not that far.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so I, I was doing two types of things I mean in terms of objects.  At the Studio Museum, it was set up more for me to work on drawings and ideas, and at my studio on 126th Street; I was working more on objects, sculpture, bigger forms, shapes.  And so it was good in that sense that I could do that it gave me a place where I can go to the Studio Museum, and actually sit down and think about the ideas that I wanted to pursue.
Speaker 1: In, in sculpturing?
Speaker 2: In sculpturing yeah the idea is then really at the same time to do some finished drawings which again was kind of extension of the sculpture.  Because I, I wasn't doing drawings in the sense of ideas for a sculpture, but drawings as a finished thing, as a separate thing in and of itself that related to the sculpture.  And so it was good for that so I could do some fairly good size, some fairly large drawings.  And then I could use those same ideas as I move back to my studio.
Speaker 1: Now were you doing drawings there because they, they didn't have the space for you to do sculpturing?
Speaker 2: The space, the also the equipment for me to do the sculpture that I was doing, yeah.  'Cause I had--at that time, I was doing a lot of wood, things in woods and band saws and things of that nature.  It, I could've used hand tools back there but it was three artists in this space.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And there's not, I mean I know if someone else was in there working on wood and creating sawdust and sand all over the place, I would've been annoyed.  And so it was not the kind of thing I felt I could do there.
Story_ID: 648435
Speaker 1: So that program, typically there are three artists who are in residence at the same time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was the dynamic among you and it, and who are you and who were the other artists?
Speaker 2: The artist was Tyrone Mitchell. I don't know if you know his work and, oh god just how embarrassing to do a, a brain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Janet Henry.
Speaker 2: Janet Henry, Janet Henry, yes Tyrone Mitchell and Janet Henry.  The dynamics was interesting 'cause we, why Tyrone and I were doing some similar things in terms of structure of things.  His ideas was very different from mine, but--and Janet probably working more conceptual than either one of us.  And so her work, her work in a way that worked really well, because as they were, we were different in that sense in the things that we were doing was so very different.
Speaker 1: And was it a supportive environment? Did, was there any collaboration, was it-- There--
Speaker 2: --competitive?
Speaker 1: It was probably friendly competitive (laughter) environment more than collaborate, 'cause no we did not do any collaboration as such.  And I don't know if that was because of the nature of our work being so different or what.  But it was kind of friendly rivalry.
Speaker 2: Being that you are at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], did this afford you more did, were there, was it more awareness of your work as a result of being there?
Speaker 1: Yes without a doubt, because people would come through and, and they would always come into the artist in residence areas.  So you'd meet people who are involved in art, other artist and collective gallery people, this type of thing.  And also as a result of that I've had people who come by my studio on 126th Street you know, because they were referred by the people at the Studio Museum.
Story_ID: 648436
Speaker 1: When you finished that [artist in residence program, Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]--or, or was it during, during the same time what that you were at York College [Jamaica, New York]?
Speaker 2: That was before York College, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was before.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think York, York College was '84 [1984] I believe.
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984] to '86 [1986], yeah, and there you're, you're an assistant professor?
Speaker 2: Yes, an adjunct.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's an adjunct role.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that means you're able to have time in your studio as well as teaching?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all, yeah I just had to be there for my classes, and so most of my classes were set up in the afternoon, late afternoon or night.  And so I was in studio all day and then I'd go to York College. It was three days a week I believe, yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the, the importance in your career of teaching and producing art kind of simultaneously 'cause that seems to be but--.  And you studied arts education [at Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you were prepared for it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it seems to be a through line in, in you're--
Speaker 2: And it did, it clearly a very important part of my development.  I guess best way I can sum that up is I was asked once when I was doing some workshops at--and I may have listed that I did some things at Sacred Heart [Convent of the Sacred Heart] on 91st Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And they asked, the head of the secondary school department asked me one day, "What is important about art to you?" To some extent, I believe that was the question, and in terms of teaching.  I said, "Well what I hope would happen is that my love, what I do as an artist, that I can convey that to some extent to others."  Because that really is the love of doing what I do as an artist, it's love of developing ideas that is for me the most important part.  There's nothing like when something actually comes together in the studio that, and I stand there and I look at it and I can get really excited about it.  Just for me personally it's just kind of the best high in the world.  And it's like if I can get somebody to; to some extent experience that kind of--understand a little bit of that, then it will be all worth it you know.  That everything else will be worthwhile. That's, that's all I basically wanna do.
Story_ID: 648437
Speaker 1: As your work has developed over the years, there're all different kinds of exhibits and that you've participated in using different kinds of media.  Like there's a show called 'Art and Technics.' What is, is this where you're using the light?
Speaker 2: Actually no and in, in that piece (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Yeah that that piece is basically, was a series of pieces that basically wood construction.  But they use light only in a sense that one of the elements that were used is used is a--I used a lot of at that time; I was using a lot of material that reflects and defuse light in the waves.  And so there was that part of it, but it was the shapes and the allusion to technology in the shapes that was the reason that was chosen.
Speaker 1: But and then you participated in a project with the Museum of Holography.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how are you incorporating the holograph with your, is, was it with wood or are you now using other materials?
Speaker 2: No it, it related to the wood, the holograms, the holograph which was a very interesting and exciting program.  And the reason that I think the work was selected on that because that grew out of the things I was doing with lights.  And I had a lot of earlier pieces that used light, and like I say used a lot of a refracting material.  And some of that refracting material is very similar to what you get in holography, so that was the reasoning when I submitted the work.  And they looked at it and they, that relationship that it could be easily translated into that.  So what we're, what I actually did on that was just was produce a couple of holograms and I was using the images from the things that I'd made in wood.  Some of those similar images I would construct shapes and then would, you know, you photograph them.  And create the hologram from those shapes so that that same three dimensional quality in some of the stuff you construct that you can do it on a two dimensional plate.
Speaker 1: So it's sort of working in the reverse of what you had go- going through the whole process it's never been--
Speaker 2: It, it's not so much reversing it as a different kind of extension of it because it's reversing only in a sense that the photographic plate and in, in hologram is two dimensional.  But the image itself is three dimensional; the illusion is three dimensional.  And, so in that that sense, yes and it was the illusion that I was I interested in.  Because in those same illusions that I think happens in the work that I make and in terms of the way the space and the planes curve and shape and move, it's the same kind of thing.  Is that when you look at that plate all of a sudden it (gesture) sucks you in to that space or into that passage in a way that's very similar to the things that you construct.
Story_ID: 648438
Speaker 1: When you worked as an artist at the Bronx Museum of the Arts [Bronx, New York] this is '86 [1986] to '90 [1990] so?
Speaker 2: Nine-
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: It's, oh the Bronx Museum or what did you say, Bronx (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bronx Museum.
Speaker 2: Oh the Bronx Museum, oh yes, okay, yes.
Speaker 1: So the museum hires artists to be the, how, how did that work?
Speaker 2: Yes you're, they hire an artist to do workshops with and most of the workshops are with area students.
Speaker 1: So you're teaching?
Speaker 2: You're, you're teaching yeah but you're teaching about the exhibition.  So basically what you do is they come in and the first part of that visit, you take them through the show.  And you talk about the exhibition, whatever the exhibition happened to be on, and then the second half you go into the studio and, and do a workshop with them.  They make something based on one of the themes taken from the show.
Speaker 1: And is it, it, is this your show that, that they're looking at or this is whatever show--
Speaker 2: Whatever show that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the museum has up at the time.
Speaker 1: So one- once again it's a teaching experience?
Speaker 2: It's a teaching experience, yes.
Speaker 1: Let's pause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah most of my moneymaking experience has been through teaching or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Good (laughter).
Story_ID: 648439
Speaker 1: It was the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee] where you went to school, correct?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So they invited you to be part of an outdoor installation there in 1986.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that project?
Speaker 2: Okay it's yeah they put together something they called a sculpture tour and he, they got some mon- material, a material grant.  'Cause I wanted to do something in aluminum.  And there's an aluminum plant, Alcoa [Alcoa Corporation] has a, a factory in at Maryville, Tennessee, which is right I guess maybe about fifteen miles from the campus.  So they got Alcoa to donate some material to do a piece, and so I went down to do a big aluminum piece.  And I did that twice--I did it two years in a row, the first and the second year of the tour.  The first piece was a piece about I guess let's see about ten feet tall maybe, triangular shaped piece.  That's open in the center with a kind of figurative or keyhole like opening.  And this piece is directly related to a, a whole series that I had been doing at that time called 'Passage' [ph.], and on a much smaller scale.  And the idea there was that--'cause two of the shapes that I've used most in my work is a triangle and a circle or sphere.  And I used those for not only historical reasons triangular related to a pyramid.  But because triangle architecturally is one of the strongest shapes and I like the idea of strength in it, and the continuity that you have in a circle or in a sphere.  And so it was always that kind of relationship that I was interested in, and that piece was kind of a result of that.
Speaker 1: Having a company like Alcoa provide the material, how common is it for you to have donated materials to work on projects?
Speaker 2: For me personally?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Not, not very common.
Speaker 1: I mean that was really--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --a great thing.
Speaker 2: It, yeah, it, it's kind of those once in a while type of things that happen, yeah.
Speaker 1: You participated in a lot of shows, either yours or group shows. Have you also had commissions for particular pieces?
Speaker 2: I haven't done any from any commissions. No, only commissions that I've done have been temporary you know.
Speaker 1: And the piece like that one which is a huge piece in the sculpture garden what, what's, was the size of, of the piece?
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: The Alcoa material?
Speaker 2: That, that particular one it's about ten feet tall and it's about six or eight across I believe six, probably about six feet wide and it tapers up.  The second one, 'cause I did two pieces, one that year and the second one the sec- the following year, which is more of a pyramid shaped piece with same image that's negative shaped on that first piece we were talking about, are actually being created and attached to the front part of one section of the pyramid.  And then coming out of that is a big arch rainbow like shaped arch that goes over and extends in again about nine or eight feet, eight or nine feet.  So it's about, and connected to the pyramid, maybe it's about ten feet wide.  And it's a height of about six feet at the top of the arch, top of the curve.
Speaker 1: Given the, the size and scale of this piece, are you making the individual pieces but then assembling on location?
Speaker 2: Yes they are and because that for instance a big curve is three, three sections to it and they're all then attached.  So it has to be, that's when it would be nice to be better at math sometimes, you know it's--(laughter) you can figure it out exactly how wide this thing gotta be to set inside of something else.  You know rather than, "Ah, I think it's gonna be this, I believe it'll work," (gesture).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Sometimes it worked--most of time.
Story_ID: 648440
Speaker 1: You'd participated in an exhibit at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in New York City [New York, New York] in 1988, 'Who's Uptown' ['Who's Uptown - Harlem '87'] this, so this is artists living uptown--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who are featured in Schom- Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, which is a beloved institution--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what was it? What did you contribute to that?
Speaker 2: There were two pieces that I contributed, these pieces were, again pieces from the series dealing with passage.  But they were made out of plexiglass, a plastic material with similar as if, it almost like the shapes.  And there were drawings on line drawings on some of the plexiglass.  And it was cut out so that you're using kind of open spaces that again similar to a, a figurative kind of keyhole kind of shape that's cut.  And then lines drawn to define the, a triangle in a sense on the plastic, and then there were wood sections in it 'cause I use woods.  It's a combination of wood plastic, and on the interior of the piece and the whole thing then was attached to a wood frame.
Speaker 1: What kind of wood are you using?
Speaker 2: Plywood.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah I--all the wood I used is plywood basically 'cause I'm looking for an industrial material.  I use materials that are combination materials. Metals I use a lot of metals, wood, plastic.  And I started doing that again when I was at Tennessee [University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee], for me there was again this business of merging time.  From a traditional material like wood, but to a more futuristic material like plastics, and the wood I wanted was something that was more industrial.  So I like the idea of the plywood.
Speaker 1: As you're making these pieces, are you working alone or do you work with a team?
Speaker 2: I generally work alone, work alone yeah.  Yeah I can say one thing about the, the Schomburg pieces and the nice thing about them, they, they purchased those pieces for the collection (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very good.
Speaker 2: --'cause they're part of the Schomburg collection.
Story_ID: 648441
Speaker 1: Did that also happen at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]--do they buy a piece from you?
Speaker 2: We, they, there were a piece donated through the New York Foundation for the Arts [New York, New York], and which was a grant that I received at the end, near the end of that residency.  And what I wanted to do-and then part of the grant was that you do some kind of art activity or something.  Or and what I decided what I wanted to do was to make a donation to the museum.  So it was done through the New York Foundation for the Arts they, they actually paid for the piece.
Speaker 1: For many years you're making art in New York [New York] and showing in and around New York. You, how long did you have your studio in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Studio in Harlem was from '82 [1982] to '88 [1988] I believe, yes.
Speaker 1: What prompted you to leave Harlem?
Speaker 2: The building was sold (laughter) and '86 [1986] was when the real estate boom start to hit and a lot of the spaces in Harlem was bought up, and that was one of them.  And they turned it into I believe it's an office space now or something in there, but it was a great four story building with an elevator.  I mean it was a wonderful (laughter) space.
Speaker 1: And you had all four stories?
Speaker 2: No I just had the top floor.
Speaker 1: Oh that's a good space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: I, I took, I took off for Spain actually. I had a studio I was gonna rent out in Newark [New Jersey].  Had met someone who knew this space in Newark and I'd gone out and talked to the guy.  And the space wasn't gonna be ready until that spring, and this was in the fall, so when I was leaving the studio in, in Harlem, and so I said, "Well I'll just take a trip." And I always wanted to go to southern Spain and explore the Moorish influence. So that's what I did.  And came back in the spring thinking I was gonna take the studio in Newark.  And ran into some difficulties, the landlord and I couldn't agree on some things, so I decided against it.  And took a studio I think my next studio was a much smaller space in DUMBO [New York, New York], and, and we know what happened to DUMBO (laughter).  So that was '89 [1989] and I think.
Speaker 1: DUMBO became SoHo [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  So that, that lasted maybe five years before, again building was bought up and turned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So while--
Speaker 2: --into coops.
Speaker 1: --so while, while you were there in DUMBO, DUMBO was on the come up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At that time as an artist, were you, was your work being seen broadly as a result of your location?
Speaker 2: It was being seen, I'm not sure how broadly (laughter) but it was being seen and there were couple of shows and things in that, in that area that I was involved in.  'Cause it was interesting too at that time a lot of landlords had buildings, they weren't sure what they gonna do, actually they knew what they were gonna do with them, but at the time they hadn't done it and they were allowing you to use the space and people were curating shows in empty spaces all along that area at the time, and so it was kind of exciting, it was always something going on down there before it became actually a full gallery scene like it is now.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And all the stuff was happening.
Speaker 1: And you, and you go from DUMBO to where?
Speaker 2: From DUMBO to the Bronx [New York]. To Hunts Point, down in Hunts Point area of the Bronx, big building called the BankNote Building.  And what was interesting about that I had a, a peso bill because someone told me, a person who owned a business told me that they used to print money for various countries in that building, and Mexico was one of the countries.  So I went home and pulled out this old peso and there it was on there, printed by the BankNote Building.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was like, "Oh, okay." (Laughter) So that was my--
Story_ID: 648442
Speaker 1: Because you, you've done shows in Mexico, yes?
Speaker 2: I did not so much a show but a talk and that was through [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.
Speaker 1: Oh in Cuernavaca [Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Yes and I met her in I went to Mexico in '75 [1975], I think it was in '75 [1975] yeah I was still at the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee].  And the head of the art department again at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] he knew her from Chicago [Illinois], from Chicago days.  And I kne- I told him I was going down, he said, "Well look, look up Elizabeth Catlett. Call her, tell her Lawrence [ph.] said hi."  I said, "Okay, I'll do that." And so I called her and we hooked up and we talked and talked about art.  And show- she was showing me some of the things that she was doing, 'cause she had just started casting some pieces in, in, in plastic and polyester resin.  And I was using--
Speaker 1: Now what year is this now?
Speaker 2: This is '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was using that material at the time and she said, "Well look I want you to come by and, and let's talk about it, and let's look at this piece I'm doing and help me."  She said, "'Cause, I'm new to it." And I remember actually casting a piece that that day, and then she said, "I want you to come down to the university [National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico] and do some talks."  So that's how that happened. I went down and gave a talk on and showed some slides of what I was doing.
Speaker 1: How did her work inspire you?
Speaker 2: Well I, it's--I just like her work. It, it has, my work has nothing to do--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with her, with what she's doing and her ideas, so it's not that, I like, interestingly enough that first piece and maybe it does, maybe it does inspire, inspire me more than I realize.  Because that piece of sculpture I told you I made from that log that the--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) a lot of similarities (laughter) if I think that now it's almost like, yeah I was looking at her work at that time.  Because there's some similarities there you know.
Speaker 1: Well and some of her sculptures, well obviously different from yours, there's some clear African influence.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then the piece's coming up out of nature--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it--
Speaker 2: It, yeah so there is, there is that without a doubt; and like I say that, that first piece I, as I think about it now, it's closer to her than I actually realize.
Story_ID: 648443
Speaker 1: Over the years what artists have inspired you? Artists or, or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--
Speaker 1: --buildings or you know what, what are the things that inspire you?
Speaker 2: I think what has inspired me maybe most is not so much individual artist but like I said African sculpture, Dogon work especially.  Really I'm very much inspired by that and also the, the Dogo- the Dogon cosmology is, it's just the whole thing about that I find intriguing.  And other things and I suppose the reason, like I say I went to Spain, was I was interested in those African influences, the Moorish influence, especially doorways and the arches, that I find very intriguing.  And maybe some of the kind of arch and pyramidal things that I do may hark into that a little bit.
Speaker 1: Into that architecture?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So those are the things.  I was very intrigued at, with [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt's work.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh
Speaker 2: One I first started, you know see he's one of the artists that I like a lot. Other than that, I don't know of any other artist.
Story_ID: 648444
Speaker 1: You talk about the use of space in your work you know as, as a, as an element. I mean I'm looking at what is this called linked or what, what is this called?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah what is that called?
Speaker 1: I'm looking, it look--'Illusion in Red' [Walter C. Jackson].
Speaker 2: 'Illusion in Red,' yeah it's I, I think what space does because I did a group of piece that I call 'Illusion of Containment' ['Illusion of Containment: Linked,' Walter C. Jackson].  And that was done kind of after that, and there were two things about the 'Illusion of Containment' that was interesting.  And why I was doing those pieces, 'cause about that time I was--
Speaker 1: Which is in the mid-'90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: This is the mid-'90s [1990s], yes.  I was doing some of my work became a little more political than it was.  And I got very much interested in exploring the criminal justice system, and the, and especially New York's  approach to building all these prisons in upstate communities.  As basically a kind of economic source for those communities and shipping New York City kids up there to fill those jails.  So I start doing a piece that had, you know, that yeah you can put people in jail but you can't jail ideas, and you can't kill ideas.  And that they will always escape and that the containment is just an illusion not something you really (unclear).  So I did a series of pieces about that and again lot of those had to do and, and it was kind almost, it was a continuation of the 'Passage' [ph.] things too.  Because you're dealing with openings and space and what fills those space or, and it was more important to what was in those space as opposed to what is in those space.
Speaker 1: Well and so the 'Passage' series which was made in what years did you say?
Speaker 2: Those were in the '80s [1980s], yeah late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And now these 'Illusion of Containment,' what, what when you look back in the 'Passages,' what was the, was there a political message there as well?
Speaker 2: Not as much the message there and, and to some, to some--an 'Illusion of Containment' too was a, a more about connectivity and movement.  And the connection between past, present, future or as you move from one state or stage to another.  And so there was just kind of a physical manifestation of that concept of, of movement of continuing.
Speaker 1: With this series in the '90s [1990s], the 'Illusion of Containment,' when you talking about what's going on in, in the criminal justice system.  In, in New York City [New York, New York], there was a huge sweep of young people away from the city--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --under Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and many people were up in arms, I mean there was just a tremendous amount of political upheaval--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and yet they still got sent away.
Speaker 2: They still got sent away and right and there were all kinds of protest and that seem to me somewhere during that time maybe there was almost every week there was some protest going on that was marching for something.  Did a lot of marching; and I was thinking about that too, that I almost did as much marching in New York City as I did in Mississippi.
Story_ID: 648445
Speaker 1: You participated in, in the marches to stand up for, for civil rights during that time in the city?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  And there, there were for, for that there were hands off Cuba marches there anti-apartheid there, there a number of things going on in the city.  And it was, that's why I say for me it was, and I think it was somewhat during that time that I found New York [New York] to be more disappointing than I had expected.  'Cause like I say you know I, I was coming from the South and somehow I had different kind of idea in mind.  That involvement might be little different and yet my experience was that it wasn't that different, wasn't that different at all.  And you've had to do pretty much the same thing that we had been doing. It was a continuation of all of that.  So I decided, I don't know, that I needed to, I don't know, change a little bit of what I was doing in terms of homework.  And maybe come a little more political.
Speaker 1: So are the (unclear) pieces a part of that?
Speaker 2: They, they are--
Speaker 1: Because they have a, a--they inspire a look of weaponry a bit.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A, a little bit because they're, they're related to a more recent group of small wall pieces that shapes so they're like kind of bullet like shapes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And it's again about this whole thing of, whole idea of this thing is setting a every static, but if you're not careful it might explode on you.  You know so you need to think about what you're doing, so it was kind of dealing with that idea.  And also with that idea of to some extent incarceration inside, outside and that nothing is really contained.  You can't contain it, you can subdue it maybe for a while but it will at least I hope will reassert itself.  And so that whole thing of illusion of containment and linkage 'cause I did a series of pieces that came out of that.  And I started to using some chains. I'd always used planes and I always use some bar elements in the work and--but that took on slightly different use and approach, bars, chains and this type of thing.
Speaker 1: And you, you describe that you were surprised to come to New York, the North, the, you know, center of art and culture.  And to see those so oppressive--this work, this work looks different. It, it definitely has a different impact--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --than the others so this is your way of expressing--?
Speaker 2: Yes that was with kind of reacting to, to some of that I guess as much as anything.  At the same time I wanted, I was still trying to hold on to some of the other things.  Because for 'Linkage' [Walter C. Jackson], it's a--'Linkage' to me was not just about imprisonment or chain of being in chains.  'Linkage' was also about a connectedness and I was looking for a way of, at least while alluding to the chains, still talk about have that chain somewhat positive in terms of how it might connect, and again connection in terms of time, space, period.
Speaker 1: It's so interesting you say that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Past, future.
Story_ID: 648446
Speaker 1: I look at a piece from 'Linkage' [Walter C. Jackson] or maybe this is the piece from 'Linkage,' there, it's almost like there's a pyramid on a pulley.  I don't know if that's what it's--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --which also could look like a hanging?
Speaker 2: A hanging that's, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what I see when I look at it.
Speaker 2: Yeah I thought about that and it was probably the, the one of the more dominant elements in that, and yet it wasn't really about that as a dominant.  That was a case of maybe too many ideas getting bound up in one work, because the chain, again which is connected to the, the pyra- pyramid shape.  And that by the way is a telescoping pyramid. It doesn't show up necessarily on the, on the photograph of it.  But it is kind of a telescope and you pull the chain up, it locks in to the pyramid, and that is connected with--to those two images those, that that could be considered people (laughter) or figure yeah.
Speaker 1: Who look like they're about to be--
Speaker 2: And which who are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's interesting because that, that in a sense is what was going on, you know, Amadou Diallo as being shot in the back forty-one times.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And when you see this kind of image it's, it speaks to the thing that you are describing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when we get to 2000, there's a lot more color, this is this 'Red, White, Black and Blue' series [Walter C. Jackson].
Speaker 2: Yeah see it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a different energy, a different feel to it. What, what inspired these works?
Speaker 2: You know those works are really an extension or continuation of the other thing is just to; it's mostly a material difference because the, in the color 'cause I had, I basically don't use color--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in my work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's why it's noticeable.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a flag thing (laughter) so I just say okay you know let's--how we gonna deal with this in--? So I did a whole series of things that I call red, white and blue.  Or red, white and black or red, white, blue and black, and those pieces (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These were wall--
Speaker 2: --were basically wall pieces yeah, they're all wall pieces and the exceptions being some installations that were done.  One that I did when I was at Bronx River [Bronx River Art Center, Bronx, New York], which was called 'Genocide' [Walter C. Jackson] and in instance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were the executive director. You are--
Speaker 2: Yes I was there for a while right, and so that was kind of almost like a flag piece but it, it was again kind of inside, outside thing.  In the sense that the shapes were cut out pretty much that same figurative like image that I always use in the center.  With just a, a black column in there with a video 'cause I was, had started including some video, especially in installations.  And that's why I say it really got very political, the work at that time.
Story_ID: 648447
Speaker 1: The 'Red, White, Black and Blue' series looks--you did, you worked on that from 2000 and 2005 is what--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --I have. This is the era of George Bush [President George Walker Bush] this is 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  The Iraq War, I mean the world (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is turning upside down and inside out, what if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: How is your work reflecting what's happening here?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm trying to put that in context, because again you know most of these ideas started little before George Bush.  And he just kind of amplified it, because it, maybe it started somewhat locally in terms of New York City [New York, New York] and what was going on there.  Then all of a sudden it becomes countrywide, nation, and like I say at that time there were a lot of marches.  And I wore out a lot of shoe leather going to stop the war and don't go to war and clearly nobody was paying attention to that.  They were trying really hard to ignore it, and one of the things that always as somebody says patriots, they always wave the flag, and talk about that.  And I think that time or just before that there had been a lot of [U.S.] Congress people talking about passing laws against burning flags and, and all kind of, and flag protection acts and stuff that was happening.  So it, it was a lot of political turmoil in a sense and I just wanted to somehow deal with some of that in, in, in my own way as such.  And I think at that time a lot of artists were doing actually flag pieces and people doing a lot of things with flags.  And I, I didn't really wanna do anything with the flag, I figured I had done my flag days in the '60s [1960s].  'Cause after this, I did some paintings you know with the flags and American flags and Confederate flag.  But the references to that was I would do it with the color and with the shape and I would also to some extent deal more with the black community.  So those were the reason for again the color choices and I wanted to do work, again that was a continuation of the 'Illusion of Containment' ['Illusion of Containment: Linked,' Walter C. Jackson].  Became some of the elements that were used in there the, the bar shaped things and bars and stuff of that nature, and black shapes bulging out or breaking through the bars I mean it's kind of cliche in a way, but I wanted something that was pretty direct I wanna say.
Speaker 1: And you said that you incorporated video into these pieces. What's--
Speaker 2: Into the and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what's looping on the videos?
Speaker 2: Into some of the installations pieces, what's looping on it is results of, some of it is, is marches and what happened in some of those marches.  Some of it is police brutality; some of it is images from slavery and Reconstruction periods.  They're images of work gangs is in quietly loops is going on, the audio is playing some of the speeches.  From people like Bush, Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] and all of those politicians I took little clips of some of their speeches and laid that over the video, the images.  And like I said it was images, depending on the installation, I mean it might be images of bombing, 'cause I had some images from the Iraq bombing and oil wells on fire and things of this nature.  So it was--the story was pretty much in the video, and the videos were usually set up in a way, again to make you become intimate with it and with the work.  'Cause I didn't, I didn't do large projections on walls or things that, my videos are usually on small monitors, monitors like six inches.  And those were set inside of some shape.
Speaker 1: So you really had to look (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you had to look closely, you had to walk, and that's why I was saying the, the pieces were designed so that they jut out at least sections of it.  Or two, two or three feet from the wall, so you, some extent you have to walk into this thing and view the video.  Again to with the idea that hopefully the person becomes more a part of it, and it becomes a little more intimate with what's going on.
Story_ID: 648448
Speaker 1: You participated in a series of shows called 'The Politics of Racism.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was that part of this 'Red, White, Black and Blue' series or was that something else?
Speaker 2: That was connected to that as, as a matter of fact the person who put 'The Politics of Racism' show together asked me to do this.  Because he had sa- he saw the piece, the 'Genocide' piece [Walter C. Jackson], and--
Speaker 1: And can you describe that piece?
Speaker 2: That piece is, it's an installation that's about eight feet tall, well it is eight feet tall and about ten feet wide.  It juts out, it's, the shapes are cut out, it's, the exterior shape of the piece is pretty much a, a rectangular, a square actually.  And that square is made up of sections four sections of cut out plywood that's painted like a flag.  In the sense of, so it's kind of like a three dimensional flag, a folding.  And in the center of that is a, a black shape with the monitor, where the video monitor is placed at about four feet, five feet high.  So that it's kind of average height I guess four and half to five feet.  And you walk in between these sections, these flag like sections to see the video and on the, the rectangular box that the video is attached to I've loosely scribbled genocide, the word genocide on, and that, that is to relate to the images and what is happening within those images.
Speaker 1: The images on the video?
Speaker 2: The images on the video.
Speaker 1: And what are those?
Speaker 2: There are, it's a compilation of prison work gangs, bombings and of, just a series of the, the inhumanity that we inflict on each other.  While again the politicians are speaking in the background, phrases that have no relationship to the carnage that's being caused.  So that was the idea to bring the person into so that they become a part of, or at least aware, more intensely aware of, some of that that's going on.
Story_ID: 648449
Speaker 1: Your work took on a different feel with something you were, you've mentioned has been very important for a long time, the Dogon tapestry series?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you've been inspired by those Dogon sculptures for, for a long--?
Speaker 2: For that's--for a long time yes, I and I really initially got interested in that I think when I was in, when I was in grad school [University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee].  Yeah that's when it start to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And these you started--
Speaker 2: --kind--
Speaker 1: It's still, they still have color so they're still color, I'm looking at--
Speaker 2: Oh those are in color (laughter). Now that really gets into color because those are not really, those are not sculpture pieces.
Speaker 1: It's a tapestry.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a tapestry, yeah and I was doing something, well they started out, let's put it this way, as sculpture (unclear).  One of the major shapes in that, in those pieces and, and those kind of, I look at them now and I think well that's, that they're pretty much in a, in and aside to what I do.  And probably shouldn't put them on the website, but anyway the, the one of the primary shapes in those pieces were actually things that were cut out of aluminum that were released, wall released pieces.  And I like that idea and I wanted to kind of extend it and try something else.  And maybe too the whole idea of getting some color in my work, 'cause I, like I said I don't use, didn't and still don't now use much color in what I do.  So I thought about a way of kind of extending that idea and working with the idea of the Dogon.  I guess I kind of focused on a little closer on these pieces than done anything else I had done.  I just kind of had really a minor references in past works, and these are more direct references.  And it allowed me to do two things: one, I could do a series of pieces that I could work with on the computer.  'Cause I start doing some computer things and I thought well okay it might be interesting to do that.  There's computer graphics, and so it was a combination of your photographs, some of the things, put it on, then manipulate it or add other things to it, and it was almost a way of doing a collage, a flat collage; and once I got it put together the way I wanted it, then you send it out and have it printed.
Story_ID: 648450
Speaker 1: So what, what has your work evolved to now? What kind of work are you doing today?
Speaker 2: Well I'm pretty much doing, in terms of concept, pretty much the same things. I mean the shapes haven't really changed that much.  They're all black now (laughter). It's a major change. Every- everything I've made lately has been, I've painted black. Everything is flat black.  And well maybe I have an opportunity to show couple of pieces, but they're similar shaped pieces in that there's a major shape that is vertical anthropomorphic in a sense, which surrounds a kind of negative shape or space and that space is actually the shape more than the material that's around it in my thinking.  It's that space that's important, because again it's the area where something not only did happen, is happening, what will happen.  And it all can take place in that space, and that it's simply a matter of whether and what is a matter of just time.  So I look at it in that sense and of--I used a lot of the same shapes: triangle, curves, circular shapes.  And there are a few large pieces that I'm working on and mostly this last couple years I've been doing wall pieces.  And basically wall pieces of triangle curve shapes and again they're all painted black.
Speaker 1: Is, do you feel a, a stirring for something in reaction to this election?
Speaker 2: No not really.  I think to some extent I, I've worked through these kind (laughter) of things.  Right now I'm just concentrating on where the work will take me, and it's more about the particular pieces and what those pieces are suggesting.  Kind of like one piece grow out of the next piece and to some extent I've pretty much gone deeper into my own thinking about what I'm doing and what I wanna do, and less reacting to external things.
Story_ID: 648451
Speaker 1: You've been making work for, for many years, and, and also teaching as you pointed out.  Are you, are you represented by a dealer? Are you selling your work?
Speaker 2: Rarely sell. No I'm not represented by a dealer and since--interesting 'cause since I moved upstate that has become less important to me to some extent.  That yes, I do feel that need still to get the work out; I know I need to do that.  As much as I enjoy just doing it myself and being able to do the work and not worry about anything outside of it.  Yes I feel those needs that I have to do that 'cause to some extent that's a part of what it is; but no, at this point I do not have a dealer.
Story_ID: 648452
Speaker 1: When you look at the body of work that you've created over your life, what is the legacy that you hope it represents?
Speaker 2: Well I--there, I guess one of the things that I hope it represents in, which is the recurring theme in all the work, is a connectedness. I, I would hope that it would suggest healthy--but you think about the relationship and the importance of the past with the present and the potential for the future.  That all of that that these things exist and that everything is kind of a part of a ongoing continuum and that somewhere along that line you, you make a statement which is basically a totem of your time, and that someone might look at that and be able to make that connection with things that are past, and hopefully see some suggestion with some of the things to come.  I like to think what I'm doing now especially has been positive and that the work suggests the kind of hopefulness.  That's pretty much it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: None. Would I've done a few things differently? Possibly yes, but regrets, no.  No, I'm able to look back on it and all the good, all the bad; and I'm pretty happy.
Story_ID: 648453
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young people who might want to become artists, fine artists, sculptors?
Speaker 2: Just to do it. If that's what you want to do, if it's where your joy is, then go, go for it.  'Cause there--I just think there is nothing better, no high better than finishing a piece.  And being able to just sit back and look at it and say, "Wow," (laughter), "this is what I was working on."  Now that's rare. I have to admit that's rare, 'cause sometimes you, a lot of pieces work and you're happy with most of it.  But once in a while you can actually go wow and that wow is worth all those other years.  And all those other pieces whenever you can do that.  So I would tell anyone if, if that's what you wanna do, then that is what you should do. Make the work. Do it.  Be sure that's what you wanna do and then just pursue it.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you would like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: No I can't (laughter) think of anything additionally. I think we pretty much covered it.
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome. Happy to do it.
Story_ID: 648454
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay go ahead and give us a description for this one and just keep going as we rotate them through the--
Speaker 2: Okay yeah this is a picture of Georgeville C.M.E. Methodist Church [Georgeville Methodist Church, Durant, Mississippi].  It's the church that I went to as a child.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: It would be in '40 [1940] through about '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and I and I think I probably was about six or seven years old at the time.  We're just right after we moved to Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: What's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Ruby [Ruby Meeks Jackson].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of my father [Willie Jackson] in uniform. It's when he got out of the [U.S.] military.  So that's pretty much the image with the exception of the coat that I saw (laughter) when I was, first time I saw him.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty smooth image right there.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of a stage design that was done by a group of kids in the art club at Douglass [Douglass High School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Picture of first big snow in Mississippi that I can remember somewhere in '56 [1956] I guess.  In front of--standing in front of the house my snowman pieces, one of my early pieces of sculpture (laughter).
Speaker 2: Graduation day, Jackson State College [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], my best friend Paul Campbell.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: That's a shot I wanted to show of the farm. It's a section of the farm with an old mechanical hay rake.  I just thought it was a nice picture.
Speaker 2: Yeah it is a nice picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  'Cause it's a sculptural object that's why. Okay go head.
Speaker 2: That's a photo of a picture from the March Against Fear [Meredith March Against Fear] that was led by James Meredith in a--
Speaker 1: That you took?
Speaker 2: That I took yes.
Speaker 1: That's during an opening or exhibition in the Wrecking Box Gallery [ph.] in Knoxville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: About when?
Speaker 1: Good question, about '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Good?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: A picture of the compound for the artist in residence space at Roswell, New Mexico [Roswell Artist in Residence Program].
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: And that was in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: An exhibition at an opening at the Bronx River Art Center [Bronx, New York] in ninety--that'd be '96 [1996] I think.
Speaker 2: And you were the executive director.
Speaker 1: I was not the executive director.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: When that show was done, I was in that show.
Speaker 2: But what years were you executive director?
Speaker 1: From the summer of '96 [1996] through fall of '96 [1996] through summer of '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: High school [Lanier Junior Senior High School; Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi] picture senior year with Paul Campbell.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Three large sculptures that are currently in my sculpture garden.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Three, three works from my sculpture garden, collection of the artist.
Speaker 2: What are they called?
Speaker 1: I knew you gone ask me that.  The foreground is 'Actuator' [ph.] and 'Illusion in Red' [Walter C. Jackson] and the other one I hesitate on because at the time I was naming my works with some numbers called 'G1' [ph.].
Speaker 2: Oh right.
Speaker 1: See that's why, I, I'm not gonna, I have to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all right.
Speaker 1: I have to look at the list to do that because it was like a certain group and a certain series in a certain city.  So I know there's a K in it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Those are actually there now, right on your, at your place?
Speaker 2: Yeah they're at my place.
Speaker 1: This is a new work untitled, actually that one does have a title. It's called 'Black Star' [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's nice, that's brand new?
Speaker 1: Brand new.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cool.
Speaker 1: Is this the correct way?
Speaker 2: That's the correct way.  That's also brand new and that--currently it's only called 'Wall Piece Number Seven' [ph.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so there's one more piece with that and it's this one which.
Speaker 2: Which also uses those S1, G something, H something for Harlem [New York, New York] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Walter C. Jackson].
Speaker 1: What's it called again?
Speaker 2: Untitled.
Speaker 1: Okay and what are the materials?
Speaker 2: Material is laminated plywood. It's all plywood.
Speaker 1: Got it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yep.
Speaker 1: That's it.
