Story_ID: 9245
Speaker 1: Sterling Johnson, "S-t-e-r-l-i-n-g  J-o-h-n-s-o-n".
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your date of birth?
Speaker 1: 5/14/1934.  I'm old.  I just look good.
Speaker 2: [Laughs] Okay.  And I'd like to also know--I'd like you to state today's date.
Speaker 1: Today is May 21, year 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And our location for the locater?
Speaker 1: We are at the Federal Courthouse in Brooklyn, New York.  The Eastern District of New York.
Speaker 2: Can you give the address?
Speaker 1: 225 Cadmen Plaza.
Speaker 2: And--and your profession.  I'm a federal district court judge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [unclear].
Speaker 2: of the Eastern district of New York.
Speaker 1: Now.  The other--Okay.  That's, that's fine.  It's slated there.  Now do you have a middle name though?  [Laughs]  No do you have?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Sterling Johnson Junior.
Story_ID: 9246
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone.  They're somewhat 'People' magazineish.  You know, just short answers are required.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Everything is my favorite food as you can see [Laughs].  But I, I, I--My favorite food?  I don't know.  I go--I couldn't tell you.  I like food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would think blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That would be difficult to answer.  I haven't had a vacation in maybe 20 years--and I'll explain that.  I've traveled a lot in my lifetime.  And I've been to every continent in the world except Antarctica.  So where is there to go for vacation?
Speaker 1: I was doing all the--I saw that whole long list that you had.
Speaker 2: --Of the various countries?
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: There a lot of countries that are not even on there.
Speaker 1: Right.  No kidding.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  you want me to tell it?
Speaker 2: My gosh!  Did you hear that?  That's must be me  [laughs]!
Speaker 1: [Laughs] Sorry about that.
Speaker 2: Okay. Favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: "You can't make chicken salad out of chicken shit."
Speaker 1: [Laughs] Okay!
Story_ID: 9247
Speaker 1: And I want to first ask you about your mother.  We were talking about her.  And I want her name.  I'd like you to give her name.  But also tell us what you know about her family and her background.
Speaker 2: My mother [Susie Johnson] is the salt of the earth.  And she is what has put me where I am today.  She's a wonderful woman and May 13, Mother's Day, she was born, ninety-four years ago.  And we gave her a surprise birthday and Mother's Day party.  And she really enjoyed herself.  She lives by herself, she cooks herself.  I go visit her.  She keeps telling me, "Boy, you're too fat."  But before  I leave, she says, "Here, take some of this food.  Take some of this."  Her grandfather was a slave.  And she talks to me about those times as if it were yesterday.  And she's surprised I didn't know about it.  And she was born in a little town in Alabama.  And I remember she telling me about her mother, my grandmother used to--the kids had to, her sisters had to pick cotton before they went to school.  And then when the white men came around, the mother would take them and hide them.  Because she said that the white men would have their way with the young girls.  And it was nothing nobody could do about it.  'Cause in those days blacks could not testify against whites in court.  I have on my computer a program,and I'll show it to you later, on where I think she was born, 1907, [Theodore] Teddy Roosevelt was President of the United States.  I think the average income for Americans was something like $596 a year.  You know, so she is a very strong and remarkable person.  She raised five of us.  And I can remember being in high school.  And I was feeling my oats and the hormones were boiling.  And I had wanted to drop out of high school and join the Marine Corps.  But I was seventeen years of age at that time.  And I couldn't join.  So she said, "I'll tell you what."  I had a month to go in high school.  She said, "You finish high school, and I will sign you in the Marine Corps."  So I kept my end of the bargain and she kept her end of the bargain.  And I went into the Marine Corps and I was taught discipline.  And I learned to really miss my mother.  I learned that a lot of the things that she was telling me really was true.  Then I got out of the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 9248
Speaker 1: I want to stop you one second.  I'd like to go back.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: To the--some of the stories.  You said that she told you about your--her grandmother.  Grandmother, right?  Who was a slave.
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: Grandfather.  I'm sorry.  Who was a slave.  Do you remem--do you--what are some of those stories?
Speaker 2: How they would accuse blacks of things that it was nothing we could do about.  The lynchings that they would have some of the slaves, runaway slaves.  The Ku Klux Klan, the reign of terror.  How difficult it was to be black in the South at that particular period of time.  And that's one of the reasons a lot of blacks migrated from the South and came up North for better opportunities.  And when they got here in the North, the opportunities really weren't opportunities.  But it was still better than it was in the South, she thought.
Speaker 1: Now did she [Susie Johnson] share any stories about her growing up?  She--did she grow up in Birmingham?  Or was she born out--right outside Birmingham?
Speaker 2: What's the name of the town that she was born in?  I think the town was Ensley, Alabama.  And yes, she went to boarding school.  She was, as they would say an unlearned person.  But wise beyond the years.  When she came north and she got married.  We had--there're five brothers and sisters.  Had babies right away.  And she struggled along with my father [Sterling Johnson, Sr.] to support us.  And I remember that she would work in the white people houses.  I guess it was domestic work.  And she said, "I do this for you today, so you won't have to do it for your kids later on."  And one of the things I remembered about that particular period, we were very poor.  And really hungry.  I always mention that and tell people about it.  Where we had a dog called Josephus.  And at that time, you probably don't remember.  They had iceboxes.  You do, [Laughs].  Well anyway, I'm hungry and I go in to the icebox and the only thing in there is a little bowl with some corn beef hash.  So I get this corned beef hash.  And I'm walking away to the table to eat it.  I trip and fall. There goes the corned beef hash.  I dive for the corned beef hash.  Josephus dives for the corned beef hash.  He got a little bit, I got a little bit and I kissed it up to God and ate my corned beef hash, [Laughs].  So that's how poor we were.  And then on some occasions, my mother would come home like on a weekend.  They would have the party.  The women she was working for.  The scraps from their table was a feast for me and my brothers and sisters.  She would always tell me, "Go to school.  Get an education.  Go to school.  Get an education."  And I think in those days, living in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant,  Brooklyn, New York] many times I was at the crossroad where I could have ended up in maybe one of the penal institutions.  Could have been a drug addict.  But she kept me on the straight and narrow.  And she was always and to this day, still is a God-fearing, church-going woman.  And maybe two months, three months ago, they honored her in her church.  Concord Baptist Church.  And she had been going to that church for seventy years.  Seventy years, you know.  So I get a sense of pride every time I talk about my mother, and every time I think about my mother [Susie Johnson].  You know.
Story_ID: 9249
Speaker 1: Now your father, Sterling [Johnson, Sr.].  The one you--are you the oldest of the--
Speaker 2: --No.  I have a sister Sylvia.
Speaker 1: Sylvia and then you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go through your, your, your siblings.  It's--
Speaker 2: Sylvia, myself, Muriel, Joyce and Billy.  William--Billy is dead.  Billy was in the Marine Corps and he succumbed to that temptation of alcohol.  And it really wasn't--he wasn't an alcoholic.  He was a wino.  And my mother used to take care of him when he should have been taking care of my mother.  And one day, he--there was an argument.  One of his wino buddies hit him.  He dropped like a sack of potatoes.  His head hit the pavement.  He went into a coma and never came out of it. Never came out of it.
Story_ID: 9250
Speaker 1: Now your father.  What, what about him.  Sterling [Johnson Sr.].  You--so you--you're, you're the oldest one only remaining.
Speaker 2: My father's dead.  My father was the first black motorman for the BMT [Brooklyn-Manhattan Transit].  That's a subway here in New York.  My father said that he had wanted to become a policeman.  And he took the exam.  He said he passed it.  But then he took the medical exam.  And the  doctors told him he had heart trouble.  He then hired a doctor, his own doctor to refute the claim of the New York City Police Department.  And they told him that, "If we say you have heart trouble, you have heart trouble."  And he never got the job.  We were on-- it's welfare now.  But it was Home Relief then.  But he eventually got a job as a motorman  and we survived.
Speaker 1: Now where did--Where was he from originally?  You said Lou--  Louisiana--Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Now how did he--How did your parents--did he talk about any growing up?  Or was he not a talker?
Speaker 1: Not that much of a talker.  Because he was so busy going to work.  I remember him with his overalls, coveralls, you know.  Just going to work.
Speaker 2: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 1: No I don't.
Speaker 2: Did they meet here in New York?
Speaker 1: No.  They met down South.
Speaker 2: They met in the South.  Okay.  And then they came North.
Speaker 1: It is--
Speaker 2: Somebody beeping me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh.  That's the door.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Okay.  So they met.  They, they met south and then they came here.  Did they ever talk about why--what period did they come here?  Do you know what period?
Speaker 2: I think the late 20's [1920s] early 30's [1930s].  'Cause I was born in  1934.  And I was the second child.  And I think they went up to New Rochelle or Mount Vernon, somewhere up there.  And then we moved into the city.
Speaker 1: Into Bed-Stuy.  In the Bedford-Stuyvesant area
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: eventually?
Speaker 2: yeah.
Story_ID: 9251
Speaker 1: Now did you--what are yo--what are some of your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Of your life?
Speaker 2: I can remember one of the things.  my father [Sterling Johnson Sr.]--it was nothing then.  But I guess it's a big thing now.  When you say bonding it really means something more to people.  You know.  And my father used to shave and get ingrown hairs.  And one of the big things about it, I used to love to do, he would allow me to take the tweezers and pull the hairs out.  I remember--I remember being, going to Ebbetts Field.  Remember  Ebbetts Field, Brooklyn Dodgers?  I remember walking to Ebbetts Field.  And I had a hero.  I was just like all the other kids.  It was this fellow on the Pittsburgh Pirates. He was a left-hander.  And he was a little short guy--short at that time.  But he'd kick that right foot up.  He'd rear back and the ball would go a 100 miles an hour.  I mean he--I, I was in love with this guy.  My idol.  So this one day I go down to Ebbetts Field and I wait outside the player's entrance.  Like all of the other kids.  And Bed-Stuy  [Bedford Stuyvesant] was racially mixed then.  Mostly white, but was racially mixed.  And I'm waiting outside to get the autograph of my hero.  And when my turn came, Pittsburgh Pirate, he said to me, "I don't sign autographs for niggers."  So now I hadn't been exposed to that.  And I didn't really understand it.  But I knew it was something dirty.  It--you know.  I was embarrassed because the other kids heard it.  And it was a painful experience.  I still remember it.  I remember from my early memories, I was a policeman, as you know.  I remember going to the18th precinct.  Midtown Manhattan.  And I couldn't ride in the radio car because I was black.  I remember being in the Marine Corps.  I was in Washington, D.C., and I went to a drugstore and I ordered a banana split.  And I--I think it might have been the People's Drugstore.  I don't know.  But I ordered the banana split.  And then the waitress told me I had to eat it outside.  I refused to eat it outside.  Long story short, the police came.  And  [he said] "What's the problem?"  And [I said] "She says I have to eat this outside.  I'm not gonna pay for it."  And I remember the policeman was really nice.  He says, "Where are you from son?"  And by this time the MP's [military police] had come too.  And I told him.  "New York."  He says, "Well, this is Washington, D.C., a Southern town.  And this is the way things are down here."  Long story short, I didn't have to pay for it.  But I got another lesson and another scar.  And I was always curious about this racial thing.  I remember seeing signs for water, colored and white.  And I would go over to the "White" water and I'd taste it.  And then I'd go to the "Colored" water and I'd taste it.  It didn't taste no different.  Oh!  What are these signs for?  You know.  So I had a lot of bittersweet memories,you know.
Speaker 1: You know when--growing up in Bed-Stuy--was that-- you said it was racially mixed.  Do you think it's an area that people aspired to who were blacks?  You know because--
Speaker 2: --It was--yeah it was upward mobility for people who could get into those.  I went to a school called Boys High School.  It's now Boys and Girls High School [Brooklyn, New York].  There was a lot of--see a lot--We had some Nobel prize winners, a lot of doctors came out of there and it was a great school.  A lot of athletes came out of there.  But it was a good school.
Speaker 1: What was home life like?  You know, growing up?  Was it, you know, was it--was there a lot of activity?  You know, you're--didn't you say your mother worked outside the home?  But I mean what, what was life like?  So do you remember?  Was it heavy church going?  Was it--
Speaker 2: My mother [Susie Johnson] made us go to church.  And I was as you would call it precocious, [Laughs]. I would organize crap games in the bathroom.  I was always doing something.  You know.  I always worked.  You know, I was industrious.  I'd carry orders.  I'd do this.  I remember once I got one of those shoeshine box and went down to Penn Station.  I'll shine shoes.  All of a sudden the police came over and says he was gonna kick me in the ass.  Get out of there.  Little did I realize you had stands in there who paid rent to shine the shoes.  But I didn't know.  I'm just industrious.  A lot of fun with the brothers and sisters and you know.  We were very poor, very hungry.  You know.  Typical Bed-Stuy you know.
Speaker 1: Now you--
Speaker 2: --Now I think one of the things that helped me out.  That I came from a household where we had both parents together.  That helped out a great deal.
Story_ID: 9252
Speaker 1: growing up in Bed-Stuy--was that-- you said it was racially mixed.  Do you think it's an area that people aspired to who were blacks?  You know because--
Speaker 2: It was--yeah it was upward mobility for people who could get into those.  I went to a school called Boys High School.  It's now Boys & Girls High School [Brooklyn, New York].  There was a lot of--see a lot--We had some Nobel Prize winners, a lot of doctors came out of there and it was a great school.  A lot of athletes came out of there.  But it was a good school.
Speaker 1: What was home life like?  You know, growing up?  Was it, you know, was it--was there a lot of activity?  You know, you're--didn't you say your mother worked outside the home?  But I mean what, what was life like?  So do you remember?  Was it heavy church going?  Was it--
Speaker 2: My mother [Susie Johnson] made us go to church.  And I was as you would call it precocious, [Laughs]. I would organize crap games in the bathroom.  I was always doing something.  You know.  I always worked.  You know, I was industrious.  I'd carry orders.  I'd do this.  I remember once I got one of those shoeshine box and went down to [Pennsylvania] Penn [train] Station.  I'm'll shine shoes.  All of a sudden the police came over and says he was gonna kick me in the ass.  Get out of there.  Little did I realize you had stands in there who paid rent to shine the shoes.  But I didn't know.  I'm just industrious.  A lot of fun with the brothers and sisters and you know.  We were very poor, very hungry, you know.  Typical Bed-Stuy you know.
Speaker 1: Now you--
Speaker 2: Now I think one of the things that helped me out.  That I came from a household where we had both parents together.  That helped out a great deal.
Speaker 1: See that's--and I'm finding a lot of that.  You know, not always.  But I'm finding more of that.  Now do you--what--so you--were you--would you consider yourself mischievous, precocious?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  I remember my mother would say, "The sky is blue."  And I'd always challenge it.  A cloudy day, "The sky's gray.  It ain't blue, [Laughs]."  I always do that.  And all man, she couldn't stand that.  I remember when I did something wrong, and she would beat us.  Thank God for the beatings.  But she was the type of person; she would beat you until you cried.  And then when you cried, she had achieved her purpose and she'd stop the beating.  Right.  Make a long--
Speaker 1: You know, we need to disconnect. (tape break)
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: So you were--I was saying-- you know you were saying how you would challenge things.  You know.  I was asking if you were precocious.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was always challenging.  I was inquisitive.  And she said, "The sky was blue."  "It's not blue."  You know, "It's gray."  You know.  She said, "Do this."  And I'd want to know, "Why?"  You know.  And--but I would challenge things, you know.
Speaker 1: So now as--let's go through the schools you went to.  First--I want to know elementary, junior high and you--
Speaker 2: --I went to a school, Public School 93--83, 93, but I remember.  P.S. [stands for Public School] 93.  Then I went to Boys High School.  I played football.  I wasn't a starter.  But I, you know, I learned competition. I learned cooperation.  I then went to the Marine Corps for three years.  And it was racist there--South Carolina, you know.
Speaker 1: But  I want to ask even before that of how you were in, you know.  This junior or whatever.  In school, what kind of--what were you?  You know we all have sort of dreams or ambitions or you know, fantasies about what we want to be when we grow up.  Did you have those at that point and time?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, no.  I think I had my ambitions in high school.  And I was the type of kid, I used to play hooky and very precocious.  But I was bright.  And if I cut class or played hooky and I'd come in on a Wednesday.  And we were gonna have a test or quiz.  If the passing mark was seventy, I'd look at a book on a Thursday and I'd get a seventy-two.  And, you know, it used to irk the teachers.  When you're so bright.  He just didn't apply himself.  Then I read a lot.  I read all of the greats.  I'd pick up a book that was about Clarence Darrow and a judge--famous lawyer by the name of Samuel Leibowitz.  And I knew I wanted to be a lawyer.  I love this courtroom thing.  And I then knew I wanted to be a Marine.  And I wanted to be a policeman.
Story_ID: 9253
Speaker 1: Now why do you think you wanted to be a Marine?  'Cause you begged your mother, as you said earlier.  You know.  It--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I don't know whether it was the uniform.  But this was the elite of all of the Armed Forces.  You know.  Not every body could be a marine.  And I knew there was something in me that I could be a Marine.  I wanted to be the best.  You know.
Speaker 1: And Judge Johnson, so you get--your mother signs off.  You know, you make this bargain.  She holds up her end.  You know, you finish high school.  You know and you get--you're enlisted.  So what is this experience?  Because you say you got shipped off to  South Carolina.  This is your first time--
Speaker 2: The land that God forgotten, you know.  I had never seen livestock.  Never seen a horse or a cow.  You know.  And I'm down there at Parris Island.  And they're yelling at you and they're screaming at you.  And they feed you.  You know.  They tell you, "Take all you want but you all you take." You know?  At 4:00 in the morning and you're running and you're ripping.  You're drilling and you're standing at attention.  And if a gnat sand flea bit you, you weren't allowed to touch that sand flea.  And if you did, you had to bury him.  It took a six-foot grave to bury it.  And then after you buried the gnat, the drill instructor would ask you, "Was that gnat that you buried male or female?"  And you wouldn't know.  So you said, "Male."  "The gnat that was my friend was a female.  Bury it again," [Laughs].  Stuff like that, you know.  But you learned a lot.  I also came back to my mother.  Ain't nothing like education.  Nothing like education.  And if you learn to be in the Marine Corps or something like that, be an officer.  Even though they didn't have black officers at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So was it--so you, you speak of the, the Marine Corps training really in terms of discipline.  That it.  You know.  But a lot of people--but there was a great deal of discipline you learned out of that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were there other things?  You know, because you had mentioned earlier that that it was, you know.  That it was racist.  And that you had more exposure to racism.  Is that--did you--am I misunderstanding?
Speaker 2: Yeah right.  For instance I had asked you what choice of the Marine Corps?  What branch of the Marine Corps did you want to go into?  I wanted to go into intelligence.  You know, I thought I was fairly intelligent.  I could handle it.  I ended up in the infantry carrying a Corliss Rifle, the heavy end of it.  Trooping up and down hills and stuff like that.  So there was not the opportunity for me that there was for a lot of the white young Marines.  So as a young black person, did that disillusion you at all?  Or you know. Do you think maybe if you could have it
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: Is that--.
Speaker 1: I'm reading.  She gave me some work and I shut up, [Laughs].  You know.
Speaker 2: So now I was asking about the service and what--you know, what other exp--you know, was there anything there?  Do you think it was all good, the training in many ways?  You know, in terms of--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah I do.  I, I really think that it had an impact on my life.  And it taught me that--It's the first time I was ever away from home. And you have to learn to be self-sufficient.  You have to learn discipline.  And the Marine Corps taught me that if you are disciplined, you can walk on water.  And sometimes you don't even need the water.  You know.  And so it was really--put me in perspective.  And it was then that I realized I need this education.  I want this education.  So I got out of the Marine Corps and I got me a part-time job in a Brooklyn Public Library.  And I immediately went to Brooklyn College.  I went to college night, days, summers for eight and a half years. Now in the interim, I took the test for the police officer.  Did very well and I was hired as a police officer.  And in those days, they didn't have the steady days or steady nights.  And I remember on two occasions I'm in college, working as a police officer.  And there's a labor strike.  And  all days days off canceling, you're working twelve-hour tours.  I had to drop out of law--college.  Then they had--We called it the 'Dictator's Convention'.  Had all of the heads of the UN [United Nations] who came over to the UN for all of this.  I had the honor of being [Jawaharlal] Nehru's bodyguard.  And we went up to the Theresa Hotel and visited [Fidel] Castro.  And I remember speaking to Castro and told him I was in the Marine Corps.  And I was down in Guantanamo Bay.  And he invited me to come back to Cuba to see him.  That was in maybe 1952.  But after eight and a half years, I graduated college.  I said, "Going to college for eight and a half years is a long time.  I think I'll take a year off."  But then something told me, "You're on a roll now.  And if you stop, there's a chance you'll never go to law school."  So I said, "What the hell.
Story_ID: 9254
Speaker 1: And when I went into the Marine Corps and came out and now I'm education driven.  And eight and a half years of college.  But the other thing, I knew I wanted to go to law school.  And being a police officer, I know that they are not going to give me a steady tour.  So I wanted a steady tour--steady days or steady nights.  So maybe a year or two before I graduated college, I went to a second school.  I went to the stenotype school.  Have you seen the stenotypist?  And I mastered that.  So when it came time for law school, still working and still have a family, I said, "I'd like a steady tour."  And he said, "No."  By this time, I'm a detective.  Right.  And you have to go out and just make arrests.  I said, "I can do stenotype."  Because they always needed stenographers in the police department.  He said, "Good.  We'll give you steady nights, and weekends."  'Cause nobody else wanted steady nights and weekends.  And still make the arrests, but if they needed a stenographer, say for a homicide or a shooting or whatever it is, I'm available with my machine.  So I worked full time at night.  And went to law school full-time during the day.
Speaker 2: Now tell--this whole thing of--was your wanting to be a police officer, was it practical?  Because it came it ca--got good benefits and things like that?  It was a good job.  And what year are we talking about?
Speaker 1: I came--I think it was in '56 [1956] I became a police officer.  195--Okay.
Speaker 2: 1956.  I was in the Marine Corps '52 [1952] to '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: So how many people were--how many blacks were on the force at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't know how large the force was.  It was six or seven percent of the force.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Something like that.  Very small number.  And I think I wanted to be a police officer, because it was a good job.  And it was a--it was a great job.  You know.  And then, like I said, I became a detective.  You know.
Speaker 1: Now what--what about that whole-- what did you like about that experience?  And what did you learn or consider significant?  Because in some respects you've had these building blocks.  Well a lot of it.  You know of what you've done.  They've been building blocks--
Speaker 2: But at the time I didn't know they were building blocks.
Speaker 1: No, I know.  But I'm saying, but was the--now that you have hindsight what did you learn during the experience of being a police officer that helps you--you know, that helped you, you know, as a prosecutor and has helped you as a federal judge?  That's, that's I guess what I'm asking.  And with hindsight?
Speaker 2: I got a lot of practical experience.  And I have very good people skills.  I would--I would see people that I dealt with, that I arrested who were just like me.  But for circumstances, they are in the criminal justice system.  I also--and I guess this probably is from my mother's training that I treated them as human beings with dignity and respect.  They're on the other side of the table than I am.  But they're still human beings.  And as long as they treated me with respect, I treated them with respect.  I think say for instance also if you have to arrest a person, or take some sort of police action.  He's with his wife or his children or his girlfriend, you don't demean him in front of his family.  You know, there are ways of doing things.  People skills.  You know.  And that helped a great deal.  You learn you get more with honey than you can with vinegar.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Now what was--what was the New York police force like at that time?  You know
Speaker 2: A racist organization.  Very few sergeants.  Very few lieutenants.  The highest--I still remember.  I can't think of this name.  Highest-ranking black at that time was a deputy Chief Inspector.  And then after that, a friend of my father's:  He used to babysit me.  A guy by the name of Lloyd [George] Sealy.  He got a law degree and college and everything. He rose up to assistant Chief Inspector.  But very few people in the department with high ranks.
Speaker 1: Now  who were you--were you assigned a black neighborhood?  Were you--Or were you--
Speaker 2: --I was all over.  Youth division, Bed-Stuy, East New York, Harlem, narcotics, all over.  Did everything.
Speaker 1: And but--so at this--and you have been serving for how many years before--?  Was it eight?  Was it--No.
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Twelve years before you went--No, not before you went to law school.  Twelve years before you went to law school [Brooklyn Law School] ?
Speaker 2: No.  It was eight and a half years.
Speaker 1: Years before you went to law school.
Speaker 2: Law school.  Right.
Speaker 1: And you served a total of twelve years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at--So you--you decided that you need to get the show on the road.  And you go, go to apply to law school.
Speaker 2: Go straight to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm in law school now.  And all of the things that I've done before Marine Corps, discipline, police department, you know, discipline, working, raising a family.  I'll never forget the story.  I'm babysitting.  And I'm laying across the bed and I'm reading a book.  And my daughter who was about three years old at that time.  She's got her little doll.  And she gets the doll and she's giving the doll some water.  And I said, "mm, delicious."  You know.  And she comes over to me.  She gives me some water.  And she says, "Mm delicious Dad?"  I said, "Yeah, mm delicious."  So she does this three or four times, you know.  "Mm delicious baby."  And then something says to me, "Where in the hell is she getting this water from?"  I got up.  And oh! Much to my amazement the toilet seat was all over with water, [Laughs].  I got this thing about toilets that must be flushed, [Laughs].  I never forgot that.  In fact I wrote a paper on that when I was in college.
Speaker 1: [Laughs] I can't believe that.
Speaker 2: Ha?
Speaker 1: [Laughs] I can't believe that.  So--I can't believe that, [Laughs].  So anyway, [Laughs].  That's cute.  You probably never let her live that down.
Speaker 2: Aww man!
Story_ID: 9255
Speaker 1: So--okay, so you're in law school.  Talk about that.  What--was there any decision about where to go or?  And when'd you get married?
Speaker 2: To law school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When did you get married though?
Speaker 2: Right out of, [softly] See I got a '55 [1955].  '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: '56, the same year you started with the police force then.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: '56 [1956]. And grew up with my wife.  And forty-five years later still there. You know.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Somebody said, "I asked her to marry me forty-five years ago.  And I still think it's my idea."  [Laughs].  But anyway, what was the question?  So--I was just asking--I was asking when you got married.  Because there was [unclear].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have family obligations.  Now had you--had this been something you had articulated to your wife that you always wanted to be a lawyer?  You wanted to do this?
Speaker 2: No.  It was something that I just did.  I'm gonna do it.  You know.  I'm just going ahead.  Just going ahead. I didn't ask her, you know.  She was good about it in the sense that life can be tough and maybe unbearable if she wasn't supportive. You know.  So she didn't bother me.  So I just went to school, went to school and finally got everything that I have today.  You know.  In fact, I remember college; I wasn't going to go to my graduation.  You know, you know, eight and a half years.  What's to graduate about?  And she said, "It's good to let the kids see you walk across the stage and the whole bit."  And then when I finished law school, I did the same thing.  And my mother was there.  And my father was there.  And the chest was stuck out, you know.  And they were so, so proud, you know.
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit more about your law school experience though.  Because you're working.  You're working still and going to law school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what is this--because this is your person who dreamed of being a Clarence Darrow.  And so what is this whole experience like?  Do you find it tough?  Do you find it you know.  Are there classes you like?  Things you don't like?  I mean what?
Speaker 2: I found it challenging.  And I found that I was a serious student.  And at that time, there were a lot of people who were in law school to get that draft deferment.  They didn't want to go to Vietnam.  And I forgot what you call a school deferment or something like that.  I had already been in service.  When you go to law school, it's different say than college.  Because you learn something in college.  You have an exam.  You regurgitate what the instructor told you.  Law school they'll give you principles of law.  And then they'll give you a fact pattern or fact patterns.  And you have to apply those principles of law to that particular fact pattern.  And they teach you in law school that there was no right answer, there was no wrong answer.  The Supreme Court splits five to four.  Not in what the law is, but in the application of the law.  And I kind of mastered that.  But one of the things that we did was so, so tough.  Because law school the first year is the toughest year.  Flunk you right out, you know.  I started law school; there were three hundred and some people in my class.  Maybe close to four hundred.  I think there were ten or twelve blacks.  I was the only one who made it.  We were looking for--I was looking for study groups.  And it's easier if you're in a study group.  And it took you a while to get the right combination.  The right people who were serious and who contributed something.  You had a lot of people who would like to be in a study group, but just to take what you could give them.  And they weren't serious, you know.  So--and you would study at various person house on Sundays.  So what I would do:  I'd study every day.  And it was so fascinating to me that I even read the footnotes.  You know.  And then on the Saturdays I would review. And on Sundays we had the, the guys got together.  Three or four people and then we would study.  And we would talk about a particular issue.  What a principle of rule meant.  And you get a different perspective from what somebody else was thinking and how.  And then we'd look it up and the whole bit.  And as a result, stayed in the top ten percent of the law class.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Did very well.  And then they said, and I'm not even thinking about this.  Scholarship for the second year.  Scholarship for the third year.  Just saved me a lot of money.  So I finished law school--
Speaker 1: Wait. Did you find--I'm sorry.  Don't--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But do you think you had--your mind was such that you had sort of a natural proclivity to, you know, to the issues, you know, the analysis that goes with it?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Because as a police officer I'm doing the same that a lawyer's doing.  Because I see a fact pattern.  And I have to apply the principles of law.  I walk in and I see blood here, and a gun here. Now I have to decide the defendant, what can he be charged with?  Burglary because you enter with an intent to commit a crime, therein.  Possession of a gun and so many things.  I'm doing exactly what I did to make a living.  You know.  So you saw all those things.  It's a little more difficult with the civil cases.  But the criminal cases it was fine.  I grasped the issues.
Story_ID: 9256
Speaker 1: So what were your-- some of your favorite courses in law school?  Did you have some that you liked versus you didn't like?  Did you like civil procedures?  Did you like torts?  Did you like--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I liked torts.  I liked torts. I liked, liked criminal law and I liked constitutional law.  You know.  Say for instance I had often wondered many times where as a police officer there were different standards for men than there were for women.  And I couldn't understand that.  You could be a police officer if you were a woman and you were 5'5" [five feet five inches].  But you had to be at least 5'7" [five feet seven inches] for a policeman.  And I wondered why the disparity, you know.  Policewomen did basically the same thing.  But not, not really.  And I, I wondered why policewomen could not go out in the street on patrol and make arrests.  They couldn't do that.  They were relegated to matron duty.  So if a male police officer arrested a woman, all they did was search.  There was a separate test for women.  But there was so many inconsistencies. And I would wonder.  And constitutional law in about this time 19--54, Brown versus the Board of Education, you know, and Civil Rights Movement.  And things were just happening.  And, you know, cutting edge and exciting times to be around.  So I love constitutional law.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And you, you started law school in what year and then finished in what year?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  '63 [1963] finished '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay so those were--that was the Voting Rights Act came in during that time.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So this was--this was--were you following very closely Thurgood Marshall and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] A hero of mine.  Hero of mine.  You know.  And the other thing.  I remember Thurgood Marshall; I think he argued thirty-five or thirty-six cases before the Supreme Court.  He, he won thirty-three.  And now comes time for him to sit on the Court of Appeals and some people said he wasn't qualified.  They said he wasn't qualified.  You know.  So if he wasn't qualified, who can be qualified if you are Black?  You know.
Speaker 1: So you--you're raising your family and going to law school.  And you--you got these scholarships.  So that helps.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did that still--were you still working though--?
Speaker 2: I'm still working, full time.
Speaker 1: Wow!  Wow!
Speaker 2: Full-time, full-time, you know.
Speaker 1: I don't think people realize that's a lot.  That's a lot on one plate.
Speaker 2: Even I didn't realize it.  I did it not--Just do it.  You know.  It's just like you start out on a journey.  Mao Tse Tung says, "A journey of a thousand miles begins with but one step."  And when you keep walking and walking and realize--that's what happened to me in college.  And many times I said, "Gee, I'm tired of this.You know, I just been going to school for ever."  And you realize, "Gee!  I got eighty credits.  All you need is 128.  I'm on the down side of the mountain."  You know.  So you just keep going and going. And before you know it, you know, the prize is there.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now so you--were there any other things that happened in your second or third year of law school that was sort of, you know, influential on you?  Any teachers that particularly influenced you?  Or any other, you know, people in the legal profession that influenced you?  Anything that--
Speaker 2: Well, I had these heroes in the legal profession.  And some of them were white lawyers--not lawyers, but judges down south with some of their rulings.  [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Thurgood Marshall.  You know just--there were some giants that came along at that time.  And they were very, very inspiring.  So.  And I just felt proud to be in the profession.  Or going into the profession.  And I also saw the inequities that were happening in the criminal justice system.  You would see a lawyer down there.  And they were ambulance chasers.  Down in criminal court and trying to get cases.  You know.  And you'd have a wife with--a husband that stabbed a wife.  And the wife would throw lye on him.  So you lock both people up.  And when they got down to court, because it was violence against violence on black people, they're gonna throw the thing out.  A lawyer would represent the husband and the wife and charge them a fee that was just so, you know.  And I call 'em plead them and bleed 'em, [laughs].  And I said, "This guy making this money, I know I'm better than him."  You know.
Speaker 1: So you were seeing--you were seeing that, that the bad things of the system, you know, from a real perspective.  Which is much different from a lot of people who are not working in the job that you're working in.  They're looking at things from a more theoretical standpoint.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 9257
Speaker 1: So were there--at this point and time are you  also--are you deciding what you think you want to do?  You know is it, "That I'll stay with the police force?"  Or you're--you know.  What are you anticipating when you graduate?  What do you want to have happen career wise?
Speaker 2: I was undecided.  I'm--I'm getting this law degree and doing very well in law school.  But I did so well in law school, I'm in this what they call the honors program.  And I was offered a job in Washington, D.C., in the Civil Rights Division.  So I went down for the interview.  And I'll never forget.  I spoke to one guy.  His name was Maudlin.  His name was Phil Maudlin.  And he asked me what I wanted to do.  I said, "I want to try cases."  And he said, "Well the Civil Rights Division, you don't exactly try cases.  You know.  You're a staff attorney and you might go somewhere.  And another lawyer will try the cases and you will assist him."  And I said, "I wanta try cases and maybe he'll assist me.  I wanted to find out whether I was a poor trial lawyer, an average trial lawyer or a great trial lawyer.  And in my mind I knew I was gonna be a great trial lawyer.  So they said, "Why don't you apply to the U.S. Attorney's office?"  I didn't know what the U.S. Attorney's office was.  So I came back to New York.  And I walked into the southern district of New York.  The flagship U.S. Attorney's office in the nation.  And I said, "I want to be an assistant U.S. Attorney."  Well, they looked at me as if I had two heads.  Finally they said, "Well, first of all we don't hire people who are not admitted to the bar.  You haven't even taken the bar.  Second of all, you have to have at least two years experience.  You know, as a lawyer."  But he says, [Laughs].  Okay so they said, "You have to have two years experience and you gotta be admitted to the bar."  And he says, "When you get admitted to the bar, you come back and see me."  This is what the fella said in the attorney's office.  So I said, "Okay."  Well, I'm studying for the bar.  The night before the bar, I'm deep into my thoughts and studying like hell.  And I get this urging.  I get this quench for some prune juice.  I took a quart of that prune juice--it was in a glass jar.  Chilled that bad boy and man I drank that.  It was so good.  It was so good, [Laughs].  So now I get to the bar.  And the grenades in my stomach start going off.  I didn't give a damn at all about that bar exam.  I'd sit down.  I'd write a little bit, get up and go to the bathroom.  Sit down, write a little bit.  To make a long story short, I passed the bar, first time.  So I go back to the U.S. Attorney's office and say, "Here I am."  You know.  So what they did for me, they said because I had all this experience.  You know, twelve years experience as a police officer.  They waived the two years.  Right.  And they hired me.  I'm now an assistant United States attorney.  My last assignment was in--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] What year is this Judge Johnson?
Speaker 2: [Pause] '60--5 [1965], '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '66 [1966] I think.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: This is pretty exciting.  And the other thing.  I mean you told this sort of offhandedly.  But New York bar is the har--one the har--It is the hardest bar
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] yeah.
Speaker 1: --exam to pass.
Speaker 2: Especially when you got prune juice.
Speaker 1: [Laughs] Okay.  [Laughs] Okay.  Well, we won't even go there.
Speaker 2: [Laughs].
Speaker 1: And you went there.
Speaker 2: It's true, [Laughs].
Speaker 1: [Laughs] I hadn't even went there, [Laughs].
Speaker 2: [Laughs] I'll never for get that.  Prune juice.
Speaker 1: So go on.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] So I don't mess with no prunes at all.
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Heck!  I don't even like raisins.
Speaker 1: [Laughs] And you had this longing for prune juice.
Speaker 2: I don't know why.  You know.  It was prune juice.
Story_ID: 9258
Speaker 1: Bill Tandy, head of the narcotics unit in the U.S. Attorney's office.  The only one in the country.  Welcomes me to the office.  "Look forward to working with you.  Where did you work before?"  He asked me.  And I told him narcotics.  So he tells me this story of a big narcotics conspiracy in Chicago [Illinois]. And in this conspiracy, some of the heavies felt that one of the lesser defendants was an informant.  So they put out a contract on this defendant.  A fella knocked at the door of this defendant.  Shows a shield, Chicago Police Department, and said, "My boss wants to talk to you. Downtown."  This defendant says, "Okay, I'm shaving.  Let me wipe the shaving cream off and I'll go downtown with you."  So he goes back into the house, into the bathroom to wipe the shaving cream off his face.  He's followed by this policeman.  The policeman takes out a gun, (explosion sound) one in the head.  This defendant falls down.  The policeman rolls him over (explosion sound) one in the face.  The policeman leaves.  This defendant does not die.  He gives a description of this policeman.  And Chicago disseminates this information throughout the whole country.  Do you know anybody fitting this description who would do a hit like that?  And Tandy asked me this question.  I said, "Yeah, I know somebody who fits that description, who would do a hit like that.  In fact, he's a hit man."  "Can you get a picture?"  I call up the police department.  I just left two days ago.  Right.  They got the picture.  They sent it out to Chicago, (claps).  That was the hit man.  Well, they thought I work--walked on water.  They thought I walked on water.  And narcotics in the U.S. Attorney's office was elite assignment.  You know, you had to walk on hot coals to get there.  Tandy wanted me yesterday and I'd only been in the office two days.  You know.  And long story short, after about six months I went to the narcotics unit. I'm in the narcotics unit about six months and the Deputy Chief of the narcotics unit leaves to go to private practice.  And Bill Tandy says to the U.S. attorney, "I want Sterling to be my deputy."  'Cause I'm mature.  I got all this experience.  And he had other guys in the unit.  You know.  All of them are white.  And I thought I'd have problems.  No problem at all.  I now became their deputy.  I have been trying to get out of narcotics ever since.  But I'm always in narcotics.
Story_ID: 9259
Speaker 1: September 9th, 1991.  I was only the 65th African-American Federal Judge since the founding of the Republic.
Speaker 2: That's amazing.  And how many, how many now?
Speaker 1: A hundred and twenty, maybe one hundred and thirty.
Speaker 2: Wow!  We're talking about in that short a period?  That's amazing.  That is amazing.  See people don't know that.  I'm, I'm shocked at those numbers! Are they--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 9260
Speaker 1: You were getting ready to tell some stories about having a gun put to your head and some other cases you worked on.
Speaker 2: Yeah. A gun put to my head, you're buying drugs and he says, "I get bad vibes about you.  And I don't feel good.  But I've been selling you drugs.  But if you're the man, or you're an informant, the world ain't big enough for you.  You and your family."  You don't think anything about it.  Because you're young.  You know you just don't think anything about it. I think about it now.  You know?  It's stupid some of these things.  I don't know why people would work undercover.  But they do, you know?
Speaker 1: Any other undercover stories?
Speaker 2: I remember basically the same thing happening to another fellow who--They had what they called special at DEA [Drug Enforcement Agency].  And I think there was a corruption investigator.  So they sent this fellow from Chicago to New York.  He infiltrates and he makes a drug case on this drug dealer or corruptor.  And two or three bodies and basically the same thing.  The guy threatens him, you know?  And the world is not safe for you or your family.  And this is a real street agent.  And he said, "When he told me that, my skin crawled.  I got cold and clammy."  This guy is a killer."  So his superiors told him, "We'll abort what we're doing and we'll go to trial on whatever we have."  They wanted an A.U.S.A. [Assistant United States Attorney] Prosecutor who knew the ropes.  Who knew the streets and who could fight.  'Cause he's gonna have a good lawyer.  And they brought it to me and asked me, "Please take this case."  I had so many cases.  I said, "okay."  The guy's name was Cliffie.  I can't think of his last name.  So they arrest Cliffie and he comes--and he was a bad guy. A bad--I mean, mean guy.  He comes into my office and he sits down.  And we say this on the record.  I see him sitting down and I look him dead in the eye.  And I said, "Motherfucker who told you to sit in my chair?"  And it was all over.  Cliffie belonged to me.  Psychologically he lost the war.  I had no problems out of Cliffie.  He pled guilty.
Speaker 1: How--How--So you were say--How did you know--Why did you--Why did you think you owned him?
Speaker 2: I had him--I didn't give him permission to sit in the chair.  He's in my house!  You know?  He does what I tell him to do.  You know?  You're not out there on the street.  This is a different ballgame. A different day. A different adversary.  So I owned him.
Speaker 1: So what other things you learned as a--you think you learned as a--you know, working undercover?
Speaker 2: Life is cheap.  Live fast, die young, have a beautiful corpse.  A lot of money out there. A lot of temptations out there. It really is not worth it.  You know.  But you also learn how people think.  You know.  You learn--there's a difference between talking to a person and communicating with a person.  You know?  You could stand on a corner and one guy would say, "what up?" Single action digit.  A few fingers,  don't have to say a word.  You know?  There's a life out there. There's a culture out there that a lot of people don't even realize. I remember--you remember the guy named Nicky Barnes?  Frank--what was it Frank I can't think of his name. Frank Lucas.  But up in Harlem in those days when one of these drug dealers, big drug dealers, they'd come around.  You could, you could almost tell.  You know.  You'd be on 135th Street and Frank or one of these big drug dealers would be on 116th Street.  But there was--there were vibes, there was an electricity.  You know there was--you knew one of these guys were on the scene.
Story_ID: 9261
Speaker 1: Did you learn a lot about drugs coming in and what--the sources for them and all of that?  You know, there have been--
Speaker 2: At that time yes.  But I really learned more about it when I went to the Drug Enforcement Administration.  Because I saw the global picture.  I knew that drugs were coming into the neighborhood.  What usually happened years ago, there was the Corsicans.  Well let me go back a little further.  They'd grow the opium poppies in Turkey.  And the opium poppy looks exactly like that picture you see behind you.  It's a bulbous plant.  Where they would slice the bulbous plant and a milky white substance would ooze out.  And they'd leave it there over night.  And it would oxidize and be dark brown or black.  And then the next morning they'd come and they'd scrape it off.  And this is your opium gum.  And they'd have these gumballs and they'd send it on to Marseille, France.  And they'd transform opium gum into morphine and morphine into heroin.  And then you had your drug dealers in the United States. Organized crime, La Cosa Nostra, Mafia. And they would buy this heroin coming in from France.  And the chemists in France were very good.  And they'd get 90, 92 percent pure heroin. So the, the Americans would buy say one hundred kilos of, of heroin.  Then they'd sell it to the wholesalers.  And the wholesalers they would cut it a little bit.  And then the jobbers.  And then by the time it got down to the street, it might be two percent, three percent pure.  But it's a nice package.  And everybody's making money along the way.  In 19--I forgot the year,[Richard] Nixon was president.  He declared war on drugs.  And what he did was to give money to Turkey to crop substitution. The whole bit.  They stamped out the Turkish-French Connection.  And now, there was no drugs.  And then they started getting drugs and heroin from Mexico.  And now New York is no longer the focal port of importation, it's Chicago [Illinois].  And then from Chicago throughout the rest of the country.  And there was a difference in the drugs.  The--a good package of Mexican heroin would be maybe 40 percent, 50 percent.  And this was in, in the way they processed. The chemists processed the morphine into heroin.  There was one step that they didn't do.  I use to say that the French were the chefs of heroin producing.  And the Mexicans were the short order cooks.  You know? Then after that, Vietnam War.  And you got a lot of Americans going over into Southeast Asia and they were getting heroin pure.  Being made over there.  And the heroin would come back to the Americans. A lot of blacks got into it.  And what they did was to get the heroin and then they would dilute it.  They'd get a kilo of heroin, 2.2 pounds.  90 percent pure.  And the stuff that's going out on the street is three percent pure.  So instead of having one kilo at 90 percent, you really have thirty kilos at 3 percent. And if you get $250,000 per kilo, times thirty. Aww man! They were making a lot of money.  Making a lot of money.  And I remember being on a street corner.  We're doing a walkthrough.  Borough President [of] Manhattan, Charlie [Charles] Rangel and some other officials--the mayor of New York [John Lindsay].  And we saw--It was congregating like, like roaches coming out at night in a tenement.  And I don't know who said it. One of the cops says, "Do you know who we are?"  And I remember a guy saying, "Yeah.  But I don't give a fuck.  If you're not out here to buy drugs, get the fuck off the corner."  That's how bad it was, you know.  So I'm back into drugs. I can't get out of drugs.
Story_ID: 9262
Speaker 1: So let me ask you.  So you've become Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Narcotics.  So Deputy--
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Deputy chief of the narcotics unit in the U.S. Attorney's office.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: U.S. Attorney's office.  And so let's talk about some of the cases that you worked on there.  And you know, that whole you know period of time.  'Cause you, you were at the U.S. Attorney's office for sixteen years?
Speaker 1: No, no. I'm special narcotics prosecutor for sixteen years.
Speaker 2: Oh! That's right.  Okay that's right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in the U.S. Attorney's office for three years.
Speaker 2: Three years.  Then you were then-- when he asked you to be your--his--
Speaker 1: I was--yeah.  I was in there three years.  Maybe after about six months, he asked me to be his deputy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm trying narcotic cases.  You name 'em, I tried them.  One case I vaguely remember was a fellow's charged with a sale of narcotics.  And the agent testify, "I saw the defendant hand what appeared to be a bag.  And this person handed this defendant some money."  And the whole bit.  The defense was it wasn't a drug transaction.  But it was numbers.  Everybody played numbers.  I said, "Oh numbers?"  Now I know about digits, right. So I got up there and I cross-examine, you know. What crack was it?  Was it old way?  Was it new way?  You know. What kind of odds did you get?"  The judge didn't know what I was talking about. The defense counselor didn't know what I was talking about. Some members of the jury knew what I was talking about.  We got a conviction.  The defense lawyer told me, "If it was anybody but you," he said, "I'd've beat the case.  Reasonable doubt."  But I knew digits.  I knew the street.  You know?  So I'm there three years trying narcotics cases you know.  And then I get an offer--oh.  When I went to the U.S. Attorney's office from the Police department, I had to take a pay cut.  I got a family.  I took the pay cut.  Then when I end the three years, they had this job available.  Civilian Complaint Review Board, investigating police officers for brutality and stuff like that.  On a ten thousand dollar raise.  So I take the job.  I'm doing that for about three or four years.  And then one of the fellows that I worked with, in the U.S. Attorney's office, gets the job to head this brand new agency.  And he asked me to come to Washington [D.C.] to help him.  And I'm not too particular about going to Washington .  I discuss it with my wife.  And we stayed there for about a year or so.  Of course my family wasn't gonna move down there.  So I go down to Washington and I'm with this brand new agency called the Drug Enforcement Administration.  And then I get a perspective, a national and international perspective on how drugs are being manufactured, transported, the whole bit.  I'm down there over a year, less than a year.
Speaker 2: What time period is this too?
Speaker 1: 'Cause see we don't--I--It's hard to think that DEA wasn't even around.  You know.  So--
Speaker 2: Se--73 [1973]?  74 [1974] something like that.  I'm down there and then I get a call from you know [Robert] Bob Morgenthau?
Speaker 1: Detective.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He--his father used to be the Treasury Secretary.  But he is the premier probably district attorney in the country.  He asked me to come back to New York to be the special narcotics prosecutor.  Now I'm getting acclimated to Washington.  And I'm traveling. I'm getting all this traveling.  You know, really enjoying myself.  But I come back to New York.  And you have to understand the political scene here in New York.  New York has five boroughs.  And they have five district attorneys.  Each are elected.  And you had the drug problem in New York so if you were to sell me some drugs in Brooklyn today, and then next week you sell me some drugs in Manhattan, and then the third you say you're gonna sell me some drugs in, in the Bronx.  And now we arrest you.  Now because of the jurisdictional differences, you had to be tried and prosecuted in each jurisdiction.  So the legislate, state legislature says, "We need an office where you'll have citywide jurisdiction. Unlike any other district attorney."  And what we will allow the five district attorneys to appoint this one particular person.  You'll have your own budget; we'll supply the manpower.  So they had me come back to New York and I did this.  And I saw the problems right away.  First of all we were not being funded adequately.  The equipment was piss-poor.  They needed training.  So we did this and made some of the biggest cases that ever came down the pipe.  And I said, "I'd stay there for a couple of years and maybe go out into private practice." Long story short, I was there sixteen years.  Sixteen years.  And then after that--
Speaker 1: So talk about some of the cases--
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] The cases?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm
Speaker 2: .
Speaker 1: I remember there was one case that started out in Atlanta.  And we had a fellow who told one of the undercovers that he was the presidential counselor--he was the President's lawyer.  And he signed into a prison.  I forget his name.  Long story short.  I need my--
Speaker 2: You need a cough drop?  Just talk about this one case.  You said it was out of Chicago.  Something
Speaker 1: All right let me; let me give you this one.  A series of cases.  But there's a fellow by the name of [U.S. Army Sergeant Leslie] Ike Atkinson. I don't know if you remember him.
Speaker 2: You shouldn't refer to me but it; it's no--it happens all the time.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm not on camera so.
Speaker 1: We had a case with a fellow by the name of  Ike Atkinson.  And he was accused some years ago of having transported heroin using the cavities of dead bodies of the G.I.'s who came back from Vietnam.  And Ike was in jail doing a long stretch.  During that time, we fought.  When I say we, I mean DEA. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations], special narcotics prosecutor, you name it.  Turf wars and stuff like that.  I remember a guy by the name of Tom Shear.  He was an agent in charge of the FBI.  We had a lot of meetings.  But he said, "No, no meetings.  Let's have a sit-down."  We had a sit-down.  And then Tom says, "That if good guys cooperate, their guys lose.  If good guys fight, their guys win."  Now cooperating means that you got to give up a little turf.  A little power. Fo r the better end.  And I always believe that when you get a case, and then prosecute it where you get the best bang for the buck.  If it mean--that means giving up my case to the Feds, I'll do it.  But it's my decision.  Not some agent's decision.  So they got information that Ike was in prison up in Otisville, New York.  He's still doing dope.  So we found out that Ike was using a corrupt prison guard.  He was sending notes.  And the prison guard would take the note and then deposit it in the mailbox on the outside.  This way it would not be censored.  Nobody on the inside could see.  And he was running his empire that way.  So we got the FBI. And they'd watch when this guard would put mail in there.  We would go into the mailbox.  Take that letter out from Ike right?  Send it down to the lab in the FBI Headquarters in Washington.  Steam it open, whatever they did, Xerox it, take the letter, bring it back, put it in the mailbox and let it go on.  So we're following all of that.  And the FBI, DEA and myself are cooperating.  We get information that led to West Germany and some other place.  They put up a wire.  We put up a wire on the prison.  We then got a DEA Agent posing as a corrupt German official.  A diplomat.  We sent him over to Thailand.  He comes back with a package and we lock Ike up again.  So now this case involved New York, Washington, D.C., California, Delaware, West Germany.  And because of the jurisdictional problem, it would be awkward to develop--difficult for me to prosecute.  So I said, "Best bang for the buck, U.S. Attorney's office." They cross-designated one of my assistants, made her a special assistant United States Attorney.  She tried it in Federal Court.  Got a conviction. One of the best cases we had.
Speaker 2: Now you-- Are there other--during your sixteen years there, you were--Remember how you said when we started, there wasn't enough funding.  You know there were--
Speaker 1: That we had challenges that were jurisdictional issues.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What are the things that you--'Cause you were very successful in this position.  What were--
Speaker 2: We still got drugs.
Story_ID: 9263
Speaker 1: What things did you put in place or accomplish that you're really proud of?
Speaker 2: We had brand new equipment.  The latest peephole mikes. We got a surveillance van.  The cops called it Sterling I.  It was custom built.  You know, you stand out there in that old submarine thing, you know.  So we wanted to do a--make a buy.  We say it would be 3:00.  We'd send--And we'd say, "McDonald's parking lot."  I'd send Sterling 1 out there at 12:00.  And just sit there and wait 'til 3:00.  Kids would be coming through buying little hamburgers and there's a drug deal going out.  So when it comes time to go to trial, we'd show these films of the kids going by and this guy dealing drugs! You know.  Right?  Training for the police officers.  Joint meetings. Like the police officers to know when we call you down for pretrial, these are some of the things that we're calling you down for.  And for my assistants to go to the Police Department and they had a legitimate gripe.  Many times they'd call down there.  "Gonna try a case next week.  So I want to prepare you."  You know?  So I call them down.  Be in my office on Monday at 9:00 [a.m.].  So the cop comes in at 9:00.  Meanwhile, the court is calling and an assistant has to go over to her office and the cop is sitting there.  You know she's getting overtime.  And it's a day wasted for him.  So as a result of that, you want to prep somebody for trial, do it at 4:00 or 5:00.  Then you don't have to be running over to court, and you can devote the time.  And we don't have to worry about overtime for you.  'Cause you don't get no overtime.  You know?  They get the overtime.  So it's a problem.  We, we learned what each other was doing.  We, we would speak to our counterparts. U.S. Attorney's office, Drug Enforcement Administration, FBI.  I locked up an FBI Agent for dealing drugs. You know?  I'll never forget the guy.  He was one of the technical people from the FBI, putting, putting bugs in the embassies.  And we're out doing an undercover investigation organized crime.  And this guy says, "Hey I--" He says, "You want to buy some drugs?"  And the undercover says, "Naw I don't want to buy any drugs. You're a cop!"  But he was one of the dumbest people that ever sucked God's air.  He said, "I'm not a cop.  I'm an FBI Agent." You gotta be kidding."  So we check him out. Sure enough he's an FBI Agent.  What we did is bought I don't know if it was one or two times.  But we bought drugs from him.  Then we notified the FBI.  And they said, "Lock him up right now.  Let us--"  "No.  We can't do anything until we finish our investigation."  So we--they called me once or twice a week.  "You finished?  You finished?"  "No I'm not finished."  So we eventually finished the investigation.  Then they called him into the office.  "You're a disgrace." And they rip his insignias off him.  "And you're now fired!"  They walk him over to me and he's under arrest.  And I don't make a big deal out of it.  Because it's embarrassing for an organization to have one of their agents you know, doing this.  So the next day a small clip in our newspaper "Ex-FBI agent arrested for drugs."  Now it was things like that. You had to get along.  You know you're all on the same side, you know.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Now what were your biggest challenges in getting along?  I mean one, how did you get the money that you needed?  To do the things that you did.
Speaker 2: It was appropriated by the state legislature.  And at that time money was scarce and they'd divide the pie up.  It used to be five DA's [district attorneys].  Now it's six.  And what I would do, I'd have to go up there and beg and scrape and crawl you know, just to get a few pennies.  Just to do the job that I was hired to do.
Speaker 1: And yo u were working for New York-- Was it?
Speaker 2: New York City.
Speaker 1: New York City.  So who was the mayor at the time?  Was it--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Abraham] Beame was there.
Speaker 1: [Abraham] Beame.  Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: But during your term you had several mayors.  I mean there were--okay.
Speaker 1: Beame yeah.  And it was a funding formula that was kind of tricky.  Where we were funded by the city and the state, Fifty-fifty.  So now if the city said that, "I'm cutting your funds by ten thousand dollars."  Then the state says, "Cool.  That'll be fifty-fifty.  So I'm cutting it ten thousand dollars." So instead of a ten thousand dollar cut, I'd get a $20,000 cut.  So I said to myself, "Politics being what it is, I'm not gonna take this lying down.  I'm gonna let the whole world know that this is what they're doing."  I invited Henry Kissinger to Harlem to see the end of the heroin trail.  I remember what--Not [President Richard] Nixon.  [President Ronald] Reagan.  On a review it said, he was going to urinate in a bottle to see if he's got clean urine.  And they asked me once you know, "What do you think President Reagan will be remembered for in the war on drugs?"  I say, "Rhetoric."  No.  What did I say?  "Piss in a bottle and rhetoric."  Or something like that I said, you know.
Story_ID: 9264
Speaker 1: So you were able to deal with a lot of the issues, you know of, of coordinating between--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.  That would be a right word. Coordinating.  Yeah.  That would be the right word.  Doing a lot of things.  Being out front, you know.  Dealing with various agencies, the federal government, the--and that was how I became friends with [US Senator Alfonse] D'Amato and when I was in Albany [New York], I would call [US Senator Daniel Patrick] Moynihan naturally.  Right.  But I would never get a phone call back.  Alfonse, you call him, he'd hook things up.  You know.  He'd say, "You go see this guy.  You go see that guy."  And we became friendly.  You know.  And it was always Sterling and Alfonse.  You know.  But Moynihan--who is it that once said that he treats everybody as if they failed his history exam.  You know.
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: So, so were there other things that you think significant out of that sixteen-year period?  That you learned that were disappointing?  Was that when you had the hit on your--the contract on your--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They told you about that?
Speaker 2: It's in that article you showed me.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh!
Speaker 2: When you say
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I had a couple contracts out on me.  But I remember once I'm special narcotics prosecutor.  I get a call.  I think it was one Friday night.  And one of the lieutenants says, "Sterling you should come uptown.  I want you to hear something."  I said, "I want to do it Monday."  He said, "No.  I think it's very important.  I think you should hear this."  So I get in my car and I drive up to the 32 precinct on 35th Street.  And there's this guy who has been arrested.  And he's got a gun on him.  And he was getting ready to do some work.  And he tells the story of the drug dealers having--The old drug dealers are having a fight with the young drug dealers. And the old drug dealers want to show everybody in the drug world that they are still in control.  And they decided they would put out a contract on this visible and vocal special narcotics prosecutor.  So I sat down and I talked to this hit man who they caught with guns.  And we discussed one particular homicide in Harlem that everybody knew about.  And he from his perspective and me from my perspective.  And we both agreed.  Although the homicide was successful, it was sloppy work, you know.  In fact he was so knowledgeable about the homicide we thought that he might have been the guy who did it.  But he didn't do it.  Because he was in jail at the time.  And he then told me.  He said, "Mr. Johnson, they got niggers up here in Harlem that would kill you for a favor."  So I said, "I can dig it."  You know.  "I ain't got no problems with that.  They gotta do what they gotta do.  I gotta do what I gotta do."  So he wanted me to okay his release on bail.  I think he admitted three jobs where he killed five people.  Alright.  No way.  I'm not gonna do it.  Right.  And he told them.  And I think it's crazy.  It's crazy!  So a couple weeks go by.  And the press picks this up.  That there's this contract out on me.  Yeah.  I think I was getting some sort of protection. And I said, "Please don't print the story."  You know.  Not for me, but for the family.  You know, they were very uncomfortable.  So he says, "Okay. I can't promise you."  Go by for about a week or so.  He says, a guy from the [New York] 'Post'.  "I'm gonna tell you, I'm gonna have to print the story.  Because there's another newspaper out there who's lurking around.  And if he gets the story and my editor finds out that I had the story and didn't print it," He said, "They'll fire me."  I said, "Okay.  But don't make a big deal out of it.  It's alright."  So this is on Thursday.  Friday morning I'm talking to someone. "How're you doing?"  "Fine.  How you doing?"  He says, "You alright?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Have you seen the paper?"  "No."  You know the 'New York Post'.  Front-page headline.  And it said, "Death threat on drug DA."  Man, did it hit the fan.  Anyway some crazy reporter--you wanna go.  Let's take a walk through Harlem, you know.  They gave me bodyguards.  They gave my wife bodyguards.  Took my kids to school.  I'll never forget this.  My youngest daughter, she was in public school at the time.  She doesn't remember.  And it was in the springtime.  And the kids at lunchtime would be allowed to go out into the schoolyard and play.  And she was upstairs looking out the window at her friends.  They wouldn't let her go out  'cause they were afraid that they were kidnap her.  I'll never forget that, you know.
Speaker 2: So did you--so you--it--nothing ever happened.  Or did they find the--I mean you knew that there was this threat.  But did they ever find the person?
Speaker 1: They knew who they were.
Speaker 2: They knew who they were!
Speaker 1: But they--they didn't do anything--they didn't do anything.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm still here.
Speaker 1: What is you--I know.  What is your fam--what is your wife doing at this point?
Speaker 2: She didn't like it.  But everywhere she went she had to have this walkie-talkie and, you know.  Bodyguards.  They used to have the police dogs come out every morning and sniff the car.  Don't go home the same route every day.  Alternate your habits, you know.
Speaker 1: You see these things on the movies.  That's as close as most people get.
Speaker 2: Oh did you ever hear of Pablo Escobar?  Pablo Escobar and his hit man, a guy by the name of Bernardo Muniz Musquera (ph.).  One of the first cases I got.  And Pablo is still in Columbia.  He was running from the cops.  They caught him and he was killed by the cops.  Right.  Bernardo the hit man he's here.  They catch him here.  He's the guy who put a bomb on a plane and--that exploded. Hundred or so come down.  They had a video of legs and arms and a kid playing soccer with a head.  And you know, I had to decide whether I'm gonna let in or not.  And I remember it came out in testimony, there was one woman.  He held her by the ponytail.  Shot her in the head.  Picked up the body and dumped her in the garbage.  So he got a couple hundred bodies to his credit.  He's on trial right here in this building.  And he puts out a contract on me and the prosecutor.  Who happened to be a woman.  And they've got it on tape.  And he--the female prosecutor was very frightened.  Because he threatened to slit her throat.  So to make a long story short, he was tried and convicted.  I had bodyguards then.  You know.  I still have a couple of bulletproof vests.  I'm licensed to carry a gun.  You know.
Story_ID: 9265
Speaker 1: In 1991.  So do you think you would have held that job for the res--I mean just for as long as they would have had it, had this--you not been--
Speaker 2: No they had--it was a time it had been threatening.  Oh after a while, you know it's time to move on.  Go make some money and stuff like that.  And I wanted to go into private practice.  And make some money or do something else.  You know.  How long can you deal in death and drugs and you know.
Speaker 1: So then how--how do you--how does this whole--the judgeship--?  Because you--how does it come about is what I'm saying?  Are you sort of--someone else says that your name is up?  Or I mean how did it come?
Speaker 2: Alfonse [D'Amato].  He's running for election.  He says I want to get--put people on the bench who are good. And he campaigned.  He said, "Not only did I put Sterling on the bench, not because he's black.  But because he's good. And he's not even a Republican.  He's a Democrat."  And I've heard people who have gone to some of these campaigns where he, you know.  And  well--where he won.  And here I am.
Speaker 1: So when your name was in--that's right.  When your name was in the hopper.  But how did you--That's starts with a process?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And of letter writing and campaigning.
Speaker 1: Not letter writing.  Letter writing.  I won't say campaigning.  But letter writing.
Speaker 2: I remember being at D'Amato's office at Penn Station.  He was at Penn Plaza.  Myself and Louis Freeh wanted two prosecutors.  And me and my family, Louis and his family and he says, "He intends to make a recommendation to the President."  You know, he had spoken to the President.  And he put my name in.  This is a couple of weeks before Christmas.  It was in '90 [1990].  Six months later, I think it was June 30 to be exact; I had gone through the FBI investigation, the ABA [American Bar Association] investigation, the judiciary hearings.  And I was ready to be a federal judge.  And I said, "This is going so fast."  I didn't take the job until September 9, 1991.  That's how fast.  They put me on a fast track.
Story_ID: 9266
Speaker 1: So this is exciting to you in many ways.  I mean it's not--it even surpasses what your boyhood dreams had been.  Because you were--you had already sort of lived that out being a prosecutor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You had pass--So this whole thing.  This is sort of a pinnacle here in many ways.  And so let's talk about this.  You know, this last really ten years.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] September 9 will be ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years.  So can we talk about that whole--you know what this, this appointment has meant to you?
Speaker 2: It's another solider in the African American soldiers who have been on the bench in 1789.  It has meant that I bring a perspective to the bench that maybe whites don't bring.  It's meant that you have African American law students who have now have an opportunity to clerk for a federal judge.  It's meant that you have gays who have never had an opportunity to do this and clerk for a federal judge.  So since I've been here, I've hired African Americans.  I've hired whites.  I've hired gays.  I hired Latinos, Asian.  You know.  There are people out there I'm convinced who can do the job.  They just never had the opportunity.  I give them that opportunity.  There was a young fellow who used to clerk for me.  Well, he interned for me.  And I make it--most judges say, "If you have an intern, he can't clerk for you."  So I--he was really good. So I shot them around and said, "This is a great guy to the other judges."  Nobody would hire him.  But he was so good.  I wasn't going to let him go to waste.  I made an exception and I hired him.  He turned out to be great.  He started a trial today.  And I went in there for the first time.  And I saw him open, opening statement.  I was so proud.  You know that--my chest could burst. You know.  That's one of my children.  They're all my children.  You know.  And they all are going to do well.
Speaker 1: You should be--really what you speak of is so critical.  Because without that people would not have opportunities.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I also--I really believe in this diversity thing.  Because there's a perspective out there that I don't have.  I don't know it all.  You know.  And I tell them, "You have a perspective that I don't have.  You're young.  You're a woman."  You know.  And other thing that I've learned from them.  What happens, I probably get five or six hundred applications for one vacancy.  So I have my law clerks go through the resumes.  Right. Maybe give me ten, fifteen.  And then I will interview them.  And for the longest time, I couldn't get men.  All things being equal, the women were better than men.  I never even thought that.  But that's a fact.  They say the same thing.  You saw Patrick out here.  He's only the second male that I've had.  You know.  And they say the same thing.  All things being equal, women are better than the men.  You're laughing
Speaker 1: [Laughs] Well no.  We hear that all the time, [Laughs].  Women work hard.  They do work hard.
Speaker 2: Theres a woman, the heavyset young lady.  She was in private practice I think about four years, making $200,000.  She took a $150,000 pay cut to come work for me.  And I said, "I love me.  But I don't love me that much."  You know.  I couldn't take no pay cut to come, you know.  That's what she took.  Patrick the guy you see, he will be leaving in September.  He's gonna start at $200,000.  You know.  More money than I make.  But God bless him.  You know.  He's on his way.  And it's nice to see your children go out and do something.  And I think once a year we have a law clerks reunion.  They come.  Oh, they come.  And they tell Judge Johnson stories, [Laughs].
Story_ID: 9267
Speaker 1: Was there any surprises when you got on the bench?
Speaker 2: I was surprised.  At 9:00 I got sworn in.  At 9:30 I had a trial.  Surprises, it's a brand new job.  A brand new profession.  I didn't know whether I'd like it or not. Because, you know, I'm used to being on the court.  Being the Michael Jordan doing the thing.  But I'm no longer on the court.  But I'm still in the arena.  I'm still in the game.  'Cause I'm--I'm the referee.  So--and I found out that I really enjoyed it.  I really enjoyed it.  And I have cases that they're significant.  You know.  And it makes an impact.  And all you have to do is do what you think is right.  You may be wrong in your decision.  But it's an error of the head and not of the heart.  That's all you have to do.  Is do what you think is right.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And you are--are there just two African Americans sitting on the court?  I mean in this district right now?  'Cause I was looking at the--
Speaker 2: You're looking at him.
Speaker 1: One!
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: I thought that one was--
Speaker 2: Nope.  Since the history of this district, there's only been two.  One guy retired and there's me.  Let me try--you need more.  You know.  You know how many African Americans are in the borough of Brooklyn alone?  I'm it.
Speaker 1: So do you find that--now you haven't found being a judge lonely though?  Or impinging upon your, you know, natural gregarious style?
Speaker 2: [Laughs].
Speaker 1: [Laughs] I'm really an introvert.
Speaker 2: [Laughs] I don't think so. But I mean have you found that?  'Cause so--maybe that's more about the appellate court.  You know, I've heard some people say that it's--
Speaker 1: Now it is a lonely existence.  The friends that you have on--when you come to the bench, those will remain your friend.  It's very difficult to get new friends.  You know.  There's so many things that you can't do.  I mean normally if I got a friend who, who wanted to go to lunch.  Let's go on vacation together.  We're friends from way back.  We can do it.  New person?  You say, "Gee.  Does this guy have an ulterior motive?"  You just don't know.  You know.  It would be very difficult to do.
Story_ID: 9268
Speaker 1: I guess you heard about I held court in the park once?
Speaker 2: Yes I did!  I really thought that--can you tell me!
Speaker 1: That's right.  You held court.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Tell about that story.
Speaker 1: We are looking for space in the eastern district.  Because we're growing by leaps and bounds.  And they kept this organization called GSA [General Services Administration].  Kept promising us we're going to get this building and it never came through.  So we got three judges sharing two courtrooms.  And at this particular time, I was having a trial.  I would have to try it in a jury room.  You know, very limited.  I'd have to try it in a visiting judges courtroom.  You name it.  So finally I said, "The heck with this.  I'm gonna try right outside in the park."  You saw the photo?  So I went to my car.  It's parked out there.  Got myself a little chair.  It's a little picnic chair.  You know.  I sat down.  The court reporter got there.  And--it was a civil case.  It wasn't a prisoner.  And we're sitting there.  And there's a marshal.  And these kids come walking down the street and they're talking to marshals.  And he said very serious, "Sh-sh-sh.  Court is in session."  They looked at him like he was crazy.  So I'm trying the case.  And I don't say anything to anybody.  I don't mention it to the press.  Because I don't, you know.  So I understand the chief judge found out about it.  'Cause it was over the AP.  What the hell is going on out there?  He called the chief judge here, [Laughs].  Oh.  A lot of people laughed.  But they wanted  to find out.  "You got a picnic chair.  What are you doing with a picnic chair in your car?"  I said, "I use it when I play paddleball."  He says, "How do you play paddleball with a picnic chair?"  I said, "When you lose you sit your ass down."  [Laughs] That's what--that's how I do it. You know.  I've arraigned people here in the hallways.  You know.  So as a result, you see the building going up?  [Laughs].
Speaker 2: [Laughs] So you may be the main reason.  And you brought attention to it.
Speaker 1: [Laughs] That was it really.  I brought attention that's right.
Speaker 2: [Laughs] you brought attention.  You brought attention.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] They said, "He did what?"
Speaker 2: You brought attention.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  All you want to do is get their attention.
Speaker 2: So you're bringing a freshness to the court that it hasn't seen.
Speaker 1: That's right.  A little different.
Story_ID: 9269
Speaker 1: I want to talk about just the beginning foundation and the importance of that organization.  But also, you know, you were saying you were the 65th judge--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] right.
Speaker 1: federal--black--black federal judge.
Speaker 2: Since the founding of the republic.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [pause] Okay, [Laughs]. Can we talk about the important--you know, this whole history and you know of black judges on the court.  Just a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I remember--I think it was 1991 or 1992 there was a fellow by the name of Dick Parsons [sic. James Parsons].  I think he was the first district court judge in Chicago.  And he was retiring.  And  they were gonna hold a dinner for him.  And I don't know if it was him or somebody else that said, "Why just hold it for [James] Dick Parsons.  Why not all black federal judges?"  And he thought it was a good idea.  American Airlines donated airline tickets for the judge and his significant other.  There was a hotel in Chicago says, "We'll donate these rooms."  It was only sixty--sixty-five at that time.  It might have been just about sixty.  Fifty or sixty, 'cause some had died.  For the weekend. And we got together.  At first just the beginning foundation and was running it.  And we got to know each other.  And we took a pride in the organization.  And the monies from that event was used to provide scholarships for kids.  But it's so nice and it fills you up with pride to see the young people coming on.  And also they now have a face with a name.  And if they have problems on the bench--I remember one lawyer calling me and asking me a, a problem.  Simple for me.  Because I've dealt with these types of things.  And he said, "He could ask people on his court about this criminal problem he had.  And he would give them the answer.  But he knows that they would talk about him.  How dumb he is.  He doesn't know this.  But he could call me.  And I'd give him the answer.  And he wouldn't have to worry about all this backbiting stuff."  So we now have--when was this the fourth or the fifth.  We used to do it every four years.  Now because they were coming on at such a rapid rate, we do it every two years.  We just had one in San Francisco.  That's the one you're supposed to come to right?
Speaker 1: But I think the next one is coming up in, in Houston in 2002.
Speaker 2: Let's talk--just talk to us briefly about the importance of this group.  I mean first of all, even the meaning of you coming together was pretty significant.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: I mean the importance for those of people who don't understand federal judgeships.  You know, this is going to a larger--you know.  And what that means.  You know, where it fits in the pecking order and, you know, what is even the--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] you know for a hundred years, we have had this law that says, separate but equal.  That if you were black and living in the South, you couldn't go to their white law school even if you wanted to.  Separate but equal.  And they had a black law school. But the state didn't provide the funds and the equipment on the same level that they provided the white law schools.  And many times, a friend of mine from Chicago, he used to be the State's Attorney.  I can't think of his name Cecil something.
Speaker 2: Partee?
Speaker 1: Cecil Partee.  He was in the South.  They sent him to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] I think.  You know, just so he wouldn't go to that law school.  But it, it--It's the federal judges who make these laws.  And it was the U.S. Supreme Court that said, separate but equal is all right.  Dred Scott decision [1857], you know.  Three-fifths of a person.  No affirmative action, you know.  But you, you need federal judges to of color to bring a perspective that the other people just don't have.  You know?
Speaker 2: What about the move.  There was that study of even the U.S. Supreme Court and the lack of, you know, diversity in the clerkships.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you know, that sort of caused a stir a little bit.  'Cause the U.S--that had not been looked at. And what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 1: It doesn't bother me.  'Cause I would say, "Look at my law clerks.  I got three.  And all three are people of color."  And I, I have them.  Because they are the best.  I have had people of color, I have had whites.  I've had gays and I've had Latinos.  I've had Asians, you know.  I want the best possible law clerk I can.  I think that there are people out there who can do a job, but just never get the chance.  They're just not looked at.  You know.  I want to look at them.  I want to give them an opportunity to do great things that they normally would not do.  Of course, if you have on your resume and you clerk for a federal judge.  It will open doors you didn't dream of.
Speaker 2: Now is there--do you have any views on law school education and, you know, anything that needs to be done towards that?  There always, you know.  From time to time people look at how law school education should be.  [unclear] perspective law--it should be at?
Speaker 1: I'm impressed with a law school Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts].  The other thing too.  I don't just take kids from the Ivy League law schools.  Patrick is from Northeastern.  Dawn is from NYU [New York University] and Jeannine is from Harvard [University].  So I take them wherever they come from.  You know.  Brooklyn, I just want the best. I like the program, the practical program.  There's a young man here.  He's an extern.  But he's here for a whole semester.  And he is learning the law by actually doing.  I'll give him a habeas corpus motion.  I let him see--he saw the opening of a trial.  He saw me try a murder case.  And you know, we'll discuss it.  What's--you know, why I did this.
Story_ID: 9270
Speaker 1: I have kids come here on a Friday from kindergarten to high school.  And they'll see me sentence a person and send them to jail. And before you send a person to jail, you ask them, "Is there anything you wish to say?"  And some of them will cry and, "Don't send me to jail."  You know.  "My kids will be  in awful--" The whole bit.  And then we'll come back here and we'll discuss the case.  And where as going in, not knowing anything about it, the kids might say, "That sentence you gave was too harsh."  But after they hear the explanation, and the fact that maybe the person has done it before.  They think you aren't harsh enough.  And they ask all kind of questions.  I recall one kid might have been in fourth or fifth grade.  He said, "Why are judges robes black?"  Do you know?  I didn't either.  So I said flippantly, "Maybe the first judge was Zorro."  So I said, "But I'll find out."  So I checked it out.  And what had happened, you know we get our law from the English.  And I think Queen Anne or somebody died.  The judges put on the black robes out of respect.  And then they kept wearing the black robe.  But I didn't know that.  And that was a real intelligent question.  You know.  "Why are judges robes black?"
Story_ID: 9271
Speaker 1: When you look at the African American community and actually your own experience, you know, here. 'Cause here's a boy, you know, born--born poor, who rises to the ranks.  You know, works his way and rises really to the ranks of a very prestigious position in our society. Where you're actually determining or implementing the laws that are sitting [unclear]. But I want to say, you know, the legal system is one part of our society. There are other, you know, other parts to that. And I guess I--I want to ask you, what are your concerns or hopes for the African American community? And, are you of the belief that we've come a long way and we're in great shape? You know.  Or do you believe that we've got a long way too go? Or?
Speaker 2: It's both those things. One of the things that I do as a Federal Judge, every three or four months, I swear new citizens in, you know. And I usually give them an address.  And one of the stories I--I--I tell them is that I had my granddaughter over with me.  And I took her to my mother's house.  And, I remember that my mother's grandfather was a slave. My granddaughter's grandfather, me, is a federal judge. We're proud of this.  We're proud of this.  Glacial speed.
Story_ID: 9272
Speaker 1: But, even though we made that type of progress that doesn't stop me from being stopped for driving while black. And it happened to me! I'm in South Carolina and I go to a place called, Beaufort.  And I get to Beaufort.  You fly into Savannah [Georgia].  You drive up to Beaufort. I got there on a Friday, did my thing on Saturday.  And I'm catching the first thing smoking going out on a Sunday morning. I think it's about 6:00 [a.m.], 7:00. So I get up out of my hotel or motel 4:00, 4:30. And I'm driving my car back to Savannah to catch the airplane. And, I'm on this bridge and there's water on both sides.  And I see angry yellow lights in my rearview mirror. And I know it's the police but I can't stop 'cause I'm on this bridge, two-way, two lanes. Angry yellow lights become angrier now.  Now they're angry yellow, red and blue. So I wait 'til I get off the bridge and I pulled off to the side. And I see this big--he gotta be 6'2" ,6'3", all muscles, about 220-30 pound.  And he's got his hand on his gun. A Glock. So--and I'm looking at him face to face.  'Cause he's got this drill instructor's, a teddy bear hat on.  You know, those hats that they wear? And he says, "Sir, I had my lights on.  You didn't stop." I'm still looking at his hand on that gun.  And even though I'm looking at him face to face. I knew his neck was red, right? So he says--oh, I tell him that, "I saw your lights but I'm on the bridge and I can't stop.  Two-lane highway and I wait 'til I got off the bridge and then I did stop." He said, "Can I see your license and registration, Sir?" Hands still on the gun. And I think of [Andrew] Goodman, Swaney-[Michael Schwerner] Swerner and [James] Chaney.  Remember them? I--I just think of them.  It was terrifying, pitch black! He says--I showed him my license and I showed him the--I rented a car. He says, "Where you going?" I says, "I'm going to the airport to catch a plane." He said, "Where's your luggage?" He says--I said, "In the car. In the trunk." He says, "Can I see it?" Now, I knew about the Fourth Amendment.  It's what I deal with.  I know about law school.  But I also know Goodman, Schwerner and Chaney and he got that hand on the gun! I said to myself, "What I'm gonna do, I'll open the trunk and I'll let him see my luggage in there. And if he wants to open it, I want to see a supervisor." But if he'd said, "Dance boy." Man, I'd dance.  I'm a regular Nicholas [Fayard and Harold, tap dancers] Brothers, you know. I'd did a, "Yes Sir, Boss." You know? So I opened it and he even let me slam the trunk, he said, "What kind of work, you do?" I said, "I'm a judge." He said, "What kind of judge?" I said, "A federal judge." He looks at me.  I looked at him, also with his hand on that gun! And he said, "All right. I'ma give you a warning, this time." I said, "Thank you." He then pulled away.  And I said, "what the hell is he warning me about?" I didn't go through a red light and I didn't speed.  'Cause it's pitch black and I don't know where I'm going! It dawn on me, driving while black! And I'll never forget that.  And don't ever want to forget it!
Speaker 2: That's a powerful story. When did that happen?
Speaker 1: Last year.
Speaker 2: The year 2000.
Speaker 1: That's right!
Story_ID: 9273
Speaker 1: When you think about the progress that you've made personally and--your father [Sterling Johnson, Sr.], how old was he when you died? I mean, how old was he, when he died, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Close to eighty.
Speaker 1: Eighty okay, okay. So he didn't die that long ago.  He died--
Speaker 2: He died twelve years ago.
Speaker 1: Twelve years ago. So, he saw your success?
Speaker 2: He saw me graduate law school.  And--and I was happy that he could see that. He didn't see me become a judge. And people say that--'Cause I invited my barber and the guys from the neighborhood.  And they say, "They had never seen that many black people in this building without handcuffs. The day I came here, you know.  So he didn't see that. My mother [Susie Johnson] did though.  What do you think he would say if he could have seen you?  "I'm proud of you, boy! I'm proud of you."  And what do you think your appointment says of--of the American experience?  It can be done. It's a long and it's a hard road.  But it can be done. And also, to young people, get ready, [laughs] to be ready. I'm remember someone saying that they had the riots in Los Angeles [California].  And they were going to rebuild that city. And they're gonna need policemen and schoolteachers and judges and lawyers.  And someone said, "If I needed a carpenter or if I needed a school teacher, one hundred jobs, 50,000. Whatever it is. Could you get me someone who's African American?" Not there. Get that education, get that--and it doesn't have to be college.  But learn something, you know.  Learn something. So when they say, "Here's an opening, it's available." "Here I am!"
Speaker 1: And Judge Johnson, one last question. What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: "He tried to do what was right according to God." As told to Susie--that's my mother.
