Story_ID: 26763
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Anthony Michael Johnson.  A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, Michael, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 23, 1954, Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a physicist.  I have a Ph.D. in physics.  My current title here is--I have several titles.  I am a professor of physics.  I'm a professor of computer science and electrical engineering, and I'm a director of a center.  And the center is called CASPR, short for Center for Advanced Studies in Photonics Research.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Here at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, or UMBC.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 25, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my CASPR conference room at UMBC.  And we are in the TRC Building of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
Story_ID: 26764
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Actually, I do, and there's two of them.  Seafood and chitterlings.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I call it electric blue.  I guess it, some people may call it cobalt blue.  But I call it electric blue, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess fall would be my favorite time of the year.  Not too hot, not too cool.  Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I have--luckily I've been at least to Australia once.  And that was probably my favorite excursion.  It turns out it was coupled with a conference, a laser conference.  But I was able to go with my wife, and we just had a wonderful time in Brisbane, Australia.  I'd never been there.  It was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I guess I learned this, picked this up from my Bell Labs department head.  And the phrase is, "Work hard, play hard."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I haven't quite gotten to the second part.  I work hard, but playing hard has been hard to do, (laughter) when you don't have any time to play. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26765
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history now.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately, then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Helen Yvonne Johnson.  That's her married name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her maiden name was?
Speaker 2: It was Weaver, W-E-A-V-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, those names are spelled the regular way you spell--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It is July 2, 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in High Point, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Wow, I really, I don't really know how far back.  I mean, all her family is from the South, and further south than North Carolina, but I don't really know that history, I'm afraid.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  So, I, my grandmother died very early.  And my grandfather was around for awhile, right there in High Point, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now is there a history of the family being anywhere else other than High Point, on her side?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what your grandparents did for a living?
Speaker 2: No, I don't even know that.  Off the top of my head, I--no.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother grow up in town, or in the country?
Speaker 2: She grew up in town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She grew up in town, but I'm not sure what my grandmother and grandfather actually did for a living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it that they didn't have like a college education or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did not.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Is your generation the first one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did your mother have a chance to, you know, finish high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she did that.  And when she moved up to New York, one of the positions that I remember her being was a buyer at the old Abraham and Strauss [department store] in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's a decent job.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, yes.
Speaker 1: It requires you to, you know, to have some level of education and social I.Q. to do.
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: So, did she go to college at all in New York?
Speaker 2: No, she did not go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But a buyer at a store is an interesting job, that you have to be able to interact with people and make decisions, and count, and all that.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and it's not everybody that can actually get those jobs, especially in those days when black folks weren't doing those jobs.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, at any rate--  So, is there a story about how your mother came to New York?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, it turns out that my father [James Weldon Johnson], who was born in Brooklyn, had a lot of family in High Point also.  So, they met in High Point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But eventually moved up to new York, married, and I was born.
Story_ID: 26766
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side, and then we'll try to put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's James Weldon Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a famous name.
Speaker 2: Yes.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, is there a story behind this?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my grandparents on my father's side knew the name, and so that's all I can think of.  And his brother is Theodore Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  James Weldon Johnson, named after the famous secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the poet and writer--
Speaker 2: Uh huh, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And author of the 'Negro National Anthem.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what was your father's date of birth?
Speaker 2: It's November 22, 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was, was he born in High Point [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn, okay, alright.  Okay, now what can you tell us about his family history?  How far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 2: Well, again, he--and there's a lot of the, of his family and my grandmother's family.  But actually, most of my grandmother's family lived in High Point.  She had many brothers and sisters there.
Speaker 1: So, that's his mother, right?
Speaker 2: That's his mother, yes.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Mattie Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  M-A-T-T-I-E?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But her maiden name was Gripper, and that's the--the Grippers, there were a lot of Grippers in High Point.  And that's where--
Speaker 1: That's G-R-I--
Speaker 2: G-R-I-P-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, go ahead.  There are a lot of them in High Point?
Speaker 2: In High Point.  And that's where I--you know, my father met my mother, in High Point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was also Theodore Roosevelt Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: He--now what I know of him when I was growing up was that he was fortunate enough to have owned a number of buildings in Brooklyn, and had a number of tenants.  So, he had amassed a number of homes.  I can't remember how many.  But maintaining those, maintaining the property is what he did mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was he born in Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: No.  But you know, I'm sorry to say I don't know, I can't say where.  I believe both my grandmother and my grandfather on my father's side were born in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of ties there in South Carolina, and some in Charleston [South Carolina].  But I don't know if that's where the birthplace is.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, so he had been managing these properties?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, did he do pretty well?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: So your father, now did your father have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't either.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  And he ended up working for the New York City Metropolitan Transit Authority.  So, he was a bus driver.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, are there any stories on his side of the family of Emancipation or anything, you know, anything that goes back that far?
Speaker 2: I have not heard any of those stories.  But I even recall going--very young age, going to High Point and seeing signs about colored this and colored that, and white here.  And those things really, you know, I didn't see them in New York.  But I would see them in the South, you know, for a small part of my childhood.  But I was, apparently it was far back enough that I could see some of those signs.  And I know that, you know, High Point was very segregated at one point, and then things changed.
Story_ID: 26767
Speaker 1: So your parents met.  Is there a story about how they met in High Point [North Carolina], or fell in love, that they share?
Speaker 2: Not with me.  (laughter).  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the history.
Speaker 1: Alright.  But they met in High Point.  Now this is--now your father [James Weldon Johnson], I assume he finished high school in New York?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where did he go to high school?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I think he went to the Old Boy's High School in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Helen Yvonne Weaver]?  I didn't ask that.
Speaker 2: Well, she went to a high school in High Point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I can't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, at any rate, they met in High Point.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And ended up relocating back in Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 26768
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their gifts, their habits, how they look, how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Take after the most?  Well, I see bits of both as I'm growing up.  I think some of my tenaciousness about, you know, trying to get things done, that's definitely my mother's [Helen Yvonne Weaver] side.  Some of the--maybe a little bit of the adventurousness is from my, on my father's [James Weldon Johnson] side, which is taking a few chances here and trying something different, things of that nature.  So, I see bits and pieces of both.
Story_ID: 26769
Speaker 1: Do you have brothers?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: You've got a brother, I know.  Can you name your siblings and--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I have two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who came first?
Speaker 2: His name is Jan, J-A-N, Johnson.  He's one year younger than me.  And Gerard, G-E-R-A-R-D, Johnson, is twelve years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay, twelve years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's a long gap.  And you've got an older brother?
Speaker 2: No, I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay, so just the two--
Speaker 2: Just the two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And my father [James Weldon Johnson]--and he has one brother, Theodore Johnson, Jr.  So, small family.  Whereas on my mother's [Helen Yvonne Weaver] side, there were many more siblings.
Speaker 1: Did she come from a large--
Speaker 2: Family?  Yeah, uh huh.
Story_ID: 26770
Speaker 1: So, did you grow up in the same place?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  You mean, with my brothers and my parents?  What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, well, the house that you grew up in, was it the same place, or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: Actually, we only moved, we only moved once.  I was very young.  We lived in Brooklyn in a section called Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.  And at roughly eight years, when I was eight years old, we moved to the current location in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's called East what?
Speaker 2: East Flatbush.
Speaker 1: Flatbush, right.
Speaker 2: Right.  And my family, my parents are still there.  So, they've been there ever since.  And they still live there in that home.  And so, I grew up there with my brothers.  My uncle--actually it was a three story house.  So, my grandparents who owned the house, were on the first floor.  My family was on the second floor, and my uncle was on the third floor.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, that's, is that typical for Brooklyn, or--
Speaker 2: I don't think it's typical.  I think it's kind of unusual for, you know, all of us to have been together that long.  And you know, it's like I was one of the first to actually leave the nest, (laughter) when I got married and started my career at Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories], and things like that.  So, one other common thing about, which I think is also unusual, is how many of us worked for the Transit Authority.  So, my father [James Weldon Johnson] drove a bus.  My uncle was a motorman in the subway.  My older brother [Jan Johnson] was a conductor in the subway, and my younger brother [Gerard Johnson] is a bus driver also.  And so, that was my out.  And I always say this.  It's that if I didn't pass my Ph.D. qualifying exam, I could always drive a bus.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: So, that was my fallback if I didn't make it in physics.
Story_ID: 26771
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Wow.  Well, they tell me I was a very colicky baby.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you cried a lot?
Speaker 2: So, I had stomach problems and, yeah.  So, that's what they tell me.  But as far as--what would be the earliest thing I would remember?  Well, I do--I seem to remember when we were in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] before we moved to East Flatbush.  I remember enjoying school, and enjoying math, and things of that nature.  And so, it was a little odd, in that respect.  And I just, you know, it was, I just enjoyed it.  And then when we moved over to East Flatbush, I was placed in a grade--I was just placed in a grade.  I don't know what assumptions were made that I didn't find the school, I didn't find the courses challenging.  And so, my mother [Helen Yvonne Weaver] came up to the school and got me placed in a higher level class.  And that's where, and that's where I really got my love of science and things of that--
Speaker 1: What grade was that?
Speaker 2: That was fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Right, that was fourth grade, yeah.  And that's where I really got my first interest in science.  I had an interesting teacher who encouraged us to have a show, a show and tell.  I can't remember how frequently, but we would go and, you know, do something.  So, I was very fortunate.  I was excited about doing science and things like that.  And one-- that year, I was fortunate enough--Santa brought me a chemistry set.  And that's what really took, that really took off.  And I really got interested in making things, and trying to make a little gun powder and, you know, all kind of neat things.  But that really piqued my interest in science, and then going and talking about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I also remember reading a lot.  I did a lot of reading, and I loved to read anything I could find on dinosaurs and Greek mythology.  I used to love those things, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, fourth grade is where you really kind of take off?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, that's right.  That's when I really decided that this is, I like science and math.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, tell us about the neighborhood you lived--  Now Bedford-Stuyvesant.  You were there until, I guess through third grade?
Speaker 2: Right, to third grade, right.
Speaker 1: Third grade.  And what was that, an integrated neighborhood?
Speaker 2: That, no, that was an all black neighborhood in Bedford-Stuyvesant.  But when we moved to East Flatbush, our family actually integrated it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were the first black family there.  And so, most of my classes, especially when I got moved up, I was the only black child in the classes.
Speaker 1: Now that might be, that might account for why they had you in this low level class.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure it was.
Speaker 1: You were black and you showed up, and they assumed that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so.
Story_ID: 26772
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I really enjoyed playing sports.  So, I, you know, we had a park nearby.  And so, we played everything--handball, basketball, softball, a little football, basketball, all of that.  So, you know, I had a bunch of friends, and we would do things like that.  And it was close, you know.  I was fortunate that, where I lived, all of my education was in walking distance.  My elementary school was about five blocks away.  My junior high school was about four or five blocks away.  And then across the street from that was my high school.  So, everything was in walking distance.  So, I was pretty fortunate.  And so, I had a bunch of friends that changed as the neighborhood changed, but kept pretty close with them.  And so, I had a lot of supportive friends, too, very supportive.  I had some friends that I used to hang out a lot with, but they respected the fact that I was very serious about studying.  So I also, I really did enjoy partying.  But I also, but I always studied on Sunday.  (laughter).  So, I would hang out with my friends.  We would go, you know, to lots of house parties and things like that.  But I would always come back and study.  And to my pleasant surprise, they didn't get on my case.  They actually were very supportive.  I actually have some friends back from my childhood days who I still keep in touch with.  And they were always very supportive.  And I find that very different today, that the, your so-called friends are not very supportive if you try to take intellectual pursuits.  They actually, you know, put you down.  At least my friends were actually encouraged by that, and supportive.  So, I really always thank them for being supportive, you know, of me doing things a little bit different than the rest of them.  But I always hung out with them, as well.
Story_ID: 26773
Speaker 1: Was church important, growing up?
Speaker 2: It, well, we did, I did go to Sunday School.  And this-- my mother [Helen Yvonne Weaver] did encourage that.  But it wasn't really a strong push in the family.  Now, and my grandmother [Mattie Gripper] was very strong--and grandfather [Theodore Roosevelt Johnson], were very strong churchgoers.  But, and so, occasionally we would go with them to church.  But, no.  And so we wouldn't go--you know, I would go to church occasionally with my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it wasn't like a dominant type of--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And let's see.  Now what about popular culture?  Did you like--you said you liked to party.  Did you like television, movies--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --magazines?
Speaker 2: I was a big science fiction fan.  I loved 'The Outer Limits' and 'Twilight Zone' and 'Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea,' you know, all those kinds of things.  I really got into some of those.  What else?  What other series?  Those were my favorites.  I, I did a lot of reading.  I did--and I said that mythology and the dinosaur, I was very interested in that.  I had some--my father and I were, he really got me into fishing.  So, we would, we would go fishing out at Sheepshead Bay [Brooklyn, New York], so saltwater fishing; go on party boats, rowboats out, and you know, and fish.  So, that was something that we did a lot together.  I really enjoyed that.  I miss that.
Story_ID: 26774
Speaker 1: Did you have any feeling that you wanted to be a scientist in the first part of your school--
Speaker 2: You mean in fourth grade?
Speaker 1: ...three grades.
Speaker 2: For the first three?  No, I don't think I, no, I think I just, you know, I went and I basically enjoyed what I was taught.  But I never, I never--at that age I never put it together with, you know, being a scientist or mathematician, or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you--
Speaker 2: I didn't think about that until maybe the fourth grade, that maybe this is something I can do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's where it started.  And then, and then it was in high school, that I actually chose my field.  And that was based on a wonderful teacher that I had in high school, in physics.  So, while I'm in high school, well, I--
Speaker 1: The high school you attended is--
Speaker 2: Samuel J. Tilden High School [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: --Tech right, Tech High School?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's Samuel J. Tilden High School.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, was that a magnet school or was it just a regular high school?
Speaker 2: Just a regular high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it was, you know, the teachers were quite well, were quite good.  And I had--so, I already liked chemistry and biology and math.  But I hadn't settled on anything until I took physics.  And I think that was eleventh grade.  And this teacher just, just made it fun for me, and he took an interest in me.  And you know, I did extra projects with him, and things of that nature.  And it was, you know, I didn't expect that.  Again, I was the only black kid in the physics class.  But he took an interest in me, because I was really interested in what he was doing.  And he just made it fun and interesting.  And I ended up going to his, his undergraduate school that he got his bachelor's degree in physics.
Story_ID: 26775
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first grade school in Brooklyn, in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Now, that's something.  I don't remember the name of it.  It was on Kingston Avenue, but I don't remember the name.  I remember the one when I moved to East Flatbush [Brooklyn, New York].  That was PS 233 [Public School 233].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And actually you have a photo of the fourth grade class to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't remember the name of the school in Bed-Stuy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you say you had a good science teacher at P-- PS 233?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the science teacher's name?  Do you remember?  I mean, you don't have to know, but I'm just--
Speaker 2: No.  I remember the high school teacher, but I don't remember the fourth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Alright.  But in the fourth grade, did you have a chance to participate in the science fair or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the show and tell thing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that level.  And I brought in a couple of chemistry experiments.
Speaker 1: And was that a Gilbert chemistry set?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy--
Speaker 1: It seems like that's the one that everybody--
Speaker 2: Probably, I mean, probably was.  But it was a nice chemistry set, test tubes and everything, and all kinds of neat chemicals and, you know, you could do other things with it.  So, I learned to do other things.  Like I said, I was more interested in making gunpowder and stuff like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was fun.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, you had good grades in grade school?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, was there a middle school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's what we called a junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was, it was called Mayer Levin.  M-A-Y-E-R, L-E-V-I-N, Junior High School.  And I actually, my grades were good enough that I actually skipped a grade.  So, I went from seventh to ninth grade.  I skipped eighth.
Story_ID: 26776
Speaker 1: The neighborhood, was the neighborhood that you lived in like formerly mostly Jewish or mostly Jewish when you moved into it?
Speaker 2: It was, it was quite a, it was mixed.  It was Jewish and Italian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Because it was named Mayer Levin--I was trying to think of who--I've heard of a lot of things named Mayer Levin--
Speaker 2: Mayer, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the Jewish community.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, just wanted--  So in junior high school, were there any significant teachers or mentors or projects or incidents?
Speaker 2: Not as much as in high school.  But again, I enjoyed it.  I think I got some scholastic award at Mayer Levin.  And it's something called the Mayer Levin Award, or something.  I think I won that, you know, as a result of good grades and so forth.  But I had a good time there, good teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, now you were there in '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969], I guess?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Yeah, I graduated high school in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But junior high school--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, through '69 [1969], I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were there when Dr. King was assassinated, right?  And what was the, what was the--do you remember what that was like in those days?  Or was it, did it have a big impact on you and your family?
Speaker 2: It did, but again, it didn't have a big impact on the neighborhood.  But it did have a--yes, we were all, you know, stunned and shocked.  And of course, you know, there were resulting riots, but not in our neighborhood.  But yeah, so, that did have, have a big impact on us.
Speaker 1: Did the school do anything special to commemorate him, or--
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, not that I remember at all, no.  And interesting--one of my classmates at Tilden [High School, Brooklyn, New York] was Reverend Al Sharpton.  He went to my high school.  (laughter).  And I remember--we didn't have any, we didn't share any classes.  But I remember seeing him in the school.  And, but he went, he went to Tilden.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, okay, so Tilden High School [Brooklyn, New York].  So, the racial balance--  Is the neighborhood getting blacker?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Uh huh, as the years went on, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So by the time you get to Tilden, like what's the percentage, would you say?
Speaker 2: By the time I get to Tilden, there were quite a few black families that moved in, by the time I'm in Tilden.  But I still have a mixture of friends, you know, black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But would you say the school was like 30 percent black, 50 [percent]?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Maybe 30 [percent].  Yeah, that's--and now it's--well, actually I think they're about to close Tilden.  I mean, when I went to Tilden, it was a really good school.  But it has since deteriorated, and actually quite a lot of violence.  And the last thing I heard is that they were going to shut it down.  I don't know if they actually went through with it.  But that was on the docket.  So, it changed quite dramatically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had really good teachers.  I really think I had a good foundation at Tilden.  And that made, that prepared me well for college and so forth.
Story_ID: 26777
Speaker 1: I guess between junior high school and high school, the U.S. put a man on the moon.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of what you were doing then?  Did you take really special note of that?
Speaker 2: I did take note of that.  And it was, it was a, yeah, it was a big deal.  And I still remember there were people that just didn't believe that that actually happened.  And it was just amazing.  And there was some correlation with rain and these flights.  But there were still a lot of skeptics and skepticism about whether it really happened.  So, I do recall discussions like that.
Speaker 1: Were there discussions in your family about it?
Speaker 2: No, no, just in the neighborhood.  No, I don't recall my brothers or my parents being skeptical.  I don't recall that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any skepticism about whether they made it or not?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, actually.  (laughter).  No, not at all.  So, I guess that was the science, the scientist, in me. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, had you followed NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], you know, as a, as a youth?
Speaker 2: Not as much as I--I'm actually surprised that I didn't follow it as much as I--  When I look back, I wonder why.  But no, that wasn't the thing that really interested me about science, and so forth.  Not necessarily the spaceflight or anything like that.  I didn't have any desire to be an astronaut or anything like that.
Story_ID: 26778
Speaker 1: Was there any particular aspect of science that really moved you, you know, when you were like, you know, before you got to high school?
Speaker 2: I guess, I really liked the idea of solving problems.  And I think that's what I learned about it.  And I remember doing math problems as younger, and like solving these proofs and so forth.  And I actually enjoyed doing it, trying to see if I could actually do this proof or that proof, mathematical proof, and so forth.  And it just, I just found it interesting and enjoyable.  And so, I think that's why I took more and more of a liking to it.  And you know, especially the thing about the dinosaurs.  Maybe I thought about being a paleontologist maybe at one point and time, because I did enjoy that.
Speaker 1: Did your family go to the museum?
Speaker 2: We did, we did go to the museums, yes.
Speaker 1: Brooklyn Museum [Brooklyn, New York] is a huge--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  And the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens--very impressive, yes.  And I spent a lot of time at Grand Army Plaza--the big library and all that--doing some, doing term papers and things like that.  So, I actually--now, that rings a bell.  I actually wrote some science fiction for one of the English classes.  And I put, and I note--I put a lot of physics in it, like I tried to make it realistic.  And I did a lot of research, trying to put some realistic numbers about energies, and this and that.  And I remember the teacher noticing that I really researched the paper and so forth.  But that was a lot of fun also.
Speaker 1: Did you, sounds like you paid particular interest to whether or not science fiction was actually scientific or not.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  I would always look for those types of things, yes.  What's the real science here, and what's, what's the fiction part?
Speaker 1: Were you often disappointed by the lack of science in the science fiction?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter).  I--yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, join the club.  The historical drama is like really how the historians deal with it.
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Yes, uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, I can--alright.  So, you wanted to create a science fiction that actually had some science.
Speaker 2: That's exactly--right, right.  But I've said, the 'Outer Limits' was like one of my favorite TV shows.  And I still have a collection of--because I still go back--because it just brings back more memories, yeah.  And that'll do it.  Some of those old series, and things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite science fiction writer?
Speaker 2: I liked [Isaac] Asimov.  And oh, and the one that recently died.
Speaker 1: Arthur Clarke?  Or Clarke or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Arthur C. Clarke, right.
Speaker 1: Now, speaking of Arthur C. Clarke, I guess it was '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] that '2001 A Space Odyssey'--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --came out.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you go to see it?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Yeah, that was, you know, fascinating.  Oh, you know, the special effects at that time were amazing, yeah.  So, I did.
Speaker 1: The HAL 900.
Speaker 2: The HAL 9-- 9000.
Speaker 1: Nine thousand [9000]?
Speaker 2: Nine thousand [9000], right.
Speaker 1: I'm demoting it--
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: --to 900.
Speaker 2: (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: So, these are all the--you know, science and technology was in the news and--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 26779
Speaker 1: So, as you're going to high school [Tilden High School, Brooklyn, New York] in 1970, you said that you met a teacher that really was able to, you know, galvanize your scientific interests.
Speaker 2: And steer towards physics.  Because I had chemistry which I liked also.  The biology, I didn't like as much as the chemistry and the physics.  I just thought it was more memorization.  But the physics, you really had to think about how to set up these problems and work them.  And I guess that, I found intriguing.
Speaker 1: So, who was your physics teacher?
Speaker 2: Now, his name I do remember, Mr. Harnik, H-A-R-N-I-K.  And I've been trying to find him.  And I have never, I haven't had any success in trying to find him.  I really would like to thank him for giving me that motivation and the encouragement to go on.
Speaker 1: So, did he teach all the physics courses at Tilden?
Speaker 2: At that time, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So you were in a like a special group at Tilden?
Speaker 2: Well, I took a couple of AP [advanced placement] courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, I was just, I don't think it was a special group, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did they have an advanced placement track, or there was a group of people that--
Speaker 2: Well, there was a group of, there was a group of us in advanced classes, that I recall.  And these guys were just really sharp.  So, I think that that really helped because we were all competing against one another, trying to get the best grades, and this and that.  And I'm sure that kind of helped spur me on, as well.
Story_ID: 26780
Speaker 1: Now, were there science fairs on that level [high school], or?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, there were.  Yeah, and I, we contributed certain things, tried to contribute something to the science fair.
Speaker 1: Did you have any particular affinity to lasers at this stage?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time.  I really didn't work with lasers until I was in graduate school.  And that was just a simple helium neon laser.  It's when I went to Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] that I got to work with serious laser, laser equipment.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, in high school, there's nothing like that.  So, now were there any special summer programs or science camps or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Now, when?
Speaker 1: In high school.
Speaker 2: Not in high school, no.  So, really everything took off for me in undergraduate school with the Bell Labs summer program.  I don't know if you want to talk about that now.
Speaker 1: We'll get to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just want to talk about high school first, just to make sure that we cover that.  But, did you have, did you run for class office, or any of that sort of thing, or?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember being in science clubs.  There was something called (ARISTA?) which was, you know, if you had a certain grade point average, you were a member of that.  I do recall, and I wish I had that.  I actually wrote in my high school yearbook that I wanted to be a physicist.  (laughter).  I look back, and that's just so weird that, you know, I knew that as a high school student, that I wanted to be, I wanted a Ph.D. in physics.
Speaker 1: I think just from my own impressions of those days that a lot of people, when they thought about who was the brightest scientist of all, they thought about [Albert] Einstein, you know.  They thought about [Isaac] Newton, you know.  And being physicists, you know, places them on kind of a pedestal in terms of all science.  You look up to--this is the highest level that you can obtain being a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --nuclear physicist, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right, astrophysicist--
Speaker 1: Yeah, astrophysicist--
Speaker 2: And all those things.
Speaker 1: I mean, that was what--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --people were thinking in those days.  Was that, did that fuel what you were--
Speaker 2: See, when I try to think about that--no, I, it's--I just heard about, I heard about the Ph.D.  And that allows you to do all kinds of neat things.  If you had the background, you could do all kinds of fundamental research and things of that nature.  And that's what I thought about.  It was this abstract thing that I knew was very difficult to obtain.  And that's what made me want it even more, not really knowing what I would do with it.  (laughter).  Except I had heard that people with this degree did really outstanding science.  That's kind of all I knew.  And I liked science, and I liked physics in particular.  So I figured, you know, that's probably what I, that's a reasonable goal for me.  And so, I had that kind of early on.
Speaker 1: Now, where you involved in taking apart electronic equipment and putting it back together again?
Speaker 2: Not so much, not so much.  No, I know a number of people that really got into that, you know, right.  Reverse engineering and things of that nature--no, that I didn't do much of that, no.  So, I was more--actually when I was thinking about what I would do, I was thinking more on the theoretical end.  And not so much hands on as doing theoretical physics, but I'm an experimentalist today.  So, and as I mentioned, the Bell Labs experience really was a major, a major signpost for me in my career.  It was spending that first year at Bell Labs in their summer program.
Story_ID: 26781
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated in '71 [1971], right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: From Tilden [High School, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you went on Polytechnic Institute?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's part of NYU [New York University, New York, New York], correct?
Speaker 2: Well, it--yeah.  When I went there, it was still, it was called Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or Brooklyn Poly.  And it became Polytechnic Institute of New York, and then it had an association with NYU.  And now it's, they've merged.  So, there's another reincarnation.
Speaker 1: So then, it was Brooklyn Poly.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Brooklyn Poly when I started.
Speaker 1: So that's, again, this in the neighborhood.  This is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never left New York.  (laughter).  That's right.  And I went--you know, I just, I took the subway--the bus and subway to Brooklyn Poly.  So, I lived at home, and I would commute into Brooklyn Poly everyday when I was doing my undergraduate work.
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you this, but did anybody else in your family have an interest in science?
Speaker 2: No, actually, no.  It was just me.  So--
Speaker 1: But you did say that people encouraged you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your friends--  Did your family--your mother--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother would see that you had the--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  I had lots of encouragement.  But--
Speaker 1: So, there's nobody in the--
Speaker 2: I remember one of things to accommodate--we had a basement.  And my parents got me this little table and this little blackboard, that I could go down there and do my thing without being disturbed.  And so, I had my calculus equations on the board, and doing all my work.  But you know, I was down in the basement doing my thing while everybody else was upstairs doing their thing.  So, it was, you know, everybody--you know, "Let Michael do what--"  Oh, and they called me Michael, first of all.  The family--so it's my middle name, but that's what everybody calls me, Michael.  "Let Michael do his thing."  Friends would come down and check me out and, you know, chat with me.  And we had a pool table down there as well.  But that's, that's where I would do all my work, was down there in the basement.  And so, I had my little nook.  That was for me.
Speaker 1: Well, that was good.  So they encouraged you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --to do what you did best.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yeah.  And so actually, the blackboard is still there.  And there's like a little, they just kept it there for me, (laughter) after all these years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, Brooklyn Poly?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, did you start as a physics major?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At Brooklyn Poly, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  And the only reason I went to Brooklyn Poly was because of Mr. Harnik.  I mean, I wouldn't have known where to go.  But he told me where he went to school, and all that.  And then to drive down there--it's really, it's a good school.  I mean, it wasn't a problem.  You know, I didn't--you know, I didn't, that was fine.  And I wanted to stay in New York.  That was important, to be close to family.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a scholarship or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  I had to take out loans.  And that was something that really bugged me, to this day, is from high school--is that as well as I was doing, I thought the guidance counselor would steer me towards scholarships.  Because there were students--so there was a friend of mine who didn't do as well as I did.  He got a scholarship, and then, and then he dropped out.  (laughter).  And I was a serious student.  And so that always bugged me, that I had a poor guidance counselor.  And--
Speaker 1: What did they, did the counselor just fail to give you the right information?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or, were they actually discouraging?
Speaker 2: I don't think he was discouraging.  He just didn't, he just didn't do his job with me.  Or maybe he just felt, "Oh, well, he'll be okay."  I don't know, but I never got--I thought I should have gotten scholarships, especially when I saw others getting scholarships that weren't as serious as I was.  And so, I ended up taking out one of these New York State higher education loans.  My parents couldn't afford it, so I got that, New York State higher education loan.
Story_ID: 26782
Speaker 1: Who were your mentors at Brooklyn Poly [Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, now Polytechnic Institute of New York, Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, the physics department was quite welcoming for me.  And it was one--it was a physics teacher by the name of Donald Scarl, S-C-A-R-L.  And I was taking a lab course with him, and some physics courses.  And he heard about this program at Bell Laboratories that was just starting up.  And I'd never heard of Bell Labs.  He said there's going to be a summer research program for minorities and women, starting that particular summer of '74 [1974].  And he encouraged me to apply.  And that's when I got in, and that changed everything for me.
Speaker 1: That's 1974.  So, you had been there three years already--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at this point.
Speaker 2: So, I was already a junior.  And then that's when they wanted, they were looking for juniors and seniors to go into this program.  And so, I was just the right age and so forth.  So I was in the first wave that went to this Bell Labs program.  And then, and Bell Labs was the first industrial lab to actually have an internship program in the STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] fields.
Speaker 1: Bell Labs is, of all these interviews I've done, I've learned this.  That Bell Labs is legendary in terms of the atmosphere--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the collegial feeling and--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --creativity, you know.  I mean, people are trying to recreate that atmosphere now.
Speaker 2: I know.  And I don't see how they're going to.  So, I went to school there, through there.  But then I worked there for almost fifteen years as a member of staff and a distinguished member of staff later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you're at Brooklyn Poly for three years.  I notice you didn't mention a mentor at Brooklyn Poly.  Did anybody take a special interest in you other than Mr. Scarl, giving you this--
Speaker 2: Well, he did.  And then the chair, his name was Uredski.  He encouraged me to--after my summer experience he encouraged me to go, to write a bachelor's thesis and to--and submitted it to this organization called Sigma Psi, scientific research organization.  And so those two were, I guess my, became mentors.  But it was late, it was fairly late already--
Speaker 1: When you got, when you arrived there, were there any other black physics students?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was the only physics student.  I met a few--I actually became active in the, in the--what did we call it?  But there was a black society, but I can't remember the name of it.  So, I became active in the black student affairs committee.  But I was their only physicist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the others were in engineering, and some in humanities, and things of that nature.  But I did join that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So I was, I was there for that.
Speaker 1: How many black students were there altogether, would you say?
Speaker 2: I would say, oh, you know, there were probably about fifty.  But I was the only one in physics.
Story_ID: 26783
Speaker 1: So, tell us about the Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] experience in detail, since this is a big deal.
Speaker 2: This was a big deal.  So, and it was, you know, it was different, because I had never really left Brooklyn [New York].  So, so I got, I applied to the program.  The professor got me the application and I applied, and I got in.  And so we had two locations in New Jersey--Murray Hill, New Jersey and Holmdel, New Jersey.  Those were the two big research labs.  And so, this was called the Bell Labs Summer Research Program for minorities and women.  We call it SRP, Summer Research Program.  It started in 1974.  And so, I was given a choice of working with two physicists who went on to become, you know, very world famous.  One was David Austin.  And he was doing lasers and opto-electronics.  He, after he left Bell Labs he went, he became dean of engineering at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  Then he went on to become provost at Rice University [Houston, Texas], and president of Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio].  And then he finally ended up at--well, he was president of the Covey Institute in Santa Barbara [California].  And they are a philanthropic organization, and does a lot of work in physics.  And now he's at UC Santa Barbara [University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California].  And I still keep close ties with him, because he became one of my Ph.D. thesis advisors, eventually.  So, my connection with him was very, very strong.  And then the other person I had the opportunity to--because I had a choice that first year.  His name was Robert Dynes, D-Y-N-E-S.  And he was a big name in superconductivity, low temperature physics.  But I picked, I think I was more interested in lasers.  And I picked Dave Austin, and that was my choice.  And how I got into the field altogether was working with him.
Story_ID: 26784
Speaker 1: So, this is an important summer of 1974 at Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories], right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, you were beginning to tell us about you had the choice of working with David Austin or Robert Dynes?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I mentioned I had, they gave all of us that first year typically a choice of two research groups to work with.  And they gave a brief description of the kind of work.  And I found the lasers a little more interesting than the superconductivity at least, because I had worked at least with the helium neon laser at my undergraduate, Brooklyn Poly, Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute of New York [now Polytechnic Institute of New York, Brooklyn, New York].  And so, and actually the professor that recommended me has, does research in lasers.  So, that just seemed to be an easier choice for me.  And it was really a great choice for me.  I had a terrific summer.  Actually, things went so well.  I worked on a really high powered laser system.  And it's called a neodymium glass laser system, and really high powered, compared to the helium neon which is, puts out very little light.  This puts out gigantic pulses.  And you have to, you know, actually, at one point we had to kind of count down when we were going to fire the laser.  And you had to, you know, it's like firing a hole, something like that, because this was a big pulse.  And you know, you had to, you know, cover your eyes and things like that because, things of that nature.  But this was a really big laser.  And it was fascinating and fun to have the responsibility to work on something this state of the art, and to do some actual real research.  It turns out that at the end of the summer, I had contributed to Dave Austin's research, and actually I wrote my first technical paper that was published the following year, based on that summer's work.
Speaker 1: And you were saying that it was Dr. Rusky?
Speaker 2: Uredski.
Speaker 1: Uredski.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That suggested that you write a senior thesis?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I wrote the bachelor's thesis.  But then on top of that, I guess, I was actually writing a paper that we should submit to the, what's called the 'IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics' on that research.  So, I got a paper and a thesis out of that summer's work.
Speaker 1: So that's the one.  Is this the one entitled 'Microwave Switching by Picosecond Photoconductivity?'
Speaker 2: That's right, that's it.  Yeah, and that was published in, that was my very first publication, ever.  And I was first author and, you know, that all happened in that first summer.
Speaker 1: So, were you breaking new ground with this?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was new stuff.  This was the opening of this field of picosecond opto-electronics using short pulses of light, laser light.
Story_ID: 26785
Speaker 1: What attracted you to ultra fast optics?
Speaker 2: Well, working with Dave Austin, (laughter), basically.  I hadn't, well, I hadn't really worked in lasers, but he told me about this really fascinating work that he was going to do on switching, and things of that nature--high speed measurements, high speed measurements and semiconductors, and other things.  And I was just, and it just, I just got caught up in it and said this is a new field, and I wanted to be part of it.
Speaker 1: Now was there, what was a switching problem that was solved in your thesis?
Speaker 2: Well, in switching, it was trying to do really high speed switching by using light, light to switch, to switch an electronic circuit, alright.  And so, basically, you would have--how can you make a very fast electrical pulse which is useful in all kinds of devices, but exciting it with light?  So, that was the new thing, is light matter interaction, and actually creating a burst of electrical pulses that one can use for different types of applications.  So, that was what was new.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause most of the switching done earlier was done at much slower speeds.  It's the fact that your light pulses are already super short.  And so, you can do, you can do many more things with--it's easier to generate shorter pulses of light than short pulses of electrons, or make high speed electronic devices.  So, many of the ways that we probe just how fast an electronic device is, is by using optics.  And the fact that light doesn't interact with itself, and electrons do, they--electrons are negatively charged particles that have, that repel one another, and those things have consequences when you're trying to make measurements.  Whereas light, photons, these are non-interacting particles.  And so, you can do much more with them.  But also the challenge of making short pulses of light.  So, we were using picoseconds pulses, already a trillionth of a second of light.  But the electronics was way behind.  So, the electronics that we used, for example, in these measurements were about a thousand times slower.  So, whereas, whereas you could get electronic scopes and devices that operated on a nanosecond time scale, there wasn't anything that operated on a picosecond time scale at that time.  And so, you needed clever ways of using light to help measure things by using light to measure some type of interaction.  And still today, because we can generate optical pulses today that are on the--they're actually, well, less than a femtosecond.  Now, the next acronym is attosecond.  Attoseconds--alright, so a picosecond is 10-12, or a trillionth of a second.  A femtosecond is a thousand times smaller, so it's 10-15, or a quadrant of a second.  And now you go to attoseconds, it's another thousand times shorter than that.  And one can generate optical pulses there on the order of 200 ADA seconds.  That's 200 x 10-18 seconds.  But there's no electronics that can measure it, so you have to actually have clever ways of using light to measure light.  And there are things you can do, so that the detector that you end up using is actually quite slow.  You don't need the speed, because you're--
Story_ID: 26786
Speaker 1: The way we know that these pulses are picoseconds, is we use one pulse to basically measure another.  And we have an interaction in a non, in a material where it depends on the arrival of these two pulses at the same time.  They have to be there in coincident to make your measure.  So, what one does is one sends these light pulses down optical paths--mirrors, and mirrors that are sitting on controllers, the step promoters, and changing the path length.  So, what you're doing is you're taking--what you're doing is you're using basically [Albert] Einstein's theory of special relativity that says that all electro-magnetic radiation travels at the speed of light.  And that's 3 x 1010 centimeters per second.  That's a constant.  So, that means you can convert distance to time, whereas 'c', the speed of light is the constant proportionality.  So for example, a displacement--if a light pulse moves a micron, that's going to be moving at so many femtoseconds.  That's how fast, I mean that's the speed of light.  So, it takes light about one second to travel the distance between the earth and the moon.  But if you, but about a femtosecond, it's traveled a distance of about a micron.  So, the thing is, we can control these stages that change the path length with credible precision.  So in other words, if the measurement that we want depends on the two beams hitting at the same time, you set it up so that one beam goes on a fixed path, and the other one goes down this variable path where you're moving the motor.  And then--so you can convert that distance into a time axis.  And the detector can be slow, because it doesn't, because it only depends on the coincidence.  That's basically how we measure the optical pulse.  That's how we know that they're picoseconds or femtoseconds.  We can actually do that measurement by using light.  And we don't need a fast detector.  Now, if you had to do with faster electronics, we'd be in trouble, because we don't have electronics that work that fast.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, now was your mentor working on this project, I mean, well--?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He had, he started and he let me join in on it.  So, he had--his first paper on this switching, I was there during that summer.  And I actually took some of the data that went into that first seminal paper.  And then after that, I started to work on the work that became part of my summer project.  And so, I wasn't an author on that paper, but he did acknowledge me in the paper.  But I was there during the summer when that was being taken.  And I took a little bit of the data.  And so, that was also quite nice of him to do that.  But then I had my project with microwave switching.  His experiment was doing DC switching.  And so, he basically took a CW electrical pulse and carved out a very fast slice, using two beams of light.  And what I did was I actually took a microwave signal.  I got an RF [radio frequency] signal and actually cut out a piece of it, using the laser pulses.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, so, that work became the work that you used back in Brooklyn Poly [Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, now Polytechnic Institute of New York, Brooklyn, New York] for your senior--
Speaker 1: Yes.  That was the thesis work, yeah.  That became the bachelor's thesis.  And it won a prize from this organization--scientists--a research organization called Sigma Psi.  And actually, I got an award for best bachelor's thesis, as a result.  And this was, the chair was, wanted the thesis submitted for that, and it worked out.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, this is pretty good for an undergraduate school.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: To be able to have a paper published and to break new ground is something that a lot of people don't do until they do their Ph.D.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I was very fortunate.  So, this program [summer program at Bell Laboratories] was really ripe for this.  And I was very fortunate to have an advisor that allowed me to work on some really important stuff.  I don't think that is true across the board.  I think many of the students had make-work projects, and things of that nature.  But I was actually in on the beginning of a new field.
Story_ID: 26787
Speaker 1: Tell us about your Ph.D. work.  Because you worked as a cooperative arrangement between Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] and--
Speaker 2: And City College [of New York, New York, New York], right.
Speaker 1: City College.
Speaker 2: So, well, you know, somewhere in here I also got married.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met, believe it or not, I met my wife at a house party in Brooklyn [New York], on the dance floor.  (laughter).  And we, I think it was in Crown Heights.  She's from Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and that's where her family is.  And we just, we just hit it off.  We met at a party, and became best of friends.  And about a year, a year and a half later I asked her to marry me, while I was at, I was at Brooklyn Poly [Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, now Polytechnic Institute of New York, Brooklyn, New York].  I was a student at Brooklyn Poly.  And the interesting thing is that on June 2, 1975, a big event for me was, in the morning I graduated with my bachelor's degree in physics, and that evening I got married.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That is a big thing.
Speaker 2: It's a big--right.  And the ceremony was at her home.  So, you know, both sets of parents were there.  And then we had a minister come in, and we did it.  We did it at her home in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.  Yeah, so that was quite a day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, you moved back to Bedford Stuyvesant, right, as a married man?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: And it was kind of a rough area over there, I mean, in those days, I think in the early '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Mid-70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  So, '75 [1975].  So, I was there from 1975 to '81 [1981], when I finished my Ph.D. So, we managed, but you're right.  I had to be--it was a rough area.
Story_ID: 26788
Speaker 1: And one of the things is when I finished my Ph.D. in 1981, I--   Well, before I do that, how did I get support?  In '74 [1974], I was in the summer research program.  I had a great summer, went back to Brooklyn Poly [Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, now Polytechnic Institute of New York, Brooklyn, New York], and now I was thinking about graduate school.  And I, while I was there I heard about the Bell Labs Cooperative Research Program for minorities.  And that was a program that was a fellowship to pursue a Ph.D. in many fields, many of the STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] fields.  And I applied for that.  And having a successful summer, I think went a long way for me getting the fellowship.  And my summer research mentor agreed to be the mentor for the Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] Fellowship Program.  And more than that--
Speaker 2: Dr. Austin, right.
Speaker 1: Dr. Austin was the--because every fellow had a mentor, no matter where they went.  You could go to any graduate school in the country, and many did.  There was quite a few around my time that went to Stanford [University, Stanford, California].  But they each had a Bell Labs mentor that monitored and followed their progress.  In my case, I wanted to, I decided I wanted to go--first of all, I wanted to do this high speed optics that I had learned with Dave Austin.  And I wanted to stay in New York because I knew I was going to get married.  And at City College, City College of New York, CCNY [New York, New York], there was a professor in the physics department.  His name was Professor Robert Alfano, A-L-F-A-N-O.  And he was doing high speed laser work.  And so, I wanted to join his group, but ultimately what I wanted to do was to do my research at Bell Labs.  Well, Bell Labs can't give me a Ph.D., so I had to, you know, convince the AT&T folks that I could do all my coursework at City College and then commute into Murray Hill, New Jersey to do my Ph.D. thesis work with Dave Austin.  And he was game, he was for it, and all that.  So, that did happen.  Fortunately, I was able to do that.  And I was one of the few Bell Lab fellows that actually did the thesis work at Bell Labs.  So, and that was a great experience.  And then I got, because I was at Bell Labs, I knew, I met so many of the famous scientists that were there.  And they were just part of my graduate education.  And so, it was a wonderful experience for me.
Speaker 2: I know scientists always speak about the collegial atmosphere at Bell Labs, that people share information across the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --disciplines.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And who were some of the people there, and what were some of the interactions?
Speaker 1: Well, I met--well, one of the people that really pushed to get this program--  This was an idea that started with folks like Jim West [James West], Jim Mitchell [James Mitchell], Earl Shaw.  Now they are all, they were scientists in the research organization.  But there was, there was an issue that there were so few minority scientists, and women scientists, at Bell Labs in research.  And so, this was an attempt by AT&T, to grow their own.  In other words, start as an undergraduate, go to graduate school, have this interaction, and potentially come back as a member of technical staff.  And that was the course that I wanted to take, and that worked for me.  And so, I knew--so Earl Shaw and Jim West, Jim Mitchell--  Shirley Jackson was, was a really good colleague of mine.  She was there before she moved on to Rutgers [University, Newark, New Jersey].  And then she chaired the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and now she's president of RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York].  But we were, she was one of my early mentors.  She was already a member of staff.  And I would--so I got to know her very well, as well as her husband, Morris Washington, who is also a physicist.  They met at Bell Labs.  And so I knew both of them, and their son.  Their son would--I have photos of their son, Alan with my kids.  And so, we were, at that time we did a lot of things together.  So, she was there.  I mean, I had also a lot of people that I considered mentors--white mentors as well.  It wasn't--actually, most of my, the mentors that were really coupled to my research were white.  And so the black colleagues were more there for--I would say for encouragement, for chatting about how things are, and things of that nature.  But the ones that I ended up collaborating with and writing papers with and so forth, tended to be my white colleagues at Bell Labs.  And I had quite a few of those.  Some probably never knew they were mentors.  But they were, they were quite giving.  Now, I had some rough patches when I started at [Bell Laboratories at] Holmdel [New Jersey], when I left.  Murray Hill was where I did my thesis.  But I was hired in Holmdel.
Story_ID: 26789
Speaker 1: What was your dissertation?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was on making high speed electrical measurements.  It's really photoconductivity in amorphous silicate.  So, that's disordered silicate.  And I was attempting to understand the physics of electron transport, but also thinking about high speed devices using silicate--but disordered silicate, amorphous--not the crystalline silicate that's in your integrated circuits.  And the thing that was interesting about that is, in the crystalline that's in just about everybody's--in integrated circuits and so forth--is that this is high quality material.  And when you excite silicon with an optical pulse, you generate electrical carriers, electrons and holes.  And they live a long time in high quality material.  What is fascinating about amorphous silicate is because it's so poor, it's so many defects, that when you generate an optical--when you hit it with an optical pulse and generate electrons and holes, they get trapped very quickly.  So, that turns off the photocurrent.  That makes it a very, an ultrahigh speed detector.  It's because of the nature of the material itself.  Because it's not crystalline, it's amorphous.  So, it's full of all kinds of bad stuff that--  It was interesting.  When we would ask people to make materials for my research, I would ask them, "Give me the baddest, the crappiest stuff you have.  That's what I want."  And they just looked at me like, "What are you talking about?"  And the reason is, it's the defects that give it the speed.  As soon as you generate this electron hole, they get trapped, and that shuts off the photocurrent.  So you see a, really, a spike in your photo-response, which is what I'm looking for.  And you don't get that with high quality material.  You get this long decay, because the material is good.  It's supposed to live long, because it doesn't have defects.  And so, I'm asking for their bad material.  But this is material that people want to make solar cells out of, because it's easier to make.  Making high quality pure crystalline silicate is expensive.  So, yes, you know, you can make solar cells out of them, but they're not cheap.  If you can make it out of the amorphous material, you could do it, you can make it in rolls--  People talk about rolling up this amorphous silicate and making sheets.  But because it's disordered, it doesn't have the same quantum efficiency.  So, people are working on how to improve the quality of the material without going through the process of making the pure crystalline silicate, which is much more expensive to make.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was interested in understanding the physics of transport in these amorphous materials.  And that was my Ph.D. thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, now this is, you were the first to look at this, right?  I mean, to look at this problem?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I guess to look at electron transport.  I mean people were looking at amorphous materials using purely optical techniques, and things of that nature.  But I was actually trying to look at the electron transport.  So I was one of the, this was really early on in the process.  I don't know about the first, but definitely early.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Definitely early on in the process, uh huh.
Speaker 1: It's always hard to find who is the first sometimes.
Speaker 2: I know.  Yes, yes.  And we published a number of papers that became part of my thesis, with Dave Austin.
Speaker 1: So, a number of papers, not just--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  So, yeah.  My thesis work ended up resulting in a number of papers.
Story_ID: 26790
Speaker 1: So you joined Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] after graduation in '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was, was it a problem at all, trying to coordinate the two?  I mean Bell Labs and City College [of New York, New York]?  You know, when it came time to looking at your final project?
Speaker 2: Well, I had my thesis committee at City College.  And so, you know, my thesis advisor and other members of the committee, they had, they wanted me to add a few extra things here and there.  But it really was not bad at all.  You know, add a couple references here, you know, a little more detail here.  So, really, not bad at all.  So that whole experience was a good one.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, when you were finishing up, were you pretty much assured you were going to have a spot at Bell Labs?
Speaker 2: No, that was, that was never guaranteed.  Even though they, they supported my Ph.D., there was no contract.  So, you know, you can do what you--you could go someplace else, or I could stay.  But that was always my goal, was to actually stay at Bell Labs and become a member of technical staff.  So, I interviewed both at Murray Hill [Bell Laboratories at Murray Hill, New Jersey] and at Holmdel [Bell Laboratories at Holmdel, New Jersey], which is where I ended up.  But I wanted to, I wanted to put some distance between myself and my thesis advisor.  As much as I loved Dave [David Austin], I just knew that, I just felt that anything I did, if I stayed too close, would be associated with him.  So I felt it was important to establish my own career.  And so, I went to Holmdel.  I accepted the position at Holmdel.  And it turns out that the person that hired me, the department chair, was another, a colleague of Dave Austin's.  They went to grad school together at Berkeley [University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  And so, he hired me.  And he'd known about me as I was doing my thesis with Dave Austin.  So, he'd always, he'd been kind of looking out.  And then when I gave a talk at one of the major conferences, I think he was really interested in having me come down and interview in his group.  And so, I decided that I would do that.  And so, I have a Murray Hill and a Holmdel location at Bell Labs.  Murray Hill did my thesis work, but I ended up working as an independent scientist in Holmdel.
Story_ID: 26791
Speaker 1: So, tech staff at Bell [Laboratories].  There's a story.  You were working on an OSA [Optical Society of America] committee under department head, Chuck Shank [Charles Shank].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You went to a meeting, and there's a coffee story there.  We had been talking about coffee all morning, but there's a coffee story there.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  So, Chuck Shank is the department head that hired me in Holmdel [New Jersey], right after my Ph.D.  And doing what a good department head would do, is try to get me involved in some of the professional societies.  And so, he got me involved in the Optical Society of America.  And so, I landed on a committee.  And so--early on, you know, the early '80s [1980s].  And I went to this meeting, went to the meeting, and I got there early.  And some other committee members would beginning to come in.  I don't know them, I'm really brand new in the field.  And one of the committee members just made the assumption that I was there to serve coffee, and asked me to get him a cup of coffee.  And I, (laughter) it was just like, just took me back.  I just, and I said, "Well, I'm also a member of this committee."  And then he, you know, (laughter) and then he realized, you know, the mistake he made.  So, yes, that really happened, that really happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was this your first experience with the Optical Society of America?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You got involved--
Speaker 2: As a committee, one of their society committees, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were, had you been involved in the American Physical Society, at this point?
Speaker 2: I was a member of the American Physical Society as a grad student.  But I hadn't done any service yet.  So, this was my first call to duty as now a professional, you know, physicist, to be a member.  But I've done, since then, I've done things with many societies.  But that was my first society committee membership.  I can't remember what the committee was.  Probably something with, maybe it was an awards committee or something like that, or--but that was my first committee assignment.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, I think around this time, around--oh, I guess in the mid-70s [1970s] when the black physicists formed a--
Speaker 2: Yes, and I was also a member of the National Society of Black Physicists, yes.  So, actually, early on I gave some talks there.  And I've been a member ever since.  The National Society of Black Physicists.
Story_ID: 26792
Speaker 1: What about your work now with, at Bell [Laboratories]?  You were there for fifteen years?
Speaker 2: Almost fifteen; fourteen and change, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In what aspect would you want to--
Speaker 1: Oh, what were you working on?  I guess what kind of apparatus you were using?  What kind of, you know, discoveries you were making?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the highlights of, you know, your career at Bell.
Speaker 2: Well, what was, I guess different for--well, maybe not different for me, was that I had the opportunity--  I was basically given an empty lab.  And basically had the opportunity to actually decide what area of research that I wanted to go into.  That's really unique.  And so, I mean, everything up to the magnets on the wall, I had to organize and purchase, and things of that nature.  And so, I definitely decided I wanted to do, use my expertise that I'd learned doing the thesis, using high speed lasers.  But some of the early work that I started was looking at the propagation of short pulses of light in optical fibers.  That was some of the early work.  And trying to understand--because this could eventually, some of this would be useful for the telecommunications business--I was interested in some of the light, fiber interaction and what happens.  Because are lots of things that happen that degrade signals because of non-linearity in the fibers, and so forth.  So, I was investigating those things.  And one of the things that I ended up doing with a good friend and colleague of mine--his name was Robert Stoland--is that we investigated pulse compression in fibers; how to make an optical pulse even shorter, taking advantage of some of the non-linear properties of the fiber.  And so, one of the papers that we got a lot of interest in, was a paper in which we demonstrated that we could compress a pulse by a factor of eighty in an optical fiber.  And--
Speaker 1: Is that the optical wave breaking of pulse--
Speaker 2: Well, no, but it's related to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there's something, there was another paper called 'Eighty Times Pulse Compression.'  But the optical wave breaking was also another paper that received a lot of interest.  And that was with yet another colleague, Jack Tomlinson.  So, he did a lot of simulations of propagation in fibers.  And I provided the actual experiments.  And the correlation with his simulation of what happens in the fiber using the non-linear shorter equation and my data, was uncanny, how well he predicted what I could see experimentally.  And so, that paper got a lot of interest, also.  And that was, again, another nice collaboration with the folks at Bell.
Story_ID: 26793
Speaker 1: I am going to say that things did not necessarily start off that way.  It took a little time in that, you know, I was in a program that was basically an affirmative action program, minority program.  And there were some that were--I won't say hostile, but you could see they weren't necessarily interested in dealing with me, in the early stages.  And so, I think what happened is that because I was at Bell Labs--I spent my graduate school there--I knew how to interact with people.  I'd learned.  And so, I guess I'd gotten somewhat of a thick skin.  And I made it my business to go talk to people, and tell them what I could bring to the table.  And so, I sat down with a number of folks at Holmdel [New Jersey].  I said, "Now, this is the kind of lasers I can build.  This is my expertise."  And this is where the collaboration started to happen.  And all those attitudes changed.  The people that could barely look at me, became my friends.  Because, you know, I belonged there.  I think I'd proven that.  I'd gone through the trials and tribulations necessary to be part of this club, and that was important to me.  And you know, and I thought that's what the program was about, is to level the playing field.  And I felt that, I felt that I was one of those examples of that.  And I don't have any problem with these affirmative action programs, as long as you level the playing field.  We're not about lowering standards.  And anyone that raises that is, you know, they're just, they're not telling the truth about the program.
Speaker 2: The opponents always say--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --that somehow the standard has been lowered, but--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: -- you didn't get any--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Your grades were good, and--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: You were breaking ground in your research.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: But under ordinary circumstances Bell Labs or, not just Bell Labs, but most major institutions in the United States, business and otherwise, might have a policy of excluding black people, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They're only going to take one a year, or that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which used to actually be, these are well documented policies in these institutions--
Speaker 1: True.
Speaker 2: --and businesses.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, affirmative action meant that you actually could get in the door.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And that's the way I've always viewed it, as just giving me an opportunity to show what I felt I could do and contribute.  And Bell Labs did that for me.  So, I, that's why, you know, I may have had a--you know, little problems, not real problems, in the beginning.  But I always talk about Bell Labs in glowing terms because that's where I got my start and my career, and great colleagues.  And so, it was really a good experience for me.  I miss it.  It's not the same anymore.  It's, you know, since divestiture and all that--but I miss that institution.  It's where I think I did my best work.  And great colleagues, and a good start for me, very good start for my career.  And now I'm now in academia.  So, I've been in academia just about as long as I was in industry.
Story_ID: 26794
Speaker 1: Well, Bell [Laboratories] got fifteen years.  Now, when you look back on those fifteen years, what would you consider to be your legacy at Bell, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I had the opportunity to do was not only to do--I felt-leading-edge research in different areas having to do with, you know, ultra fast optics and things of that nature.  But I also had another passion, and that was trying to bring minorities and women into the scientific enterprise.  And so, I was involved in a lot of recruiting, as well.  And bringing in minorities into the research, into research, and bringing in students into the summer programs, and things of that nature.  And I was, and that was something that was not discouraged.  And I think we had the leadership that wanted to see more of that.  But I had, in order to be credible, I had to have a good research background, as well.  Because you could not go there and spend all of your time doing those types of, of outreach and mentoring, and things of that nature.  You had to have, you had to show a good research track record.  And then that made you more credible when you actually went out in that role.  So, I was very fortunate that I had management that supported my efforts.  And I was actually able to bring in a few people, into the research enterprise at the Ph.D. level, recruiting and so forth.  So that's very rewarding.  And then the number of students that I've had over the years in the summer programs, I became a mentor to graduate students.  And I had undergraduates in my lab as well.  And that's what eventually made me think, "You know, maybe I want to do this full-time, and actually go to academia at some point."  So, that helped with that decision.
Story_ID: 26795
Speaker 1: You were also the editor of 'Optics Letters.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, this is important.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--right now--when I was editor, it was the number one journal in optics.  Right now, it's like one and two.  There's another optics journal called 'Optics Express' and they kind of switch back and forth.  So, I, yeah, I was involved in 'Optics Letters.'  And that was a lot of work, but I'm so glad I had the opportunity to do that, and meet many people in the process of doing that.  So, I was the editor-in-chief for six years.  And I was a topical editor before that for six years--ultrafast phenomena, of course.  And then I was asked if I would be interested in being editor-in-chief.
Speaker 1: Alright, so that happens to be online?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now you became part of the photonic circuits research department, right?  Photonics circuits--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, uh huh.  And then I was promoted to distinguished member of technical staff somewhere around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I think before you left Bell [Laboratories], you were the vice president of OSA, Optical Society of America?
Speaker 2: Well, that was, I was president in 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the way this works is you start off--you're elected by the membership.  You're elected as vice president.  You're vice president for one year.  You become president-elect the second year.  President, the third year and past president, the fourth year.  So, you've got two years of training and working with the board of directors and the staff of the OSA before you become president.  And that's really useful, so that you hit the ground running.  And so, that means I guess I was made vice president in around 2002.  It must have been 2000.  In 2000, I was elected vice president.  In 2001, president-elect.  In 2002, president.  So I was, at that time I was at, I was still at New Jersey Institute of Technology [Newark, New Jersey].  I left Bell Labs in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was probably on the board.  I was very active in the Optical Society and the American Physical Society, for that matter.  I had board memberships in both organizations.  So that one, that first instance, didn't deter me.  (laughter).  It actually made me stronger.  So, it made me want to contribute even more, because of that.  You know, to try to maybe change the face and help promote more diversity in these two professional organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, were you ever president of the National Society of Black Physicists?
Speaker 2: No, I have not been president of that yet.  I've been on--I have a number of committee memberships, and so forth, but not, not president.
Story_ID: 26796
Speaker 1: Before we leave Bell [Laboratories], I want to ask you about your patents.  You've been a part of a number of patents.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, I have patents.  I have four patents, and they all have to do with high speed optoelectronic devices.  And that was, again, quite interesting.  And working the patent attorneys and working with my colleagues.  I mean they were all, they were not solo, they were collaborations with other researchers at Bell Labs.  And I think I have four of those patents.  And again, all high speed opto-electronics nature--high speed laser, a device--and we wrote a patent on that.  And one of them, I remember has to do with trying to come up with a measurement capability to look at high speed integrated circuits.  So you have these, this metallization on the optoelectronic device.  And I came up with, with my colleague, we came up with a measurement that where we could actually image the electrical pulse traveling down the transmission line.  And we did it by a process called photoemission.  We would shine light on the electrode, and the electrons would come off, alright, by the process of photoemission.  So, we would, we would do that and then by looking at the timing of when the electrical pulse went in--and when we would use a focus, an optical beam--we could actually get an image of this pulse traveling down the transmission line.  And we could measure its speed, whether there were dispersion issues on it, what was slowing it down.  And if we could improve that, we might be able to improve the performance of the device.  So this was an imaging, a very high speed imaging process, to look at integrated circuits.
Story_ID: 26797
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], I know you delivered a paper.  I don't know if this was National Society of Black Physicists, but it was about the low numbers of black Ph.Ds emerging in physics.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Well, one of the things within the APS [American Physical Society]--in 1992 and 1993 I was chair of the APS Committee on Minorities in Physics.  And so, I actually served two years as chair, which is unusual.  And then so, '94 [1994], yeah, I probably gave a talk at an APS meeting about the low numbers.
Speaker 1: What did you attribute the low numbers to, and did you have a--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it has to do with our recruitment effort, and the fact that things had not really changed.  One of the things--in 1981 when I got my Ph.D., I was able to research the number of African Americans getting a Ph.D. in physics.  And there were four in my year.  Yeah, absolutely incredible, four.  And I knew the other three, of course.  (laughter).  And two of us were from Bell Labs.  The other person which had also a Bell Labs fellowship, he did his thesis work at Murray Hill [New Jersey] like I did, and he did his thesis at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  And so the numbers typically are now, you know, closer to ten, but that's not a big advancement.  So, I still think that we're not doing a, a good enough job in making, in letting students know about the opportunities in physics.  We need more--students need to see more people that look like themselves in the field.  And one of the things that really hit home to me about this issue of role model--which I wasn't necessarily a big proponent of, until I went to NJIT.  When I went to NJIT, the New Jersey Institute of Technology [Newark, New Jersey], I was chair of the physics department, but I also started up an optics program there.  And there were no black students in physics.  But when I got there, they started approaching me to join my group.  And then it dawned on me.  I guess it's because I'm here, (laughter) that all of a sudden, students are coming.  And my first three graduate students were students of color.  And they all got their Ph.Ds with me in applied physics, and are doing quite well.  So, that's when I realized it really is important to see someone that looks like you.  It really helps, you know, especially if you don't, especially in a field as difficult as physics.  And to not see many people that look like you in physics, you have to wonder about that.  And now this brings to memory--in 1994 I was at one of these NSBP [National Society of Black Physicists] meetings.  And this young man--I was actually part of a panel on graduate school--how to go to grad school and what do you look for, and so forth.  And I remember there was this undergraduate student, black graduate--undergraduate student, from Appalachian State University [Boone, North Carolina].  And he came up, and he said to me, "Wow, I didn't know there were black physicists, and at the Ph.D. level and all of that."  And it was just like, wow.  So, it was kind of--  I didn't expect that to happen.  But he made that statement to me, and I actually wrote it in one of my articles in the APS, that, you know, how low the numbers are.  This was in my article, and that this student came up and said, "I, you know, I just didn't know there were any.  And it was rewarding to come to this meeting and to see that indeed there are.  And they're practicing, and they are--they're practicing physics, and they're actually making contributions to the field."  And this student, by the way, contacted me years later.  He did get his Ph.D.  And he contacted me and thanked me.  So, that was kind of rewarding.
Speaker 1: That's--so, you've mentioned already like four Ph.Ds that had come, you know, you became Ph.Ds because they had you as a model, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: And an advisor, too, you know.  Where the year you graduated, there were only four--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, you created another four within a short period of time.
Speaker 2: And a number have graduated from here also, as well at UMBC [University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 26798
Speaker 1: You leave Bell Labs [Laboratories] in '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: In '95 [1995], right.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened?  Did you decide to--
Speaker 2: Well, actually I was, I was doing well at Bell Labs.  And it turns out that a colleague of mine, who's on the physics faculty at NJIT [New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey], called me up.  I had met him through an interaction at Bell Labs.  And he was on the faculty there.  He actually did, I think he did a postdoc at Bell, so that's where I knew him.  He called me and asked me if I would apply for the chair of the department of physics.  And so, it really caught me off guard.  I thought he was going to ask me about semiconductors, some research.  But he wanted to know if I would be willing to apply, put my name in, to apply for the chair of the department.  And so, I hadn't even thought about it.  And I decided, you know, I'm going to take a look at this, because I've been working with students, and thought that eventually I wouldn't mind going to academia.  And why not leave on a high note?  (laughter).  If you're going to leave Bell Labs, leave when things are going well.  And after I investigated it--and also thought about the proximity to Bell Labs that, you know, wow, I could continue to collaborate with all my colleagues and students and all that.  I said, this could really work out.  And so, I decided to do it.  And so, I left in '95' [1995].  And I was chair of the department, and I did the distinguished--as a distinguished faculty member.  So, I got that title as well.  And it turns out that within a year, Bell Labs split apart.  And everyone thought I knew something, that I had some inside information.  It was just dumb luck.  An opportunity came, and I said I think I should take it.  And then a year, within a year, things start to break up at Bell Labs.  And I was just lucky, just lucky.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something.  I remember it was national news.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And so, it was disappointing when Bell Labs really did fall apart.  And all the opportunity that I was thinking about for my students to learn about industry, and you know, and have maybe internships there, and I could do a sabbatical at Bell Labs.  You know, and all-- none of that happened.  You know, it was just, that was it.  So, it was very disappointing.  Then they're calling me for positions as chair of this department.  (laughter).  Yes, yeah.  Well, actually I did manage to bring at least--I brought at least one, one faculty member and maybe one or two technicians to NJIT [New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey].  It was after, you know, after things just started to split apart.
Story_ID: 26799
Speaker 1: New Jersey Institute of Technology [Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were there for eight years, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and while you were there, you became the editor of 'Optics Letters.'
Speaker 2: Right, during that time, uh huh.
Speaker 1: And, well, what was it like?  You said you attracted three students, three black students--
Speaker 2: Right away.
Speaker 1: --that didn't want to be physicists until--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they were exposed to you.
Speaker 2: Well, at least they were hoping that--and one of them was very explicit.  He said, "I'm hoping that, you know, I'm already here at NJIT, and what I'm hoping is that you will provide an environment that's nurturing."  And you know, that's what this student was particularly worried about.  And I, I made it my goal to make it a nurturing environment.  And he's gone on and gotten his Ph.D., doing quite well.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is something I guess that's very important, I guess--to produce a Ph.D., right?  Anybody in science--I know--
Speaker 2: Uh huh--
Speaker 1: I was working in a school, and I recently--I mean just a few years ago.  I noticed that students of various nationalities, foreign born, congregate together around the computer in the computer lab.  They congregate in the halls.  You see them exchanging information and notes.  With black students, you don't see a lot of that.
Speaker 2: No, that's right.
Speaker 1: It seems like a lot of isolation.
Speaker 2: And a lot of that is--
Speaker 1: Especially in the technical.
Speaker 2: --critical mass, because there aren't enough to do that.  And one of the--while I was in this fellowship program, one of the successful--there were a couple successful institutions that were producing a fair number of black Ph.D. physicists.  And part of that was because there were a critical mass of students that could work together.  Stanford was one.  MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  They were actually able, for a period of time, to probably produce the most Ph.Ds.  And that's still not saying a lot, because we're still talking like anywhere from ten to fifteen, where I don't think there's ever been bigger than fifteen, at least among, among black Americans.  But that was, that was very important for that to happen, is to have this critical mass where they could bounce ideas off of each other, as opposed to being alone, you know, and isolating yourself.  That's definitely not the way to go.  And when I went to graduate school, you know, I was, I was pretty much the one black student.  But I really formed some really strong connections with my fellow graduate students.  And it may have to do with, you know, the Bell Labs [Bell Laboratories] experience and all of that, that made me reach out and not try to, you know, sit in the corner and try to do it all by myself.  Because that would have been deadly.  I mean you just can't make it through, at least in physics, if you isolate yourself, unless you're just absolutely brilliant.  You learn so much from your fellow graduate students--solving problems, qualifying problems, and things like that.  And these are relationships that last forever.  I mean, I still have, I still keep up with some of my former graduate student colleagues, that we went through, we went through qualifies together, and all of that.  And they've all gone on to careers like myself.  And I still meet them at meetings, and we still, you know, reminisce about old times.  But not everybody has, has that constitution, where they're going to--  They may shy--you know, stand, be a little standoffish.  Whereas if they see a group of students that look like them, it's much easier to--those barriers seem to be less, and it's easier to work together.  And that's what's happened at some of these schools where they have produced a fair number of black Ph.Ds.  But then that wears out, and then they're not producing them anymore.  So, it moves around.  So I remember Stanford [University, Stanford, California], MIT, Georgia Tech, Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] at one point.  And you know, it doesn't--  And you have to have a champion there that really wants to see this happen.  That's also important.
Story_ID: 26800
Speaker 1: So, around this time, in 19--, in the '90s [1990s], between I guess the mid-'90s [1990s] and 2000, you became a fellow of OSA [Optical Society of America], the National Society of Black Physicists and the American Physical Society.  Who presented you with the Edward Bouchet Award?
Speaker 2: That was the American Physical Society, yes.  Now, you mean what president, or?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I'm just saying this happened--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at this time.  And so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, you're a fellow, I mean there's no doubt.  I mean it's the equivalent of, you're now, everybody agrees that you're a physicist of high standing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: I guess if there's any doubt, now everybody's chipped in and said okay, you're the one.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: So, any reflections about your time at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, before you go to UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No, I really enjoyed my time there.  The one downside was the commuting to my home in Freehold [New Jersey], because I was going against traffic.  So, that was an hour each way.  And I was lucky.
Speaker 1: So, even though you were living in New Jersey and working in New Jersey, it was still a longer commute.
Speaker 2: Because everybody's going to New York [New York], so I'm with all the traffic.  And so, yeah, so that was two hours everyday, even though I lived in New Jersey, with the traffic.  So, that was really kind of wearing me down.  And I used to put in long hours, even though I had a two-hour commute, especially being chair, dealing with the department management.  But I also had to have my research group going.  And so, I would do a lot of my administrative work, you know, during the day and actually get in the lab in the evenings.  And so, that really took a toll for eight years, doing that.  And-- excuse me-- trying to maintain a research effort--recruiting students, doing the business of the department, promotion and tenure, hiring and things of that nature.  So, that was pretty tough.  And trying to have a credible research program, and bringing in support for my grad students.  So, that was a tough job.  So, I did that for eight years, and then I was recruited to come here.
Speaker 1: So, how did that--who contacted you?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting the way it happened.  You know, I had colleagues all over the place.  So, it turns out there's a colleague of mine that I had met at one of my laser conferences over the years.  And UMBC, he was in the electrical engineering department.  And periodically, you have to have a review of the department.  And you get an external committee that comes in and looks at, you know--the courses, the research, you know, your appointments, your recruiting, your research portfolio--and gives you a critique of the department.  And that's required of just about all departments, like maybe every five or six years, or something like that.  So, I guess at that point, the VP [vice president] for research asked the members of the department, "Can you recommend anyone that could do that?"  And this particular faculty member gave my name, and asked me if I had the time.  So, you know, I got a call saying, "Would you mind coming down here?"  I didn't even know what UMBC was, to be honest.  And asked me if I would be willing to do that.  And I had a couple of friends here on the faculty.  So, I said, "Sure, I'll come down."
Story_ID: 26801
Speaker 1: I think it was two days.  Review the department, then we had to write a report.  And, but when I got here it was a surprise, because I thought I'd be going into Baltimore City [Maryland].  Then I got here and said, this is a campus.  I mean, it's outside of Baltimore.  This is Baltimore County.  And it's close to Baltimore City but it's not--there is a University of Maryland, Baltimore.  And it's kind of confusing--UMB, UMBC (laughter), you know, things like that.  And so, I saw this really nice campus.  So as a result of that, this VP for research remembered me when Freeman Hrabowski went after funding to generate a, to build a photonic center.  And so, he was able to do that.  And he's very close with Senator Barbara Mikulski.  I actually have a picture over there with me and the senator, on the wall over there.  And so, she provided the seed funding for this center, called CASPR [Center for Advanced Studies in Photonics Research].  And when--so, when it was time to come up--to name a director, this VP for Research contacted me and wanted to know if I would be interested in moving from NJIT to UMBC, you know, to lead this effort, and join the faculty.
Speaker 2: So, they had already come up with a center for--
Speaker 1: Yes.  But they didn't have--
Speaker 2: Photonics research.  That was an idea--
Speaker 1: That actually started in 2002.  I came in 2003.  So, they already had established a center, but they didn't have a director, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--and it wasn't easy.  I mean, I took a long time to make a decision to move.  Because I knew I was leaving my family here.  I'm still commuting, after ten years.  Actually--
Speaker 2: Is this closer than the New Jersey Institute [of Technology], in terms of--
Speaker 1: Well, you see, I only commute on the weekends.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's right.
Speaker 1: So, I live on campus during the week, and commute home on the weekend.  So, I'll be leaving tomorrow around three or four o'clock and start my drive back to New Jersey.  That's typically--and then come back--
Speaker 2: That's closer, that's right.  But--
Speaker 1: But here, I mean my commute is two minutes.  My dorm, where the student housing I live in, is just up the hill.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you can spend more time doing your research--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --and doing your work.
Speaker 1: That's what happens.  So, I do.  I put in really long hours here, and then go home on the weekends.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: That's a flight of probably an hour, right?
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: The flight back to--
Speaker 1: I drive.
Speaker 2: Drive.  You drive, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's why I've got to have a good car.  (laughter).  Yes, I put some serious miles on it, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  I drive back and forth.  Because my hours--well, there's no train, unfortunately, that is close.  There's a train close to UMBC, but nothing close to where I live in Freehold, in central New Jersey.  So, I need the flexibility of going and coming, so I end up driving.  I'm been driving for ten years.
Story_ID: 26802
Speaker 1: UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland]--now what are some of the, I guess--  Well, one of the activities of CASPR [Center for Advanced Studies in Photonics Research] is MIRTHE, I guess, the Mid-InfraRed Technologies for Health and Environment.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, that was one of the, that is a National Science Foundation engineering research center.  And my Bell Labs colleague--when she was at Bell Labs--her name is Claire Gmachel, at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], G-M-A-C-H-E-L, approached me about submitting a proposal to the NSF [National Science Foundation] for an engineering research center which would be, which she would direct and I would be a deputy director in this area of mid-infrared technology.  And if I would go in with her on this, and try to put this proposal together.  And we did.  So this, we were granted the proposal in 2006, and we're now in our eighth year.  And you can only have a, it can only last for ten--you only get funded for ten years.  And so, we're beginning to wind down, at least the NSF support.  And we're going after research funding and so forth from other agencies, to continue, because it's working very well.  So, there are six institutions in MIRTHE.  Princeton is the lead, UMBC, Hopkins [John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], Rice [University, Houston, Texas], Texas A&M [Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], and City College of New York [New York, New York], my alma mater, it turns out.  And the folks there, I know very well, also.  So, that's the six institutions from, for this mid-infrared technologies.  And we do everything from sensors to fundamental physics to looking at air pollution, health--all kinds of interesting things.  We even had a group actually go to Beijing [China] during the [2008] Olympics, to measure the pollution.  And that was really interesting.  I mean, so we have the technology based on the mid-infrared technology to actually measure pollution in real time.
Speaker 1: Just explain sort of how mid-infrared technology is able to measure molecules in the air.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, we're taking advantage of--it's some interesting physics--that many of the gasses that we're interested in measuring like ammonia, like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide--all of these pollutants tend to have-- are molecules.  And they have optical resonances in the mid-infrared part of the spectrum.  And the mid-infrared, we consider to be between 3 and 30 microns, typically.  And so, for example, one of the molecules of interest that we think really helped us get, win this proposal--because we had medical doctors from Hopkins who do breath analysis are on our, or either part of the group--was ammonia.  And ammonia, which, you know, the first time I heard about it for us, it was thinking about household ammonia.  But it turns out that ammonia is one of the gasses that are emitted when you're having kidney or liver failure.  And the technique that is currently used is called breath analysis, where you basically breathe into a bag.  You take that bag to a place where they have a, a spectrometer that can actually measure the amount of gas in the parts, whatever concentration there is.  But that takes time, and time could be of the essence.  And so, we wanted to make a compact device with very high sensitivity and immediate response.  So, we're using the fact that ammonia has an optical absorption resonance in the mid-IR [mid-infrared], and it tends to be around say 9 microns.  Now, with typical lasers that are used, say, in telecommunications, these operate about 1.5 microns.  And so, you can mass produce those.  But if you measure the absorption in ammonia at 1.5 microns versus 9 microns, you're talking about the difference of a thousand, three orders of magnitude.  So, the sensitivity goes up dramatically.  So, what we're doing is we're making compact lasers and sensors that you can hold in your hand.  And that's the goal, is that you can breathe directly into this device and immediately find out how many parts per billion, for example, of ammonia you have.  And the, and the medical folks know if it's above a certain level, you're in trouble and you need to get to the hospital fast.  And so, that's what we want to do.  And we can change the gasses.  Many of these interesting molecules all have these resonances that are enhanced in the mid-IR, and that's why we're going for mid-infrared.
Story_ID: 26803
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you have a new, you're exploring new ways of measuring light.
Speaker 2: New ways of?
Speaker 1: Measuring light.
Speaker 2: The light?
Speaker 1: The light, yeah, different aspects of light.  No?  (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, now maybe I'm--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: New ways of measuring---?
Speaker 1: Light, using non-linear optical fibers.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes.  I mean we do, we use fibers and all types of non-linear optical elements to measure light.  But it's not necessarily new, but that's--we have--  In order to measure optical pulses of the duration I've been talking about, in the picosecond and the femtosecond time scale, we have to use non-linear optical measurements, where two beams hit a crystal and we measure the response.  And so, we basically correlate the response as a function of the timing of the arrival of the two pulses.  So, what we call a correlation measurement.  It turns out, for example, the non-linear that we're using for the measurement has an ultra--, has a really fast response.  It's almost instantaneous.  So that's--so the speed of the measurement comes from your ability to change the arrival time of the pulses at the crystal.  And we use a translation stage to do that.  Now what we're doing is we're using the fact that we know that all light travels at the speed of light, 'c', and that's a constant, and that's [Albert] Einstein's special theory of relativity.  So, using 'c' as a constant, we can convert distance into time.  So, we know that if an optical pulse moves a certain distance, we know how much time it's taking to travel.  So, typically it's something like--if a pulse moves about a micron, it takes on the order of a few femtoseconds for that happen-- 10-15 seconds.  The other thing is we also know, for example, how long it takes light to go from the earth to the moon.  We actually have a retroreflector sitting on the moon.  And so, we actually shot a beam of light and had it come back, and measured it.  So, we know that it takes light about a second to make that huge distance.  And that's still knowing the speed of light.  So that's another way of thinking about the magnitude.  You know, one second versus 10-15 seconds.  So, with these types of techniques, we can actually measure these short phenomena in time.  They're not, electronics are not there yet.  We can't do that with electronics, so we have to use light.  So yes, we can measure--we can use these other effects to measure very fast events.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what you just described, is that reflected in the paper, "Techniques for Simultaneous Measurement of the--," probably not.  (laughter).  "Gain of Co-Efficient Linear--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Reflective Index of Optical Fibers."
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, uh huh.  So, what that is, is a new measurement.  It's a new way to measure the non-linearity of the fiber.  That's what that paper's about, is that in order to make a communications system, you need to know some of the fundamental parameters of the fiber.  And it turns out that measuring some of these non-linear properties require very long lengths of fiber.  But there are some new fibers that are coming out that you can't make long.  You cannot make kilometers of the fiber.  And so, the technique that's in that paper utilizes yet another phenomenon, but allows you to do the measurement over a couple of meters of fiber, which is doable and reproducible and manufacturable for very special high non-linearity fibers or things like that.  So, our technique allows you to measure these properties in these short lengths of fiber.  That's what that paper's about.
Story_ID: 26804
Speaker 1: Something we were discussing when we came in.  We were at--in the lab was a quantum cascade laser.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were showing me that, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Right.  A quantum cascade laser, which is the central technology of MIRTHE [Mid-infraRed Technology for Health and the Environment Center], is a semi-conductor laser, but not the typical type of semiconductor laser that's, that is in your computer, that's in your grocery scanner and so forth.  Those are called diode lasers, and they work on a principle of making a junction, a so-called p-n junction where you have material that is p type and you have material that is n type, and you make a junction, and you can make a laser.  That's your standard diode laser that is everywhere.  The quantum cascade laser uses a different principle, but allows you to generate infrared pulses.  I'm trying to--how can I say this without going into too much semiconductor physics?  In the normal--in the standard semiconductor diode laser, you only need a couple of layers of the semiconductors to make this device.  In the quantum cascade laser, you need hundreds, maybe even a thousand layers because it, it works on a totally different principle.  And it allows one to generate these very long wavelengths.  And the reason it's called cascading is that the way--when you put these semiconductor layers--and they're very tight--nanometer--layers together, what you end up doing is you inject electrons with a battery or something, into a state--an electronic state, a quantum state of this semiconductor.  And when it de-excites, it emits a photon, okay.  But that electron is not finished.  It can now tunnel into the next quantum well, and do the process again and again, and again.  This is why it's called cascading.  That's the nature.  And so, you have in--  If you have inactive layered regions, then one electron can produce inphotons, and that's why you make so many of them.  And that increases the gain and so--but it also makes it more complicated.  But it's because all the action occurs in the so-called conduction band and not in the valance band, that it's different from a diode laser.  And that's why you have to make so many layers.  And the thickness of the layer determines the wavelength of the light.  And the diode laser, it actually depends on the composition.  So, how you grow it, what the composition of the various elements is.  So, if you can't grow the same layer, you're going to change the wavelength.  Here, you go--all you have to do is learn how to grow one kind of layer very well, and know how to change the thickness.  That's what changes the energy levels.  So, if you move these guys closer together, the layers move up.  Further apart, they get--that's what determines the wavelength, is the thickness of the layer.  And so, you can two different sources.  And that was invented by another, a Bell Lab [Bell Laboratories] colleague of ours in 1994, the quantum cascade laser.  And it operated at liquid nitrogen temperatures.  And it lasted, the first ones made lasted a couple of minutes.  But that took--all of these lasers took time to develop, to remove the defects and all of the issues.  Now, you can make these quantum cascades.  Not only does it lase at room temperature, it can produce lots of energy.  Back then it was producing milliwatts of liquid nitrogen to cool it down.  So, super cold to remove all of the scattering phenomena and so forth.  But we learned how to make the material such that we've gone from 1994 to now, where you can generate watts out of these lasers.  So that's--but that is all the lasers took that path.  When they were first made, they were awful.  They burned out, all kinds of things.  And then as got the processing together, we were able to make them, and make them super cheap now also.  They're in just about anything you use.  In all the computers, the scanners, all these things use semiconductor diode lasers.  Your disc players, they use lasers.  And now we can make them, we can manufacture them for pennies, you know, real easily now.  So they're, they're massed produced.
Story_ID: 26805
Speaker 1: What's the future of laser technology?  Or what aspect of it do you see yourself making a major contribution to?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to see, I would like to see--there are applications in the mid-infrared that are important to both health and environment, and also defense.  One of the things that we'd like to be able to do is something called standoff detection.  Now, that means looking at something at a distance, because you have enough power to do it.  So, for example, we'd like to be able to detect explosives.  Now explosives have, emit a vapor.  And those vapors have resonances in the mid-infrared.  So, we'd like to be able to detect things at a distance with using lasers.  And that requires some fairly powerful lasers.  But that's what we call standoff detection.  So, all kinds of--many of the dangerous materials that we worry about, typically have molecules associated with it that we can detect.  You know, if we could make the technology right, we could detect them at a distance.  Another thing, of course we'd love to be able to contribute to, is in our wars--is these IEDMs, the improvised explosive device, IEDs.  And we'd love to be able to detect those with light, and again, at a distance.  You know, so many of our soldiers have been wounded by these IEDs, and that's been a major hazard.  But that's the technology that I think we can deal with.  There's also talk of using it in the food processing industry to make, to have lasers on a conveyor belt, as food processors.  It goes by--you could be able--you should be able to tell the difference between stale and non-stale meats, again, by emission of molecules.  And so, that could be used there as well.  So there are, I think there are many applications.  It turns out many of them in the infrared as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But there are, there are other spectrums that are also of interest as well.  And many things can utilize the speed at which we could make these measurements, because many things happen quickly as well.
Story_ID: 26806
Speaker 1: I was just noticing that equipment in the lab.  You have probably hundreds of lenses.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All kinds of lenses.  And some are--well, explain what some of the lenses--describe some of the lenses.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, this is what we call free space optics.  And it's because my initial lasers are fairly large.  Now, I'd like to go to more compact sources, but that requires a lot of grant funding.  So, and then there are some experiments that one can do with fibers, connecterize.  Some things you can't do yet because--especially if the pulses that you want to use are very short.  It turns out that these very short optical pulses are very intense.  And the fibers can--you have non-linearities that you don't want that are in the media that's doing the transmission.  And so, you have to always worry about that if you're going to send short pulses down the fiber.  If you've got long pulses, they're probably okay.  But you can always measure the pulse at the output of the fiber to determine that.  So, there are limitations to how short a pulse you can use and not affect the--and have the fiber affect the pulse.  Because a lot of times you want this perfect pulse to go down this fiber to this experiment, and you don't want the fiber, which is just a transmission medium, to impact the pulse.  Because you're assuming it's a certain shape for whatever you're interrogating.  And so, we have to worry about how to deal with that, if we want to use very short pulses of light.  In fact, there are some experiments that have been done where you would think that air would be, would not impact a pulse.  But actually there are pulses that we can generate today that are so intense that you can actually generate a virtual tunnel in the air from the intensity, so that it actually makes a channel because of the non-linearity of the air molecules.  But that requires huge pulses, very large intense pulses, that you're trying to propagate across a room, for example.  For example, one thing that is done is when you send a pulse in the air, it diffracts, or it spreads out.  That's the process of diffraction.  Under certain circumstances, you can actually make the air be non-linear enough that it produces, that it becomes a negative lens and it causes the beam to recollimate.  So, you could actually make a channel if you have enough light, enough intensity, so that the beam doesn't spread.  And you're using the non-linearity of the air to do that.  And that's when you're talking about these massive high energy lasers that can do that.  So, even air can be a problem if your pulses are very, very short.
Story_ID: 26807
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the programs for minorities here at UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  There is a program called the Meyerhoff Scholarship Program that was started here at UMBC and championed by the president, Freeman Hrabowski.  And it's named after the benefactor that actually donated the initial money, Meyerhoff, a famous Baltimore [Maryland] family.  And he saw the need for--this was a number of--the program is over twenty years old now--but provided the initial seed funding to start this program to support minorities in STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] fields.  Well, it's more than STEM, but going on for advanced degrees, starting at the undergraduate level.  And that program has just blossomed.  And the students that are in that program have a special support mechanism.  There's groups of students of former, more advanced students, that work with the incoming students.  And so, there's this critical mass of support.  And these students do very well. And the majority of them go on to graduate school.  Many go on to Ph.Ds, MD/Ph.D. programs, and so forth, and are doing extremely well.  And so, this has become a model program for educating minorities in various fields, in particular, chemistry, medical fields, biochemistry, some in physics, and engineering as well.
Story_ID: 26808
Speaker 1: Now, here at UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County] in the physics department, do you offer a master's degree?
Speaker 2: In physics?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, masters and Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Masters and Ph.D.
Speaker 2: In both electrical and physics.  Now, I have a joint appointment.  I have an appointment in physics, and an appointment in computer science and electrical engineering.  But I'm on the electrical engineering side.  So, I'm a full professor in both.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the students that you referred to earlier, did they get their Ph.Ds here, or did they go off?
Speaker 2: Yes, they got their Ph.Ds here.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, three--
Speaker 2: There were, the first three got their Ph.D.'s at NJIT [New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey].  But now, I have a whole group that have gotten their Ph.Ds here at UMBC, right.  And a couple of them that didn't, that did not complete their degrees at NJIT, moved with me here, which was amazing, I thought, that they would come and help me start a new program here.  And they have since gotten their Ph.Ds, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one in particular--and you'll have one of the photos, is an African American woman who was the only African American female to get a Ph.D. in physics in the country.  She got her Ph.D. with me at NJIT.  And then she moved down here, and she became the person that oversaw the lab, because of her expertise in high speed lasers.  She was the person that really helped me build the lab and oversaw the operations of it.  And so, she was with me almost ten years.  She recently left in January to go to NAVAIR [Naval Air Systems Command].  So, she's now with the Navy doing research in photo acoustics.  But she's done phenomenally well, and I really miss her.  She was a critical--she was a dear friend, as well, but also an important part of this research effort as well.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Elaine Lalanne.
Speaker 1: Her picture--I was going to suggest that might have been her, but I--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --knew she wasn't here any longer, but I noticed her picture out front.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  So, she is still doing--she comes back now once or twice a month, just for a day or two.  And she's still helping us, because I have a lot of new students getting up to speed on the laser systems.  So, she, she comes back and she, you know, and helps out with that.  And she enjoys coming back and getting back in the lab.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So CASPR [Center for Advanced Studies in Photonics Research] is, I know a major source of funding is National Science Foundation [NSF], right.  And what are, what are the other sources?
Speaker 2: Well, the major source of funding that I have gone after as the PI [principal investigator] has been NSF.  But I am in the process of writing a couple proposals to the Air Force.  I have a few with the Army.  And so, you know, Defense Department money as well.  But NSF has been probably the biggest source of funding.  But I'm trying to branch that out now, as well.
Story_ID: 26809
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I actually, I mean I really enjoyed my time at Bell Labs [Bell laboratories], and my two academic experiences have been wonderful.  Now, I would really be remiss if I didn't mention how important my wife has been to me in this process.  And she suffered through me going through my qualifying exams, and was right there with me.  And she decided to go on and get her Ph.D. in nursing.  And so, she's been my partner.  So, we've just had our thirty-eighth wedding anniversary.  And she's real important, an important part of making this work.  And she puts up me being away a week, you know, five days out of seven.  So, she's real important.  And she's a Ph.D. also.  Adrianne Johnson.
Speaker 1: We may as well talk about your children, too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you've got four?
Speaker 2: I have three.
Speaker 1: Three?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Three, right.  My daughter Kim, my son Justin, and my youngest son, Brandon.  So, they're, you know, now thirty, twenty-nine, and twenty-six--no, twenty-seven.  (laughter).  So, they've put up with us for awhile.  They're doing well.  They're-- Kimberly is interested in information technology.  Justin, who is, who also served time in the Marines, is pursuing law enforcement positions.  And my youngest son, Brandon, is in aerospace and aeronautical engineering.  So he, he actually did, he was here at UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County].  And he had the opportunity to go to many places, but chose to come here, and was part of the Meyerhoff [Scholarship] Program.  And he could have gone anywhere.  He finished the bachelor's degree, did a master's at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], and now he's doing Ph.D. at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] in aerospace and aeronautics.  So, he's, he's the scientist engineer of my three.
Story_ID: 26810
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm still concerned that so much of the population of the African American community is not pursuing these, these fields.  And you have to wonder, well, what is the problem?  You know, I was lucky enough to get introduced and encouraged.  And I know how bad some of the schools are in the inner cities.  And I've been to them.  I've gone and I've talked to these students.  And, and I just know that they're not getting the training that they need to pursue these fields.  'Cause I'm sure they have the aptitude, but if you have teachers--and we're finding, you know, many physics teachers don't even have physics backgrounds.  And so, what we think is happening is that the physics teachers, the quote unquote "physics teachers", are actually shy about the physics.  And so, that, that fact that they're not comfortable teaching it, translates to the students.  And so, they don't get that interest, either.  And so, we've got to start earlier.  We've got to get them interested in the STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] fields, the engineering, science.  And they're lucrative fields, you can do well in these fields.  And we are experiencing shortages in technology.  We're going overseas and so forth, when we should be, we should be cultivating our own, and making it attractive for them to go.  And you know, I know that you still have, you have, you have these stereotypes about people of color, and their ability to do these things.  And we've really got to, you know, clearly get by that.  And we need everyone contributing.  I think you'll talk to the corporate types who are worried about, well, where is my next engineer going to come from?  And we need to be working on our own here.  And that means including women and minorities, and giving them the opportunity and encouragement that they are welcome and they can contribute.  And those different perspectives, I think are important to, for new ideas about where to take the technology.  So, I think a diverse community is important for the country, for its advances, as well.
Story_ID: 26811
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your career to this juncture, today, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy.  Well, I am really proud of the students that I've had the opportunity to work with.  And I've made an effort--you know, I have a very diverse crowd.  But I also made a really strong effort to bring in women and people of color, into my lab.  And I go across the country and I see many laboratories that have no-- very little diversity.  And I'm thinking, is that a choice that the faculty members make, or not?  So, you know, I've made my choices and, you know, maybe things get done a little slower than they could if I, you know, had limited my selection.  But this is what I feel very comfortable with, and I'm, it's important to me to do these things, and to try to contribute.
Story_ID: 26812
Speaker 1: Is there anything else we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I guess that's it.  I, (laughter), you guys are doing the interview.
Speaker 1: Alright.  No more important thing that hasn't been raised?
Speaker 2: Been raised?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I think we did talk about how important it was that my parents were encouraging me to going into these fields, to do science, when I was really one of the few interested in it at the time.
Speaker 1: I suppose they were pleased when you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely.  That was a very proud moment for everyone, yes.  Because you know, you don't know.  It's not guaranteed.  (laughter).  And you put a lot of effort into it, and, yes.
Story_ID: 26813
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Remembered.  I would like to be remembered as a good scientist who cared about people.  But it's important that the good science is there, that you know, I did a credible job, I contributed to the scientific--to science, making some advances.  But that, that I also helped bring some of the diamonds in the rough along.  That students that, that maybe with the additional encouragement, without some encouragement--might not have pursued advanced degrees.  And that's important.  That, I think is part of, part of my legacy.
