Story_ID: 192904
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Jason Miccolo Johnson, J-A-S-O-N M-I-C-C-O-L-O J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have any idea where Miccolo comes from?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No, I do not, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all right.  Now, what, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 21, 1956 in in Hayti, Missouri, Pemiscot County.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hayti, Missouri?
Speaker 2: H-A-Y-T-I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Missouri, M-I-S-S-O-U-R-I.  And Pemiscot is P-E-M-I-S-C-O-T-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a photographer.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 23, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're located at 47 Q Street, Northwest, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is your studio here.
Speaker 2: And this is my studio and my home.
Story_ID: 192905
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five People-Magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a brief answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Lightweight questions.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably vegetables.  I, I like greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Are you a vegetarian?
Speaker 2: I, I'm getting there, yeah, I'm getting there.  I can do without the meat.  I only eat fish and seafood now.  Just recently, about a month ago, cut out the chicken, and I haven't eaten red meat in twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France], actually Cuba--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --then Paris.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, one that my good friend, James Carter, let me steal from him is, monster vision plus massive action equals mega success.
Story_ID: 192906
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family.  First, I ask about your mother's side, and then your father's side.  Can, can you spell your mother's name for us and give us her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Vida Johnson, V-I-D-A J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  I think she was born in Grenada, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact date.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Chamberlain--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --C-H-A-M-B-E-R-L-A-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You think it was Grenada, Mississippi and--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Do you know the date?
Speaker 2: Well, she died at forty, I believe, and so that was 1959, so I guess she was born in 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, how much do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: On that side of the family, I basically only go back to her mother, my grandmother, whom I had the chance to live with for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she never talked about her mother at all or--
Speaker 2: No.  In fact, I don't know who my grandmother's mother was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother, I don't, I don't even know her name really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she--was she from the same part of the country?  Was she from Grenada, Mississippi or--
Speaker 2: They were in Mississippi, born and bred for the most part.  They lived in Mississippi in different parts.  People moved around a lot, and then my grandmother eventually moved to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your grandmother have any stories that were passed down through the family, maybe about things that happened to people a long time ago into the nineteenth century--
Speaker 2: Not really.  My grandmother didn't talk a little bit, didn't talk much about history, didn't talk much about her husband, no more than he was a barber, but not a lot.  I learned very little from, from her, and only a little bit about my mother, or other of my mother's siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother, was she raised out in the country or in town or--
Speaker 2: She was raised in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she didn't talk about that in some level?
Speaker 2: To the extent that they, you know, worked hard, and they, of course, you know, worked the fields and raised chickens and farm animals, that kind of thing, and would go wring chickens' necks to have some fresh chicken.  But other than that, not a lot of specifics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your--any stories about your, your mother's early years that you heard from her?
Speaker 2: No, no, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your, your mother died at--when you were how old?
Speaker 2: My mother died when I was three.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you can (unclear).
Speaker 2: And when I moved to stay with my grandmother, I was about eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, in those days, grandparents in particular did not talk much about, you know, personal history or family history, and certainly not to a young kid.  And so, she was alive from the time that I was about eight to maybe eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my grandmother died in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't know a lot about your mother at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, the only thing--the most I know about my mother is things that, that her sister, my aunt, told me.  And some of those things didn't come until, until I was, you know, over thirty-five years old, and it was just kind of dropped in.  And I had asked my aunt to tell me, you know, things about my mom, or I'd ask her from time to time or write down history.  And she'd write down basic things that I already knew, but nobody really talked a lot about it.  And then, out of the blue, she may say, you know, your mama did such and such or, or lived so and so, that kind of thing, or stayed with different people.  And I like, no, I never heard of that.  How can you, how can you have held all that information for all these years and not, not tell me, you know, which I thought was interesting--I guess the, the biggest bomb that was dropped on me right before my aunt died.  And my aunt was the oldest of the, of the girls in my mother's family.  When she told me that my mother had, had been pregnant when she died, that she was pregnant when she died, and then she'd think, died as a result of childbirth or giving birth, trying to give birth to like a seventh, sixth or seventh child.  And I had never heard of that before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did the child survive?
Speaker 2: No, no, I had never heard.  And I asked my oldest brother if he knew, and he didn't know that my mother was pregnant when she died.  And nothing's on the death certificate--mentioned anything about that.  So I thought it was interesting.  And I was always told that she died of double pneumonia.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's kind of strange, huh?  Did, did your aunt or your grandmother tell you anything about your mother's personality when, when she was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no more than she was a hard worker.  She was left-handed, and that she could lay on a good whipping, yeah, but, fortunately, I was never at the other end of that.
Story_ID: 192907
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Vida Chamberlain Johnson] and father [Boyd Johnson] met?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not, not from either side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what, what did your mother do for a living?  Did she, I know she had a lot of children, but--
Speaker 2: She was basically a domestic worker.  She worked at other people's homes and cleaning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: I think she had a fifth grade education, and I think my father had a third grade education.  He couldn't really read or, or write.  He'd make his mark for a signature, you know.  I don't know.  I saw my mother could read and write, but I don't know, since I only knew her for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there anything else about your mother that, that, be-, before we go to your father?
Speaker 2: Well, the things that I remember is that, you know, she was short in stature.  I guess she was probably between five and 5'2", you know, obviously, you know, kind, but I don't remember a lot about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've got few snippets or images, almost like vignettes, but I don't remember a lot about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were one of the youngest of your brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: I am the youngest of five brothers, no sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, five brothers, all right.
Story_ID: 192908
Speaker 1: What, what do you know about your father's side of the family, or about your father?
Speaker 2: Well, the--I obviously know a little bit more about my father because I was with him for eight years, eight and a half years.  My father come from a large family.  I think it was about ten or twelve of them, and he came out of Eupora, Mississippi.  He was born in Eupora, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: If I'm not mistaken, Eupora is E-U-P-O-R-A, Mississippi.  And he was somewhere in the middle, I think, in terms of order.  Then he threw a succession of moving about, eventually moving up to Hayti, Missouri.  And I've heard stories about them living on different people's farms, like one doctor, a black doctor had a farm, and they lived on his farm for a while.  And then, they lived with somebody else's farm.  And then, they eventually moved up to Hayti.  Generally, in those days, people tended to cluster around other family members or nearby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there, are there any stories that are passed down through his side about life, you know, early on in the early part of the century or the--
Speaker 2: I don't remember any specific stories.  I remember my father used to talk about different stories and talk about his brothers and all when I was a little kid--talked about hoboing on, on the freight trains and all, which I though was exciting.  I always wanted to be a hobo on a train, catch a train, and go up some distant place.  It's just my version of running off to the circus.  But mainly that, you know, the work was hard, and that they chopped a lot of cotton, picked a lot of cotton--worked at the sawmill was one of the occupations.  And they'd always talked about wanting to go and pick fruit in the, in the winter time, when it was winter in Missouri, and going to other places like Florida to pick fruit.  Some of the men would go do that, I guess, like migrant workers.  And I always looked forward to--it seemed like such an adventurous thing to go do, but I never got a chance to go that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what was his full name and how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Boyd Johnson, B as in boy, -O-Y-D Johnson, although there's been some speculation that it was Voyd with a "V", but I always saw it as a "B".  And he always signed it--well, when he did sign his statement, he signed with a "B".
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know when he was born.  I think his birthday was January fifteenth.  I'm not certain of that.  I'm not sure he was certain of that.
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother?
Speaker 2: He was older than my mother.  He died in 1965 at about the age of fifty-four, fifty-five.  Nobody seems to know exactly how old he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was he like and, you know, what, what did he do in a--
Speaker 2: Well, he was certainly an entrepreneur, and he was a great provider for his family.  He picked cotton, pulled cotton, chopped cotton, cut down logs, cut down trees, and dragged them, would drag them back for wood when we couldn't afford to buy coal or, or oil.  He was creative.  He was a survivor.  And I remember once when the railroad track was--which was about two blocks from our house, when they were resurfacing the track, taking up the old cross tires, and they had them laid off to the side.  He and several other men in the community would gather together, and drag those heavy cross tires to a nearby ditch which was about fifty to seventy-five yards away.  And they would toss it in the ditch, and use some long poles to direct those cross tires and float them down river, or downstream to everybody's house.  And they pulled them out once they got to your house, and they crossed them in stacks and let them dry, so they could be used for firewood.  I thought that was pretty ingenuous.  And, you know, he knew how to handle heavy snow drifts and floods and leaks.  And one of the things that stand out that's really kind of miraculous to me is I can remember heavy windstorms, or a small hurricane was coming through.  And the tin roofs on the barns across the, across the road from us, were blowing off.  And the roofs were being snatched away with some of the roofing tile, and it was just this darkness, and it was thundering and lightning.  It was a heavy, heavy storm.  And he instructed us to open up the doors and roll, and raise the windows to the house--just a little bitty four, four-room living and four-room box house sitting up on, on some pyramid shape concrete blocks.  And so, we opened up the windows, and later found that what that allowed the wind to do was just to go right through, so it had no pressure against it.  And that way, we, we didn't have any windows knocked out, and we didn't have any damage done to the house.  I thought that was ingenious.
Story_ID: 192909
Speaker 1: He [Johnson's father, Boyd Johnson] was also very good at going into the woods and finding home remedies, picking plants that had medicinal value, things like mullein or a certain, certain pieces of, of tree trunks that he would cut off and make teas out of.  He was a very good cook.  He's had some of the best biscuits and cornbread that I've ever eaten.  He was a gardener.  He had a big family garden, probably about sixty feet long and about ten rows on it.  And he also made sure that the two youngest brothers, the two youngest kids, myself and my brother, had a garden.  We had a little small garden plot, probably about a six feet by four feet wide in, in depth and dimension.  And we raised everything from beans, corn, carrots, watermelon, squash, tomatoes, peas, and that's how we ate.  So, in effect, my early years, I just have pretty much a vegetarian then, and didn't know it since we couldn't afford meat.  We raised a few hogs and killed about one hog a year, once we fattened him up, and had a smokehouse in the back.  And that's how we had our meat, leave it in the smokehouse, heavily salted down.  And I used to love hog-killing time because that meant there was going to be fresh meat for, for months.  Otherwise, you only had meat on Sunday and that may be chicken.  Some of the chickens that we grew, or the neighbors grew, and we trade them out for something.  And, occasionally, we would have--we would go into town on Saturdays, and we'd have fish or hamburger.  And that was like our treat when we'd go into town every Saturday, get a haircut, and go to the stores, the local town square stores.  That was a regular routine so I always looked forward to that.  And, occasionally, we would go fishing, but I don't remember us catching any fish.  We caught a turtle once.  He cooked the turtle--first time I ever had turtle.  Yeah.  It took hours to cook that turtle, but--and he was a hunter.  We hunt for squirrel and rabbit and things like that.  So he was very versatile.
Speaker 2: Did he have a lot of dogs?
Speaker 1: No, we had one dog from time to time, but we never really had a family dog per se.  There would be some stray dog, just happen about and would hang out, but there was never like a family pet in those days.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And at that time, the people that hunt, you know, had a couple, a couple of dogs to raise, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.  We could have used them to keep away the snakes.  We had a lot of snakes around.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, yeah, sounds like your father was very resourceful and--
Speaker 1: Absolutely, very resourceful, very industrious.  I never saw him, you know, not working.  And I went to work with him on many a mornings, many a days, chopping cotton, watching him chop cotton while I wait, played, or brought water to the, to the field workers.  And then, as I got a little older, when I got to be about five or six years old, then I had my own cotton sack.  And I picked cotton right along beside him with my other younger brother.  In fact, the whole family worked together.  We all hit the fields.  Once you were about twelve or thirteen, you were old enough to chop cotton, but until then, just pick cotton, so I picked cotton and I pulled cotton.
Story_ID: 192910
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a story about why he ended up in Hayti, Missouri?
Speaker 2: Hayti?
Speaker 1: Hayti.
Speaker 2: I think he just happened to be where, where he could find a place to stay.  It's probably one of the relatives.  We had some relatives who were there, and I'm sure they probably told him to come up.  There's, there's work here or we got a place to stay.  There were relatives on my mother's side of the family who lived there.  She had a brother there.  And that's probably why they came up.
Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there a history of Hayti, Missouri that, that has been passed down?  The name is, I know, is the oldest spelling of the portion of the island of Haiti, 'cause the Indian name for the island of Haiti that the Hispaniola of the island that Columbus landed on way back when, and the scene of the, the only successful revolt of African slaves against the white masters in the revolt of Toussaint L'ouverture in 1791 when they took over.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I also noted black communities all around the country, you know, after 1791, black neighborhoods in cities like Pittsburgh in black communities called Hayti, H-A-Y-T-I.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: And other, other cities, too, have similar designation.  The white community sometime will call it Little Haiti or little Africa.
Speaker 2: And they pronounce it Haiti?
Speaker 1: Haiti.  And sometimes they pronounce it Hayti, depending on how they could pronounce.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the name that we now know is H-A-I-T-I was some that is, was often spelled in those days, H-A-Y-T-I, and that's the way it's spelled in Pittsburgh and in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know where that name came from or why they named it that, but I'm, I'm sure it wasn't named after any blacks.  Well, I can't say for sure, but I just know that--
Speaker 1: Is the population mostly black in Hayti?
Speaker 2: No, the population is mostly white.  The--it was segregated.  There was--once you cross the railroad tracks, you were in the white part of Hayti, and on the other side was the black part of Hayti.  And then years later, when I was growing up there, the population was 6,841.  And I remember distinctly because of the Highway 84 was where they had the one sign that had the population.  Highway 84 and Highway 61 intersected there.  They were the big highways, and we'd see all the trucks.  And 61 was the famous north/south route that later became Interstate 55, but it's still the route or the heart of the Delta in the South.  And a lot of the civil rights transactions and events took place on Highway 61.  And 84 split the city, and one part of the city was called the North Heights, and the other part was the South Heights.  And Interstate or Highway 84 split the North/South Heights and later that turned into Hayti Heights.  And the city kind of divided a way or they, I guess, succeeded, and more or less turned the black part of Hayti into the City of Hayti Heights, Missouri.  And then, they elected their own mayor who was a former bus driver at my high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It is interesting about how--I just wondered how that, you know, that name being a--I know it's a historical link.  I don't know what the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the founders intended, but that was some historical link to that name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have no idea who the founders were.
Story_ID: 192911
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about growing up.  You've told us some things already, but we always ask people to describe the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, growing up in, in Hayti, most of the, the sights and sounds were rural sounds.  The sounds I remember most are the early morning sounds.  I mean, early morning sounds, like 3:30, 4:30 in the morning, and the late night sounds.  The early morning sounds were the sounds of trucks and buses preparing for the field hands that they would go and pick up.  I could hear all--we, we lived about two miles outside of downtown, and about a mile from the Heights, from Interstate 84, mile, mile, and a half.  But because there were no trees and nothing to block, no buildings to block, just open farmland, just flat open, the sound carried.  I could hear all the way downtown, for instance, to the zoo.  I could hear the lion roaring.  I could hear the sound of different individual buses and trucks that belonged to some of the straw bosses that took the field hands to, to the field every day.  We could hear certain people's trucks.  We knew the engine sounds.  And we knew when, when they were--you could almost tell when they were around in certain communities.  So he's over by Miss so-and-so's house now.  Well, I hear he's a couple of streets over.  And the other sound was the sound of the, the ice machine.  There was a huge ice machine in front of one of the stores, of the Curtis Stores.  The Curtis family was white family owned--much of--a lot of Hayti and, and also the Turnage family.  But in front of Curtis Store, which is the big supermarket nearest us, there was a big ice machine which looks like a storage house.  It's like a house somebody would have in their backyard, a storage facility, but it had two chutes.  One dispensed block ice, a big block of ice, and the other dispensed crushed ice, if I'm not mistaken.  Well, every morning, one of the last stops that the buses or the trucks would make would be to the ice house.  And they had these tall igloos and these were the, the round igloos which most people never, probably have never seen in their life, but they could fit a block of ice into that igloo.  And then they would put water on it, and that, that would supply the water for the field hands all day long.  If it was a lot of field hands, like it was a bus, then they would get two or three blocks of ice.  And then, they would have some crushed ice as well.  But I remember that sound, 'cause you could hear that sound, that block of ice coming down the chute, you know, and the way it come there, and that was always great.  And they would pick it up with a big ice pick, ice gauge clamp, and then drop it down into the bucket, and then they'd roll on.  And you could hear the sound of farm tools, like hoes being inserted into the side of the buses.  It was like a railing that went along the top of the windows.  And the, the hoes would hook into that railing, and then the handle part of the hoes would just hang down below the windows.  So all these sounds, like I said, the early in the morning, the sound of the lion roaring in the zoo, and then at night, the sound of the crickets, the sound of the wind blowing.  We lived around the woods in a wooded area--frogs, all those kind of animal sounds at night.  It was very dark.  There were no lights.  I remember seeing bats flying back and forth.  I was afraid of bats.  There were only two houses in my immediate area within view.  And one set diagonally across, she was the landlady, and that's, that was the most immediate family that we interacted with.
Story_ID: 192912
Speaker 1: All right.  You had talked, talking about some of the sights and sights and smells.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were talking about your neighbors, the one, two houses that were adjacent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one house across from us diagonally.  That was the closest house probably for six or seven, about a half mile.  We had to go across the road to track, and then there were only three houses.  Most of the houses were spread out about a half mile or mile apart and this was the closest house diagonally.  There was a female head of the household.  She was--I don't even know much about her husband.  I know he died.  And she raised several sons, three sons, a couple of daughters, but most of them were grown by the time that I came long.  I think there were only about two still living with her.  And then they eventually went off to the service.  And then she had four granddaughters that would come every summer to stay with her.  And that was always a big fun 'cause there was, those were our playmates.  They were our age group, the first females that I ever knew and ever been around was her granddaughter, the Williams, family daughters, granddaughters.  But I, I can remember the sound of the railroad train, that the train coming down the railroad, which was, like I said, about two blocks from the house.  And the train would come by--I think about three or four times a day.  Well, we could time things by when the train came by.  We had a train--the last one at night and say, ohh, it's, must be about seven, seven-thirty.  We just heard that last train come through.  And then as this, as the city wound down, it was more the animalistic sounds, the sound of the farm animals that she kept, our landlady kept.  She had a cow, a couple of pigs, and some hogs, and chickens.  And she, at one time, she even had a turkey.  And then there was a guinea that flew back and forth which I was frightened of.  The turkey used to scare me and run me in and have me up on the fence, you know.  But it was all this navigating of, of these farm animals, the sights, sounds, navigating snakes.  They were everywhere.  Just the elements, it was danger all around, but we, we didn't really see it.  Then there were--she had some dogs and it was always being puppies born.  I guess the thing that I remember most about growing up in Hayti [Missouri] in those first eight and a half years was that there was always something blossoming.  There was always something unfolding.  There was always something new.  There was always an adventure.  And our landlady was into flowers and she had a hotbed.  So I learned about chrysanthemum, chrysanthemums, and all the different flowers and, you know, lilies and things like that, and snow on the mountain, different plants, and could--identified them and knew their, the seeds.  And I knew the composition and, and the structure of the--I knew a lot about trees then.  My father would take us walking through the woods or we walked everywhere.  We never had a car.  And downtown was two miles away.  The quickest way was to take the railroad tracks so we always walked the railroad track most places we went.  We went to school--we walked the railroad tracks if we missed the school bus.  But as we walked on the railroad tracks, we would--it was an adventure.  We were picking up rocks and throwing them in, in the lakes and ditches, and letting the rocks skip across.  We passed the cemetery on the way to, to the downtown area.  And there would always be box cars parked.  As we got closer in towards downtown, we used to climb the box cars.  My daddy used to love to do that and jumped from car to car.  And that was always a little frightening for me 'cause my legs were kind of small.  And he'd say, just jump, jump on--this, the gap was probably only about, I don't know, three feet wide, but it looked like an eternity to me, you know.  But that was fun walking on top of the box cars, and then climbing back down.  And sometimes the box cars would be open.  You'd see hobos laying in their sleep.
Story_ID: 192913
Speaker 1: But all those things--constantly being on the lookout for snakes around your feet, all kinds of snakes, water moccasins, snapping snakes, king snakes, chicken snakes, lizards, a lot of lizards, green snakes.  You know, some snakes, you just kinda knocked out of the way, and get on out of the way, little bitty snake, you're not poisonous, you know.  So you learn which ones are poisonous, which ones to fear.  My brothers would catch them.  And there was a superstition if you caught a, a snake, and turned him over on his belly and put him on the, on sticks, or put him on a rack, or hung him up with the belly up, that, that would cause it to rain, things like that.  That was probably the most frightening thing growing up as a kid.  We eventually found snakes in the house.  We grew up with snakes in the house.  When we'd do spring cleaning, you'd find that there's some snake has shed its skin underneath your bed.  I mean, said they were living right in there.  And I swear to this day that one crawled over me while I was sleeping on a pallet.  My younger brother and I slept on a pallet most of the time.  It's--
Speaker 2: Right, right on the floor.
Speaker 1: Right on the floor in a couple of, of blankets and quilts.  We only had three beds in the house.  My daddy had a bed.  My, my oldest brother had like a twin bed to himself.  And then there was, I guess, a standard size bed that my two oldest--well, my second oldest and third oldest brother, there was their bed that they shared.  So my brother that was immediately older than I was, two years older than I, he and I usually slept on the floor.  And as long it was, the temperature was, you know, fairly decent, and even in the winter time sometimes, when it got really cold, then the four of us would just sleep in that one wider bed, you know, two at the foot and two at the head.  And that was always fun and chaos, you know.  But, you know, we, for entertainment, we, we would shoot the rats or the mice that would run back and forth from hoe to hoe.  We'd shoot them with BB guns.  So that was some of the sights and sounds that I remember most--and raking the yards, and the sounds of the rakes, the little tin rakes, the ones with the sort of spidery-like composition.  We always had to rake up the, the chicken refuse, if you will.  And we did that for our landlady 'cause she had a lot of chickens around.  And she would always be feeding the chicks and they'd be baby chicks.  It seems like there were baby everythings around.  I remember playing with little baby chicks, and I remember the soft fur that's about them and how delicate they were, and how ferocious the, the hens would protect those baby chicks.  And those baby chicks would just be trekking right behind, and they chirp-chirp-chirp, just chirping right behind them.  And if you came near them--we, we knew not to go near baby chicks or baby birds or, or baby kittens, or baby puppies, or baby piglets.  You don't go near no babies once, you know, if the mother is still around.  You always were very cautious of that.  I remember raise--getting up early in the morning and rushing over to the garage at my landlady's house.  In her garage was essentially a chicken coop.  There were several chickens.  And we would go around and stick our hand over in, in the basket underneath the hens, and get the eggs.  We would pick the eggs in, in the morning.  And she would give us money for that, or she would give us candy.  And, you know, we could have gotten easily bit by snakes, 'cause there were chicken snakes in there, but we'd get those hens out of the way, grab the eggs up.  And sometimes you would awaken and see this fresh litter of puppies, and, and I can remember the smell of, of puppies.  They had a curious kind of smell about the--and their eyes would not quite open.  They're just barely open.  And, but you had to be careful because if that mother dog was still around, she would growl at you.  And I can remember the, the mother dog being weighted down prior to having those, those babies.  And just the sight of that, or the sight of cows when we would milk them in the afternoon.  I would go out with my landlady, and she would milk the cows and that was always a, a unique thing to watch because it was a technique to it.  I never could quite grasp that technique.  You had to kinda grab on to the, to the teats, and pull and squeeze at the same time, and make sure you weren't behind the cow, but on the side of the cow, so you didn't get kicked.  A lot of hay, we were always putting hay into the barn or, or raking up hay.  So I grew up around a lot of physical things, alfalfa, Johnsongrass, which has a real sharp razor edge to it.  If you ever try to get rid of Johnsongrass, you know you had to be careful.  You'd pull on it, you'd cut your hands.
Story_ID: 192914
Speaker 1: So, every element of my early childhood was about life's consequences.  There was, there was a consequence to every action.  It was almost like Isaac Newton's third law of motion--for every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction.  And you grew up knowing what were the pros and cons of your actions.  If you did this, you were in harm's way for this.  You knew not--I mean, we walked around barefooted all the time, so you knew when you were walking barefooted--be careful where you stepped, and not stand into, or wade into shallow water, particularly in the ditches because there were a lot of broken bottles there.  And you'd get your feet cut.  You knew not to ride your bicycle on loose gravel 'cause that's where'd you fall.  And I fell and injured myself and end up on crutches because of a bike accident, riding behind my third oldest brother.  That was traumatic because I end up on, on crutches for a while.  But the crutches were made out of a old ironing board that my dad had tooken and cut down the size.  And if you think about it, the legs on an ironing board are really like two sets of crutches.  And I remember the, the chickens used to come and, and pick at my, my sore ankles, and I had to run them away.  But, eventually, that healed and I was back on the bike.  So everything had its, its ups and downs and its pros and cons, so you just live within those boundaries, but your sense of perception of your environment was very keen.  You're in tune to the smells of things, to the sounds of things.  I could smell rain when it was coming.  I could visually identify all kind of animals, all type of trees, all type of plant vegetation.  You know, I could tell whether it was a wheat field being planted, or where the soybean is being planted, or corn being planted before it came up, or cotton, with driving it thirty-five, forty-five miles an hour past it.  I could see it.  And those are the sights.  There was a beautiful time in springtime when the planters would plan the fields.  And, and every season had its visual distinction, not just from the physicality of the seasons themselves, when the changes of the trees and the leaves and things, but from what took place in the neighborhood, the environment.  And that usually revolved around the agricultural environment, the planting season, you know, the harvesting season.  And with the planting season, they lay those rows out, and those tractors, six and eight rows at a time.  The plows would plow those tractor driven fields, or they would be so orderly.  And I just loved it.  It, it was like the cornrow of somebody's hairstyle, but it was just smoothly laid out, and the contours and the rolling hills which would be so beautiful.  And as those plants came up and you got those tall stalks of corn or cotton or soybean, that was always beautiful.  And we watched it, the tractors plant for days, and it turned around at the end, and go back down.  And then, later on, you see this, the spraying.  They would either spray from the tractors to kill the, you know, the vegetation or the weeds that were coming up, or some of the animals that would, that would--the boll weevils that would be eating up the cotton plants.  And then, you see the, the overhead sight of the crop dusters, the small airplanes scooping in, and coming down as low as a hundred feet from the ground.  And then, they'd fly and turn around and come back down.  And the sound of a distant airplane always stuck in my mind.  The crop dusters often to the--it was, it was a lonely sound, but a serene sound.  And even to this day, when I drive across the country, I'm always taken by the, the beautiful symmetry in the order in this of the fields--the way they're laid out, and the long arms of the irrigation equipment.  They would roll those long arm irrigation equipment out there and drag them.  You'd see the water coming up out of them in the evening time.  And then, of course, when you got into the middle of the summer, people started picking cotton, so now you'd have a burst of color.  You'd not only have the green plants, but then you got the white puffs of cotton and, and the brown bolls and watching them open up, and every day something blossoming.
Story_ID: 192915
Speaker 1: Now you seemed to develop quite a capacity for detail and appreciation for, you know, the, the visual symmetry and the textures of things around you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you went to--do you look back on that now and see this is the beginning of your career as an artist, as a photographer?
Speaker 2: I think it definitely was very instrumental in my visual dexterity and appreciation for details beyond a doubt.
Speaker 1: And were, were you unique, do you think, for someone in your age group at, at that time to, to pay attention to such detail?
Speaker 2: You know, that's a good question.  I don't know, but I never heard anybody else talk about it.  But back then, I didn't talk about it--I just observed it.  In those days, particularly, you know, kids were meant to be seen and not heard.  And so, I internalized a lot of thoughts.  It's like writing an encyclopedia, but never publishing it.  And so, all those thoughts in my head, and they had been there just collecting more volumes.  And I never really went back to, quote-unquote, edit those volumes or to review the tape.  And so, I didn't really know what I knew until somebody would raise a question or jog my memory, or we would go back to a family reunion, or go to a funeral.  And that was usually the case--you go to a funeral, and that's usually when you found out more about your history.  You'd hear people talking across generational lines.  And they would be reminiscing about different relatives or incidents that took place, and you'd sit and listen.  That's mainly how I learned is to listen and I learned to be a good listener.  And I tried to remember as many details as possible by who did what, when, and it sometimes takes decades to get the correct version.  You hear the story told two or three different ways about how your uncle died, and you'd think it one way.  Yeah, you know, your uncle, he got drunk, and fell dead and froze to death, and he was up by, by the highway.  And then somebody else said, well, no, he was out in the fields.  And somebody else said, no, he was across the street, from--no, he was two blocks down the street from the house.  He'd almost made it back to the house.  And so, finally, you know, some forty years later, you, you find out the real deal of how somebody died, or how somebody lived, or come to find out that so and so wasn't really their child, or Miss such-and-such wasn't really married to Mr.so-and-so.  They just lived together.  And that this person really wasn't your aunt.  You just called them that.
Story_ID: 192916
Speaker 1: A lot of, of life in those days was about extended family.  It was about survival and it was about teamwork.  If you had a scrap of food, then you had something to share with others.  And it was, it was teamwork even when the men--when we had a hog killing, when we killed a hog, those hogs were sometimes five or six hundred pounds.  And you could not string a hog up and kill a hog by yourself.  So what would happen was you'd set a date--four or five men would come up to the house.  And you'd select a hog you're going to kill.  And they would usually either hit him in the head with a hammer, or shoot him in the head with a, with the rifle.  And once the hog was, was definitely dead, they would drag him out and string him up.  We had a large tree in our yard, and they would string him up, upside down, tie his legs together.  And they would build a big fire, and take one of those big, I don't know, sixty-gallon drums, and fill it up with hot water.  And then they would drop him down in there, and that would scald all the hair off.  And then, they would take him to the slaughter house and then get him cut up.  They would cut him down to smaller pieces.  And then, the, you know, the butchers would, would cut him down to smaller pieces.  And then they would divide some of the pieces up with some of the men that helped.  And then we'd take and cut those pieces down, and put it in a long wooden trough, you know, almost like about a casket size and fill that up with salt.  And it'd be layers of salt, layers of meat, layers of salt, layers of meat.  And then some of the meat, we would hang up on the rafters in the smokehouse.  And then we'd just cure, which I thought was very strange, 'cause it seemed like the meat would spoil, but it didn't.  It would just sit there for months.  And even though there were rats and rodents and things around, and snakes in the smokehouse, too, they never delved into all that salt.  I guess the salt deterred them.  I thought that was pretty fascinating because nobody had refrigerators in those days, or certainly not large enough to keep a lot of meat.  So when we needed meat, we would go to the smokehouse, and get a segment, say, a, a leg or something or, or a piece of ham, and come in and cut that down, and then cook that.  And a lot of times in the summer time, we cooked outside.  We'd build a small fire, have a big black ten-inch cast iron skillets--all the skillets were cast iron, and big black kettles or big pots that we cooked in.  People cooked outside--I remember cooking outside.  I remember cutting firewood down because if you didn't have coal to burn and we didn't have gas stoves.  It--I didn't get a gas stove until probably about six months before my dad died.  And so, we had to build a fire--everything you did, you had to build a fire.  If you wanted to take a bath, you had to build a fire.  If you wanted to heat bath water, if you wanted to wash your clothes, you had to build a fire, heat some water.  And first, you got to go get the water.  We had a pump in the backyard.  And as long as it wasn't frozen, then you could just go and pump the water, and then put that pail of water over fire and heat the water, and then put into a number five or a number three tub.  And that's how we heated our water and cooked by.
Story_ID: 192917
Speaker 1: Now, what you experienced growing up was already something that a lot of black folks had relegated to the generation before (unclear).  I mean, as farm life began to like kinda die off, you know, like in the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --black folks' experiencing that life in, in a rural setting like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I caught that tail end of that.  My brother said I had it easy, so I only, I only lived that existence for eight years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And most people your age, their, their parents had experienced that, but they usually [were] raised in a more urban setting--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because people migrated out of the South, but you experienced a lot of things.  A lot of people your age have not.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I often felt like a relic in, in the classrooms, and particularly when we moved to Memphis [Tennessee] because of the experiences I had were more akin to the experiences that my peers--parents--had had, and even, even harder than some of their parents had had.  Their parents had never known the kind of experiences that I had of washing clothes on the back of the porch on a square board, hanging them up on the lines outside, and using a, a tree trunk to tighten up the pole lines, the clothing lines.
Speaker 1: And now, tell us about school now.  You, you started school in Hayti [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I suppose.  What, what was, what was the name of your school and how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved the school.  It was, it was a Hayti Negro School [later Hayti Central High School, Hayti, Missouri], and it went from first grade to twelfth grade.  There were--so I recall about three main buildings on the, on the site.  It seems like there were, there was an elementary building.  All these were--all the elementary buildings were one story.  And the secondary education was one story.  Then the high school part was a two-story building, but they were "L" shaped buildings.  The elementary part was "L" shaped.  And they had a playground in the middle, small playground in the middle.  And then, there was a shop, like a woodshop, a mechanical shop on the, on the site in the middle.  And then the high school was a two-story, just a straight long building.  And then be, there was a gymnasium at the beginning of the site when you first come on to the campus.  And then in the back was a baseball field.  And across from the high school on one side, there was two stores.  I want to, I would say two juke joints.  They weren't really stores.  They were places that sold hamburgers, hot dogs, drinks, potato chips, sodas, things like that where kids would go off campus, across the street, and, and buy some food.  And we would go there, and I had a budget of ten cents, a dime for lunch.  And for a dime, I could buy, I could buy a big rainbow soda for seven cents and some six cookies, which were two for a penny at that time, or some combination thereof.  And somebody else would buy some potato chips, and you just kind of trade off.  That's about all we ate.  The hot lunch at the school cafeteria was fifteen cents, if I'm not mistaken.  And they had those, smart--small four-ounce cartons of milk for, I think, two cents and three cents, and eventually went to four cents.  The white milk, I think, was three cents, and the chocolate milk was four cents.  So, every now and then, you, you might have a hot lunch once or twice a month, and that was always good.  My aunt worked at the cafeteria there.  So if we did have a hot lunch, we went through when she was on the server line.  You, you'd get some larger portions.  But most of the time, we, we bought our lunch, and that consisted of some cookies, some snacks, and a soda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you do in the classroom?  I mean, do you remember any of your teachers or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember all my teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have all my report cards except my eleventh grade card and I remember the teachers were very good.  I had Miss Jones [ph.], my first grade teacher.  Her husband was the barber in town.  I called him Barber Shop Jones, but Mr. Jones, the barber, cut our hair all, all those years.  And I remember him because he was a man of character and dignity, didn't allow any profanity in his shop.  And it was very clean, very neat, and orderly.  She was a short woman, sort of stout, but very kind.  My second grade teacher was, was Miss Philips [ph.], and when Miss Philips went on--I think she might have had a medical leave of absence--and Miss Hicks substituted for her.  I've seen been in touch with Miss Jones and Miss Philips who now lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  We've communicated.  My third grade teacher was Miss Peterson [ph.].  She had freckles, a nice looking young woman.
Story_ID: 192918
Speaker 1: And after the third grade, the summer between my third and fourth grade, that's when we moved to Memphis [Tennessee] after my father died.  But I was in the process of getting ready to transfer to the integrated school, the integration to the white school.  The integration, it finally made its way to Hayti [Missouri] in 1965, and the court ordered desegregation was about to be implemented.  So we had a choice of either staying at the black school, or going over to the white school.  And I decided to go to the white school and I went over there for one day of like a trial run.  I didn't really like it.  I, I thought that they had a better playground.  They had nice facilities and everything, but it was stricter.  The teachers were a lot stricter.  And they were not as kind, they were not as kind.
Speaker 2: How did the students treat you?
Speaker 1: The students treated me fine, I mean, and kids are basically kids.  What was interesting about that one-day experiment--and it, it's also ironic and interesting that my dad let me decide, you know, at eight years old that I wanted to, to go to this school and not the school that I had been in for the first three years, that he would leave the decision up to me.  But I think I remember I met a couple of kids there.  And one said his name was Robert, but I could call him Bob.  And another said his name was William but, but everybody called him Bill.  And I couldn't understand that.  If your name is William, why are they calling you Bill?  If your name is Robert, why do they call him Bob?  And, of course, years later, you learn that those are just sort of acronyms or nicknames for those names.  I thought that was very interesting.  And when the bell rung at recess, there was no lingering.  I mean, the teachers really got after you.  They wanted you back in the building like right now, so I thought that was pretty tense.
Story_ID: 192919
Speaker 1: Well, how did you do in school?  Did, did teachers like you or and, and did you do well?
Speaker 2: I did well at school.  I made almost all As and Bs.  In fact, I don't think I made a C in school until probably the ninth grade, or maybe the eighth grade, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In grade school, I mean, what were your favorite subjects in grade school?
Speaker 2: In grade school, I, I loved everything, social studies, math, I excelled at that, English.  I loved everything.  And I had a good conduct, "very goods" and "goods".  In those days, they grade you on "good, very good", and I think conduct was "excellent" or "satisfactory" or "needs improvement".  And I had "very goods" and "goods" in all those.  And the comments on the report card was that I finished my work and, you know, I kept my mouth closed most of the time, that kind of thing.  So I enjoyed school a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you, were you, or did they cut the school year down from black students, you know, so they could, they could do things like pick cotton and--
Speaker 2: Right.  Our schools started a little later after the, the cotton season, so we started in September and probably was mid- to late September.  I don't know the exact date, but I'm sure it was after the harvesting season.  That was the standard then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they, they didn't do the same thing for the white students, right?  They, they--
Speaker 2: I, I don't--
Speaker 1: I, I've heard of some communities that white students have, have a standard school year--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but the black students, they cut it down a little bit so they could help with cotton--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know what the school year was like for the white students, to be honest with you.  I started school at five, and because my birthday is in November and the school year started in September, so they let me start a couple of months early because I was pretty good in the subject matters until they felt that I could keep up, rather than making me wait a whole another year and starting at six, almost seven.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any, any favorite books or anything that you read when you were a--
Speaker 2: None that I remember.  I remember reading books about characters like Rusty.  It was always pictures of white kids in the books.  And there were no black books that I read in, in my elementary years that, that I can recall.  Stories like, you know, "Tar Paper" and "Brer Rabbit", you know, was a bit disturbing, didn't quite know why, but there was certainly nothing positive.  The "Jane and Dick and Spot" books, old books handed down.  I do remember pictures from some of those books showing workers, mechanical workers, like building buildings and row graders and, and dump trucks, things like that.  I thought was very interesting, fascinating, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your books like hand-me-downs from the white schools.  Did they--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sure they were, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, for those three years that I was in Hayti [Missouri], I would probably say that Miss Jones, my first grade teacher, yeah.
Story_ID: 192920
Speaker 1: Now when you were eight years old, your father [Boyd Johnson] died, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that.  Now, how, how did you find out and what happened?  Were, were, were you expecting it?
Speaker 2: No, no, he died of a heart attack.  My father died of a heart attack in the summer of '65 [1965] while we were out for the school about three weeks, about a month before school was to start back up.  And it was just a routine Saturday.  The night before, he had said that, he reminded us to get up the next morning, which would have been Saturday morning, and get the clothes washed and hang them up.  And he always gave us our marching orders for our chores.  And, at that time, my oldest brother had been badly burned in, in a fire at the white school.  They had been painting, and somehow the paint ignited and it caught on fire and it, it end up having to run to the doctor's office downtown.  I don't know how, how much, I guess, over thirty percent of his body may have been burned or something like that.  And so, that was very traumatic, so he was in the hospital at that time.  So it was just four of us left at the house, my two oldest brothers, and my brother next to me.  And that Saturday morning, we got up and we noticed that our dad wasn't anywhere inside or wasn't around, but that wasn't unusual 'cause he took walks sometimes, or he would go into the woods or, or, you know, go somewhere.  See, people disappeared for hours and for half a day, you thought nothing of it because people are walking.  And the terrain was so wide and so vast, but nobody ever really got concerned about that.  But after he didn't return by midday, then we got concerned about where he was, and we started looking around.  And our house, it wasn't on a hill, but there was a, there was a dip as you walked out the back.  First of all, the fields came all the way up to our yard.  And it was just enough room for the tractors to turn around, so if you can imagine these rows and rows of cotton or wheat or, or soy beans coming up to our backyard all up to our garden.  Then there was a dip in which you cannot really see paths, this area that lead towards the woods because the ground was not flat.
Speaker 1: So somewhere around midday or midafternoon, my third oldest brother, if I recall, went walking and, and discovered my dad laying dead at the end of the field, at the end of the rows.  And we called us, and all of us, you know, gathered around him and, and I remember distinctly that there was a dog, some kind of stray dog I had never seen before, sitting at the end of the row almost like on guard, kind of a white grayish-looking dog, I believe.  And I can remember my second oldest brother turning my dad over, and his eyes were still open, and he closed his eyes.  And I can remember ants crawling around on his face and, and dirt and dust where he fell.  And so, we called--our landlady was not in.  She was not home.  I think she had gone to St. Louis [Missouri] to visit her kids.  And so, there was no adults around.  My oldest brother at home at that time, I think, was fifteen.  And I don't remember, I don't know, we flagged somebody down 'cause we had no transportation.  In some kind of way, we got word to the, I guess, to the, maybe the funeral home, and they came out and, and then picked up the body.  In a week's time, our life had changed.
Speaker 2: So, you all had to--there's a funeral, of course, and then--
Speaker 1: There's a funeral the following Saturday.  Relatives came in from Memphis [Tennessee], St. Louis [Missouri], Mississippi.  And then, there was this--my oldest brother was in the hospital in Memphis at that time, which is the next nearest city, ninety miles away.  And I had gone with my father to, to move him from the local hospital to Memphis where he could get more specialized care about his burns.  I had ridden in the ambulance with my oldest brother and my father to Memphis to take him to John Gaston Hospital [closed, Memphis, Tennessee].  So he was in the hospital when he--and I don't remember how he heard about it or who he heard from--there was a decision that we could no longer remain intact as a family.  So a couple of aunts and uncles on my father's side said they would take two kids.  And a couple of aunts and uncles on my mother's side would take two kids.  So two went to my mother's side of the family, and two went with my father's side of the family.  And the two went to St. Louis, two went to Memphis.  And they asked me, you know, where did I want to go and I, I said I was going where my third oldest brother, John, was going.  I was--felt closest to him 'cause he had more or less been my caregiver over the years, and then taught me a lot.  And in those days, the, the older kid sort of adopted one of the younger kids and took him under the wings and was responsible for them, that kind of thing, so I gravitated more towards him.
Story_ID: 192921
Speaker 1: So he [Johnson's older brother, John Johnson] and I went to Memphis [Tennessee], and we stayed with my grandmother.  That's how we end up in Memphis.  And two weeks later, we were in school.  It was like a whirlwind.  You, you leave one environment.  And I was, you know, initially destined to go to this newly integrated white school downtown in Hayti [Missouri], and now to end up at a black school, a couple of blocks over from my grandmother's house--new system of learning, new ways of filling out answers, new instruction books, just everything new.  It's almost like going and learning a new language in a sense because of moving from, not only that instructional difference, but from rural to urban.  It was a big difference.  And I was like a country bumpkin, you know--knew none of the ways of the city.  I went from taking a bath in the, you know, a round number five tub to now taking a bath in a real bathtub with soap, as opposed to washing powder or, or lye soap that, that we made or somebody else made to real packaged soap.  Yeah, it took--actually having a bathtub indoors, as opposed to having grown up with bathrooms outdoors, outhouses, running water indoors, a sink indoors.  It was miraculous changes.  It was like moving from a Motel 6 to the Waldorf Astoria in terms of the differences of amenities.  There are stores nearby that you could walk to, downtown that I could actually see from my grandmother's house.  It was about two miles away and about the same distance away as to downtown in Hayti, but much different--we're talking skyscrapers and we're talking Mississippi River being within walking distance of my grandmother's house.  Interstates being built, eight-lane highways, it's just a miraculous difference.  Even though her community was like a small town environment with older shotgun houses, older citizens that looked out for each other.  And so, it was a good cocoon, a good midpoint, so I wasn't thrown into the heart of the, you know, the urban situation.  It was--still had a small town feel because of the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 192922
Speaker 1: What do you remember, I guess, the most about your grandmother [Dora Chamberlain] in terms of her--
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the physicalness.  She walked with a limp.  She had had a stroke, and as long as I knew her, because I had came, come up to visit on at least two other occasions with my dad and my brothers, we would visit.  I think we'd come up about once a year to Memphis [Tennesssee].  And so, I knew her.  We had taken pictures with her before.  I knew she was old, old beyond anybody that I've ever seen.  I mean, gray hair, frail body.  She was small, probably about 5'2", wore a lot of flowery dresses, flowery patterns, very neat, neat, shotgun house.  She had a garden on the side.  She had a decent sized plot of land.  She taught me how to sow mustard seeds and, and for greens, for growing greens, and how to properly water the yard and things like that.  So, again, that nurturing and that agricultural development continued.  She wasn't really into flowers as I recall, but we'd cut the grass or push more, and she had, I think she had a rose bush that grew.  But she loved that garden, but you could also tell if she was walking because she kinda drugged her foot and walked with a limp.  And so, you always knew when she was coming through the house.  And it was a, a simple house with a bathroom, kitchen, middle room, and a front room.  And there were beds in the--there was a bed in the front room and in the middle room.  Of course, everybody had a bed in the front room in those days.  It wasn't really called a living room.  It was called a front room 'cause it was a room up front.  And you'd always have to make your bed up immediately every morning before company came.  And you'd always have to wait every night for company to leave before you could go to bed because your bed was in the living room or in the front bed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now had you--did you have like television out in the country when you were out there or did--
Speaker 2: We had television.  I think we had a television in 1963, I believe we got a television.  We had an antenna on, on the top of the house and the roof of the house.
Speaker 1: I mean, in, in the country prior to your moving up--
Speaker 2: Yes, this is in Hayti [Missouri], we had a TV.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: So we would watch the typical shows, the "Ed Sullivan Show", "Shindig", "Hullabaloo".  We watched "Walter Cronkite".  My dad didn't care too much for "Huntley-Brinkley Report".  We'd always turn off that.  We always were "Walter Cronkite" fans.  And the "ABC News" at that time did not have a major news, evening news, so we watched that.  It was ironic, as I think back, because some years later, I would end up working with David Brinkley and helped launch his show for "ABC Network News".  I thought that was ironic, how our paths crossed, after sitting and watching him on TV [television].  And I remember learning of the Civil Rights Movement through television, learning of President [John F.] Kennedy's assassination in seeing that repeated, watching that funeral procession, everything that led up to it.  The good thing about, while I was in Hayti, was that I was always with my dad.  So for the years, even though we only had him for a short period of time, there was a lot of quality time there because we spent practically all day and all, and I was almost inseparable.  And while, since I was the youngest, when the older kids were going to school, I was there with him.  And every morning we had our routine of sweeping, dusting, and washing dishes, and cleaning up the kitchen, and then going and find something to, to cook, either putting on the beans, or starting the cornbread, or going out finding some wild berries, to come back and make our pies.  And with my grandmother, because she didn't work, she was there all the time, so you'd leave, go to school, which was two blocks away, and you'd come back, and she would be there and she would cook.  And so, there was always this close-knitness that was always a, a continuity with the people that you were staying with, you know, they weren't latchkey kids in those days.  And so, that was good.  There was always someone around.  She had a telephone.  It was a party line, you know.  WHitehall was the prefix, WHitehall-8.  I think it was, WHitehall-8-3411 was the phone number, I believe.  And so, when you needed to use the phone, and you'd pick up the phone, you always had to listen to make sure no one else was on the party line.  On the party line, I think there were about four other people that shared that phone line.  And she would always tell you, don't, don't listen long.  Just find out if somebody on, and put the phone back down, don't be eavesdropping.  But when you really need the phone, 'cause emergency, you know, and tell the person who was on, 'cause you recognize their voice, excuse me, Miss Jones, we need to call our cousin in Grenada [Mississippi] or, or St. Louis [Missouri], emergency call.  Okay, we'll be off in a minute, and they would get off the phone.  And that was, that seems to be so ancient now.  You, you can't even, you don't even think about having a phone line that you were paying for that you had to share with four other people--had to wait till they get off the phone before you could pick up the phone and start a conversation.  Yeah, that's funny.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at different time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But she, she loved to, she, she had chickens, my grandmother had chickens.  That was the only farm [unclear].  She didn't have any dogs or pets.
Speaker 1: Did many people, people have chickens in Memphis and, and other [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Yes, in those days, in the sixties [1960s], they did.  And then, I don't know whether they passed some city ordinance or whether the people just phased it out, but probably after sixty-nine [1969], and you wouldn't see any more chickens in people's yards unless they were far out into the rural area of Memphis.  But up until that time, people raised chickens to supplement their food 'cause they had very little income.
Story_ID: 192923
Speaker 1: Now, did you see the March on Washington on television when you were--
Speaker 2: I did, yes, in--the famous '63 [1963] March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, did you have a sense that you were living in the South, and people were--they have a lot--I mean, the place where a lot of the struggle in Civil Rights was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, absolutely.  I had a great sense, a keen sense that, you know, history is being made, that it was a change coming.  One of my favorite songs during that time was Sam Cooke, "A Change is Gonna Come".  And the Memphis [Tennessee] period of my life was very much driven by the sounds, the musical sounds, the sounds of recording artists, listen to the DJs [disc jockeys] from WDIA [radio station, Memphis, Tennessee], the first black-oriented radio station in the nation.  And I felt like I was on the--as I look back now, I was on the cusp of a, of a major trend in, in history-setting place.  I was in the right place at the right time in, in many ways.  It was the crossroads because people would stop off in Memphis before they headed down South--engage in civil rights protests.  I had cousins from Greenwood, Mississippi, and Greenville [Mississippi], and other parts of Mississippi who were involved with the marching.  And they would come up and stop over and tell us about what was going on, you know, how they were out of school, marching and protesting.  It sound so exciting at that time to me, and I couldn't wait till I got old enough to go and protest and march.  And there were demonstrations at the local high school when I was in elementary.  And the kids would come across the, the grounds of the elementary school on the way home after protests.  And we could see them and we could hear what was going on.  And that was always exciting and interesting, boycotts, and all that was taking place 'cause we're talking, you know, sixty-five [1965], 1965, and sixty-eight [1968] up until the time when my grandmother died.  That was a very instrumental times, plus this side of Motown was very prominent, the Supremes, the Temptations.  That was the music that I loved and grew up on--Smokey Robinson, the Miracles, the Four Tops, a lot of the songs that were inspirational songs like the Impressions; Curtis Mayfield songs, 'Keep on Pushing,' 'Moving On Up,' 'We're A Winner;' James Brown, 'Say It Loud--I'm Black and I'm Proud;' 'Young, Gifted, and Black,' Nina Simone.  We performed those songs at school.  Our teachers were very much into it.  I remember one of the first plays I ever went to was Lift was, where I got to hear 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' was at the local auditorium, and our band director took us.
Story_ID: 192924
Speaker 1: What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to George Washington Carver High School [Memphis, Tennessee], yeah.  So, because we had a lot of teachers that were very into cultural things, we were blessed to be exposed to culture and our history very early on.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And these are things that weren't in textbook.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What, what grade school did you attend in Memphis [Tennessee] when you were with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: In Memphis, I attended Kansas Street Elementary [School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Kansas Street Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Oh, Kansas Street [Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Kansas Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from the fourth grade through the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go to middle school or did you go--
Speaker 2: I went to Carver, George Washington Carver, it was seventh through twelfth so I only went to three schools.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was at that--they, eventually, made it a high school, but I went all the way through.
Speaker 1: Were you in high school when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed or were you still in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was in, in grade school.  I was in the sixth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when Dr. King was killed in sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Do you remember all the excitement about that?  Well, I guess you do.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I do.  I remember that very day.  We were riding with the friend of my aunt's.  She probably was going to go shopping somewhere.  And I could remember riding down Macklemore Street [McLemore Avenue, Memphis, Tennessee].  And we stopped at a store or a gas station and we heard that he had gotten shot, and so we hurried home and turned on the TV [television].  And then, within an hour, they said he was dead.  And I can remember all the pandemonium and the reaction of the people.  They're weeping, they're crying, and eventually, the, the rioting, the curfews, the looting, the troops, the National Guards coming in.  And we were on the curfew and couldn't, couldn't move about after, after dark, and it was a very tense time then.  Everybody was very tense and everybody was very sad and very angry, particularly knowing that it occurred in our city just a mile and a half from my house.
Speaker 1: Now, your grandmother died while you were still in school.
Speaker 2: Yes, she died in sixty-eight [1968].  She died, I think it was September of sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: So what happened to you?  I mean, what, what, now where, where did you and your brother go that was staying with your grandmother after your--
Speaker 2: Well, my brother was a senior that year.  He had just graduated when he was still staying with her.  And well, actually, he had moved out and stayed with her sister.  She had a twin sister that lived in Memphis as well and he had gone to live with her.  And my second youngest brother had came back from--had moved back from St. Louis [Missouri] to Memphis.  And so he and I were staying with my grandmother when she died.  And then, I moved over to stay with my aunt, my mother's sister.  And my second oldest--my second youngest brother moved to stay with my grandmother's sister, so he and my middle brother were together at my, my great-aunt's house, my grandmother's twin sister.
Speaker 1: Well, was it difficult for you all to keep, keep in contact with one another?
Speaker 2: No, we just didn't, I mean, we were about, we were only about a mile apart walking distance.  We walked everywhere so twenty minutes, half hour walk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother was graduating the same year that I was moving to the high school, so we weren't never in the school at the same time.  So as he was transitioning out on his own, and then within about two years after graduating--he eventually moved back into my grandmother's house and stayed there for about a year.
Story_ID: 192925
Speaker 1: Started to--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  It was at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Memphis, Tennessee]--started out with a, a Polaroid camera in which I had eight sheets of film in it.  And I would charge a, a dollar per photo.
Speaker 1: Now did you, now where did you get the camera?  Was this your (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The camera was a, it was a gift, a Christmas gift from my oldest brother.  He had asked me what I wanted.  He would always buy us school clothes and Christmas gifts, and he would usually ask us what we wanted.  And I wanted a camera, so he bought me a camera and for Christmas of seventy-one [1971], 1971, and, you know, I think it was twenty-five dollars.  And he sent me the $25 and I went and bought the camera, not realizing that I was going to need another five dollars for film.  So I didn't have film or flash cubes in those days.  They used four flash cubes to plug in.  But I--and so a week or two later, I got the money for some film, and I could actually use the camera.  But I started taking pictures of kids at school, and that was where I supplemented my income.
Speaker 1: So you would take the camera to school and shoot kids and then charge them money?
Speaker 2: Right, charged a dollar a picture.  And if I was lucky, I had eight pictures and made eight dollars, and film was $3.99, $4.00, so I made 100 percent profit.  But if I, you know, messed up a picture or two, then it deeply cut into my profits.  And then, eventually, around 1972, I met a biology teacher by the name of David Wright [ph.].  And he had been an avid photographer, and I think he had a camera club at one time at the school.  But he loaned me his thirty-five millimeter Yashica and let me take pictures around the school with it.  And that's when I converted over to a thirty-five millimeter film and camera.  And I bought my first camera after the summer of seventy-two [1972], I believe, after I had picked cotton all summer.  That was my goal was to--I would go back to Hayti [Missouri] every summer and stay with my aunt and my cousin who was about a year younger.  We hung out and chopped cotton during the summer.  And so, from chopping cotton, I was able to save up fifty-five dollars to buy a thirty-five millimeter camera at a pawn shop on Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee], and that's how I got started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what, what kind of camera did you buy when you bought it?
Speaker 2: It was a Yashica G and it was a 1.4 lens, 50 millimeter lens on it which now--and I didn't realize how, how sharp the glass was or, you know, how fast that lens was at that time.  And now you pay an arm and a leg to get a 1.4 lens, but I started out with a 1.4, and just experimented and read books.  My aunt worked at a prescription shop, Merrill [ph.] Prescription Shop downtown in Memphis [Tennessee].  At that time, it was on Madison Street [Memphis, Tennessee].  And there was a camera shop, Memphis Photo [Supply, Memphis, Tennessee], which is a big prestigious camera shop downtown, and it was right across the street from her.  And I would sit in there.  They had a little reading area, a little table, and a lot of pamphlets and brochures and books.  And there was a black lady that worked there and she knew my aunt.  Everybody downtown knew my aunt because she delivered prescription, walked around and delivered those prescriptions to the offices.  And she had been down there for thirty, thirty-five years before she retired.  So I would go there and sit quietly and read the pamphlets and books, and try to take in as much knowledge as I could.  And then, there was a camera shop not far away, and there was a music store next door--took my aunt's prescription shop where she worked, and that's where I bought my first mouthpieces when I started playing clarinet which I eventually gave up to play baseball full time.
Story_ID: 192926
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now all this is in high school.  You're really branching out now, playing--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I played baseball.  I made the baseball team all six years of, of school, from middle school through high school, made the team every year, seven to twelve.
Speaker 1: Now what positions did you play?
Speaker 2: Center field and second base.  So I did that.  When I started, I learned in, in elementary school in the sixth grade, was when I really--I had played a little ball in Hayti [Missouri], but nothing organized--just play on pastures and fields, but I found I was good at it.  And I really loved the game, and there was a baseball field behind my grandmother's house, which was on the school grounds, and we would play all summer long.  And I had a friend who was really good.  He was just excellent.  He, he could have went pro named T.L. Hamilton.  And he told me about this team that he played on in the summer time and they had uniforms and everything.  And I hung out with him and eventually made the team.  And we both made the team in the seventh grade when we went to, to the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you, you--did, did you play high school baseball, too, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Played high school, yeah, played every year from the seventh grade through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't that great at it.  I was good, but I didn't have the proper coach and to really develop my skills.  I was a, a good defensive player, a good fielder.  I was lousy at hitting.  I was a good base runner.  I had speed, so once I got on base, I usually stole bases and advanced, you know, I had the speed to make it around.  In high school--well, in junior high school, I was a leadoff batter when I was starting.  And in high school, there were a lot of good players on our high school team, so I didn't start in my high school years, but maybe half the season or some games, but not most.  But then, I later played some, a little semi-pro ball in the summer time, so my skills improved as the coaching improved.
Story_ID: 192927
Speaker 1: Now, how, how was your academics in school?  I mean, did you, did you find that when you were in Hayti [Missouri], you were behind or you were ahead or were you about even or--
Speaker 2: Well, I found I was a little behind.  The curriculum was a little bit rigorous when I came to Memphis [Tennessee], but I adjusted to it.  The first year, the fourth grade was really rough, mainly because it was, you know, there were a lot of emotional things I was going through that I had nobody to talk to about, nobody to tell.  And I could remember, it seemed like I cried for the first month like every day.  And I was just homesick and lonely and just looking out the window.  In the fourth grade, I remember looking out the window all the time and just, you know, just crying.  And then, eventually, just adjust.  In fact, I did well.  I was always a B student, a B-Plus.  I could have been an A student, you know, had I had more encouragement to really apply my skills.  But as long as you made, you know, decent grades, nobody really worried about it.  Nobody really cared, you know, they weren't stressed out about it because you had good enough grades.  And they didn't really bother about trying to get you to optimize.  And so, I didn't really bother about optimizing.  I always knew that I could make As and I knew I could be at the top of the class, but I had a lot of other things to think about and a lot of extracurricular activities.  And I always felt like as long as I made Bs and had the ability to make As that, you know, I was all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 192928
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that--well, other than your biology teacher there, were there any other teachers that, like took an interest in what you're doing and tried to help--
Speaker 2: Photographically?
Speaker 1: Well, any--
Speaker 2: What'd you say?  Well, actually, the gentleman that got me started in photography, he was a biology teacher, but he wasn't my biology teacher.  He took an interest.  I had some coach, one of my coaches, Mr. Davis Penn [ph.] took an interest, not only as a photographer, but as, just as a person.  And he was someone I could talk to in my high school years.  He was a big guy.  I guess he was about 6'4", 6'5", you know, two-hundred fifty-plus pounds, solid.  And he had graduated from Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and had been a football player.  He was my assistant football coach in junior high school, and he coached several other teams.  But he was someone I could talk to.  He eventually became the assistant principal, and we kept a lifelong friendship and that, it's maintained to this day.  Whenever I had any problems or issues or life decisions I wanted to talk over and get some feedback, he was the person that I talked to.  And, and in the seventh and eighth grade, one of the persons that was very instrumental in my career, in my life was Laura [ph.] Sanders [ph.]. She was my seventh grade Tennessee history teacher and eight grade American history teacher, and she was a very classy lady, and just wonderful in, in every sense of the word.  And she became my model for the kind of woman that I said that I always wanted to marry, yeah.  She was smart.  She was beautiful.  She was kind.  She was all around decent person, really decent person, and understanding and patient, yet demanding.  I meant she had a top curriculum, and I took pride and aced in it, aced in her tests.  It was always a challenge, but I made As in her class.  And ironically, one of the teachers, my seventh grade geometry, geology teacher, geography, seventh grade geography teacher was very good in terms of sharing a lot of subject matter about world issues.  And it allowed me the chance to dream and think about things outside of America.  And he introduced us to a lot of things around the world, you know, geographic things that have broadened my mind and broadened my vision about what is possible.  And he made us learn every, every state and every state capital in the United States.  And also in the seventh grade, Miss Sanders [ph.] made us learn every county in the state, and, and, and the capitals of each county of the seat of government.  So they were both very demanding, but, but their lessons stuck with me.  And I since run back into that particular teacher after over twenty-five years, almost thirty years.  I just met him again the last month, my seventh grade geography teacher.  It's amazing.
Story_ID: 192929
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the school newspaper at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the ninth grade, I took journalism.  And that was my first introduction to newspapers and I worked on the student newspaper, and I was writing and then eventually started taking pictures for the newspaper.  No one else knew how to take pictures or had a camera, so I became the newspaper photographer, the school's photographer.  And the principal would call me to the office or to the auditorium when they had programs, when they had special guests.  And that was pretty neat because I got a chance to be at all the assemblies and all the programs.  And then I started shooting the football games and the basketball games.  And, and since I was playing baseball, I didn't shoot baseball, but all the other programs around the school, and I became known as, as the picture man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, eventually, I, I took pictures for the yearbook.  In fact, that was the first book that I was published in.  I had the inside back cover, the 1973 yearbook, and had a picture on the back cover of the seventy-three [1973] yearbook.  And I took pictures at the seventy-three [1973] prom and, and made money that way.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that make you feel to be published then--
Speaker 2: Well, it was great to have your picture published and to have your name in the student newspaper as well as the yearbook.  And, actually, I have forgotten all about that I had the, the inside cover of the yearbook until we were having the school's [George Washington Carver High School, Memphis, Tennessee] fortieth Anniversary Reunion in 1997.  And we gathered all the yearbooks from all the rendering [ph.] classes, and I look back and I recognize a night photo that I had taken, just a handheld night shot of the school.  And that ran on the inside front and inside back cover of the yearbook.  I thought, wow, and I still have some of the newspapers from my high school in which I was published.  Unfortunately, they didn't have photo credits underneath the pictures in those days--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I know it's mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And everyone else knows it's mine.
Story_ID: 192930
Speaker 1: When you were graduating from high school, did you have an, did you think about going to college or do, or, or what, what did you think you would do next?
Speaker 2: I thought about going to college, but I know I didn't have, I didn't have sterling grades.  I didn't have any scholarships, and I knew none of my folks had any money to send me to college.  And I didn't have any money to go to college.  I left high school May 19, 1974 when I graduated, and then I moved to--I went to live with my brother in St. Louis [Missouri] immediately, oh, probably in July, either June or July of '74 [1974], to see if I could get a job up there.  But being seventeen years old with no, you know, practical skills.  I mean, I had worked at a gas station before and I had worked at Zayre's--at that time, a retail outlet.  But aside from, from those retail skills and they were, in those days they were paying about a dollar and a dime an hour.  That wasn't a lot that I knew how to do.  And I wasn't really old enough to, to work in the factory jobs.  They got to be eighteen at that time and I had not turned eighteen.  So after trying unsuccessfully for about a month and, and living on my brother, living with my brother, and living on my brother, I decided that I would just join the, join the [U.S.] Navy.  And that's what I did, August 1, 1974, I enlisted in the Navy, and he co-signed for me as a guardian.
Speaker 1: So where, where were you stationed?  Where, where did you go to--?
Speaker 2: Well, since I was in St. Louis, I went to Great Lakes [Illinois].  It was the first time I'd ever ridden a train.  And after seeing all those trains pass by my house, I always wanted to ride a train.  So I got to ride the train for the first time.  And I was in Great Lakes until November.  I came home right before Thanksgiving.  And then I went back and stayed in Great Lakes until, oh, maybe I was on leave.  I think I was on leave after Great Lakes until early or mid-December.  And then I took the airplane to Norfolk, Virginia.  I was stationed on a ship there, and that was my first airplane ride.  And I spent three years in the Navy, primarily stationed in Norfolk, Virginia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the USS Puget Sound which was a destroyer tender.  It's a destroyer repair ship which is a, a repair ship in general.  It had practically every rate or occupation in the Navy on it, so we could repair most of anything.  We could rebuild another ship all the way down to grinding glass.  They had otologists on there and doctors, lawyers, carpenters, pattern makers, hull, hull technicians, and photographers.  So I eventually became a photographer's mate after the mandatory three years of, of--not, not three years, mandatory three months of mess cooking.  In those days, you had three months' transition period before you went into a specific rate.  You either did your three months working on the deck, then you're painting it, and grinding paint and beating down floors, and redoing floors, and hanging over the side of ships.  That was hard work.  Or you went into the fire room as an engineman, and that meant you were down deep in the wells [ph.] of the ship, and that was dirty and hot work.  Or you went to mess cooking, which you were in the dining facility, which meant that this was early work.  You got up real early and those were long hours.  So, I got sent to mess cooking, and it was probably the, the better of the three options because the folk on deck worked hard.  Most of the mates worked hard.  And even though mess cooking, we would get up at five o'clock in the morning or sometimes four-thirty, you could, you'd at least, you ate well.  It was always warm because you were on the inside and the, the work was, was not that physically hard.  And once you get to tend to the various meals, morning and breakfast and dinner meal, and the mid [ph.]-rations, which were like the late night meals for the people that had the late shifts.  You're basically buffing, mopping, and a little waxing.
Story_ID: 192931
Speaker 1: Let, let me ask you now.  When you started photography, was, was this your first time being, being exposed to more sophisticated equipment?
Speaker 2: In the [U.S.] Navy, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because aside from the two years that I had of self-taught, self-training with my thirty-five millimeter and my Polaroid, I mean I knew enough about exposures and about lighting and about taking a good picture at that time when I got into the Navy that I'd, I knew what I was doing.  I just didn't know how to do it well.  And after the three months' mess cooking, I, I struck for the position--what you call, call a striker.  In other words, you, you find a particular occupation or trade that you want to go into.  And because I did not have a "A" school, I was not sent to a technical school to learn photography.  Straight out of boot camp, I went to OJT, on the job training, and so I went down and made myself known to the photographers on board ship that I wanted to come down and join them when I finished mess cooking.  And they have to--it's sort of like a selective and a position.  They have to select you to come down.  You can elect to go down, but they got to select you.  And they asked me a few questions about exposure, what would you do in this situation if you're outside, and you had this kind of film?  And I gave all the right answers, so they knew that I knew enough about it to come in and, and be sufficiently trained, sufficiently trained on the job training that I could get up to speed fairly quickly.  And so, at that time, there were four photographers in the photography department, but they were all short timers.  They were getting out soon, three of them were getting out soon.   And so within one year, I found myself being like second ranking photographer in that department in just a short period of time.  I mean, and that was great.  I loved that and it was the best job I ever had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what are some of the highlights of your, your stint as, as a Navy photographer?  Did you get a chance to photograph anybody famous or do anything real dramatic?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess the highlights was number one, learning the dark room skills, and that's where I picked up my dark room skills.  It was the first time I had ever been in a dark room.  And using a medium format cameras, even though I'd used a twin in a reflex camera, the Yashica in high school, I didn't know what I was doing.  But here, I was exposed to a Vermilya [ph.].  I think it was a, a C330, and I was using the finest thirty-five millimeter in the world, Leica.  I didn't realize what I had at that time or what I was using.
Speaker 1: Did you know what a Leica was at that point?
Speaker 2: No, no, I had never seen or heard of a Leica.  It was just another little camera, you know, small, manual camera.  And we had a four hundred millimeter telephoto Leica lens specially made.  And when we would go on the snooping detail, that's when we were out to sea, and we were surveying or doing some surveillance of Russian ships, and things like that.  So that was kind of highlights to spot those--
Speaker 1: A hundred and, yeah--
Speaker 2: And run up and, and put that telephoto on, and then we take pictures of other ships off in the distance.  They were, they were not, you know, U.S. ships, and sight of the sub was a major event.  I also photographed the--we had a helicopter on, on board, and so I photographed the helicopters landing and takeoffs, mainly in case there were any accidents or problems.  And that was always fun.  We had a boxing team.  We had a band.  We had a wrestling team, wrestling team on board ship, so I photographed all those events.  I got a chance to photograph a lot of things because there were so many different rates on board ships--everything from accident reports, investigations, a lot of cake-cutting ceremonies, a lot of reenlistment ceremonies.
Story_ID: 192932
Speaker 1: I think one of the highlights was when I was in the Mediterranean for a six-month cruise.  And at that time, our ship had become a flag ship, meaning we had an admiral on board.  And he was the admiral of the third fleet--I think it was third fleet, or sixth fleet.  It was the Atlantic Coast fleet.  And we met up with the admiral of the, of the Mediterranean fleet.  At that time, it was Admiral Stansfield Turner who later became the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] Director.  And there was other great, other dignitaries in ports in Italy or in France--dignitaries would come on board.  I photographed that.  I photographed two or three changing of the guards of the leadership when a new captain came on board.  That was always a huge ceremony, a big deal, when we got a new officer.  And other than that, it was mainly sport-, sporting events.  The travel was a big thing for me.  It's one of the main reasons why I joined the Navy was to travel and see the world.  And in that six-month Mediterranean cruise, we went through the Straits of Gibraltar, which six months prior to that, I was reading about in geography books.  And now here I was in, in Spain, you know, off the coast of Morocco and, and Northern Africa, and we were based in Roda, Spain.  And that was just fascinating.  And here I was, barely eighteen years old, and I'm, I'm in Europe.  I'm in the Mediterranean.  I'm, I'm in places that I, like I said, previously a year earlier, was reading about and doing book reports on.  And here I was, in, in Toulon, France and Naples, Italy, and Iska [ph.] and Capri, and places like that, Augusta Bay and off the Islands of Crete and Greece, forty-eight hours from Lebanon during the Lebanon crisis.  But since we were a support ship and a repair ship, we were never worried about being in combat harm's way.  We only had one big gun on the front.  And I was told that was more for balance in the ship.  And we were not a combatant ship so like, hey, don't shoot us.  We're non-violent, you know.  So I, I never was in fear of my life.  I picked up a good time to go in because in seventy-four [1974], things had quieted down in Vietnam, so that was no fear of being shipped to Vietnam.  And, of course, in seventy-five [1975], the [Vietnam] war was officially declared over.  It was an eventful time period in that nine days after I joined the Navy, [former-President Richard] Nixon resigned.  And then, of course, in seventy-five [1975], the war ended officially in Vietnam.  Seventy-six [1976] was all the [U.S.] bicentennial events that were going on.  That's when I was in the Mediterranean.  I'll never forget on the Fourth of July, we were floating down the Mediterranean and looking at the water, and how blue it was, just like you could scoop it up with a glass.  And it seemed like it would still be blue in, in your glass, and how calm the waters could be.  They, they would be so calm that it was difficult to photograph because it would be like photographing glass.  That was the most fascinating time of my life was going to those countries.  And I'll always remember that as a highlight of my [U.S.] Navy career.  It highlighted my life.  And the diversity of people that I met, meeting Filipino guys for the first time, Hispanics, Puerto Ricans, Cubans, black guys from the inner city, from the ghettos and, and as well as from the rural area.  That was quite a wakeup call, looking at all the different customs and idiosyncrasies that was--and then all the white guys from the, from the farms, and from the Midwest, and from the California's towns, California towns.  It was quite interesting.
Speaker 2: How long were, were you in, in the Navy?
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: Three years until nineteen--
Speaker 1: --seventy-seven [1977].  I came out August tenth of seventy-seven [1977] and immediately went back home, and started enrolling in Memphis State University [later, the University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 192933
Speaker 1: Do you want to mention anything about boot camp or not or what?
Speaker 2: I think something, yeah, important about boot camp, you think we ought to hear, all right.
Speaker 1: Well, I think as a result of my ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] training, I was the first company leader when I first came in the first two weeks.  Are we rolling?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it was called a R Park [ph.].  And I had training in marching and skills and two years of ROTC training from high school.  So the company commander immediately made me the R park or the, or the leader of all those new recruits.  That lasted for about two weeks.  And then he found out that there was another guy who was much bigger, much tougher, and could actually get the guys to do what needed to be done by hook or crook.  And he made him the R park, and I was so happy because I became the guide leader, the person that carries the company flag.  And since I had the best marching and drill skills, it worked out perfectly because that's the person that marches up in front.  And the rest of the company sets their movements on the guide, and that's what I did.  And my friends became other company officers.  One wanted to be the postal clerk and he got the postal clerk.  And the other one became the educational officer.  We had all these little junior officers in boot camp and that was terrific 'cause I knew that whenever mail call was that I was going to get my mail first.  And seeing I had--both enlisted together in St. Louis [Missouri], we came in that same morning.  You know, one of the ironic things about boot camp was the morning I enlisted, August first, the, the recruiter goes around the car and rounds up everybody--these recruiter over the course of--I guess last two weeks or month, and they schedule you for a certain date.  One of the guys that they picked up that morning that rode the train up with us, I would later find out in about three weeks into boot camp that he had actually been my best friend in the second and third grades.
Speaker 2: Down at Hayti [Missouri]?
Speaker 1: And down at Hayti.  And I had not seen him since, of course, 1965, and this is seventy-four [1974], so almost, you know, almost ten years had gone by.  And, of course, you know, you change a great deal.  And I did not recognize his name.  And so when we got to talking about hometowns and, of course, when he mentioned he was from Hayti, that rung a bell.  It's such a small town.  I'm like, really?  He said, yeah.  I said, "I used to live in Hayti."  And we talked a little bit more, and he'd ask me about my people, and I asked him about his people.  I didn't really recognize his folks' names, so I told him who my cousin was.  And my cousin was very well known down there, as, as was my whole family.  And he knew my cousin.  So, oh, man, that's interesting.  I said, you know, I used to come down there during the summer time, da da da.  And we just deduced it down to which classes we were in and which teachers we had.  And I said, "What's your name again?"  And he said, "Royal [ph.] Robertson [ph.]."  I said, "Royal Robertson?"  And that's an unusual name, Royal.  And it dawned on me, I said, man, you used to be my best friend. We were running buddies.  We used to run around the campus and pick up the returnable soda bottles.  In those days, we collected all the soda bottles.  And I think it was two cents return on the bottles.  And we would get those cartons and cases and stack them up, and turn them in for cash receipts.  And that's how we raised money in the third grade for our class.  It was the kids who scattered out so we really hustled bottles, and he was the best at it.  He could find where kids tossed their drink bottles.  He'd go in trash cans behind buildings.  He'd find more bottles than anybody I knew.  And, and, he later helped me out a great deal when I first leave from boot camp.  And we went from Great Lakes [Illinois] into Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and I was thankful that I had him by my side.  He probably saved me to make sure I got back intact.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, let's just say that freedom has its limitations and, and when you've been bottled up for about twelve weeks, you can overdo things.  And he was there to stay by my side and make sure I got back on time and intact.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A lot of coffee helps, too, yeah, and, thank God, for the USO [United Service Organization].
Story_ID: 192934
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Memphis State [University, later University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  Now you came back and--
Speaker 2: I came back--
Speaker 1: And you had, had money from the [U.S.] Navy to go to school--
Speaker 2: Yes, I had the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] behind me.  And within two weeks of returning to Memphis [Tennessee]--and I already knew that I was determined to go to college.  That's, that's what I had been focused on, and I'd already investigated, you know, different colleges and schools prior to getting out of the Navy.  And I was deciding on whether I wanted to go to a photography school or to a traditional four-year college.  One of my buddies was going to a well-known photography school out in California, but it was pretty costly at that time.  It was about $700 a year.  Memphis State, now I think that's, I think the photography school is about $700 a semester.  Memphis State, I could do that entire year for $700.  I think at the time, it was $336 per semester.  And with the GI Bill, the GI Bill was probably about, I think, $282 a month, so two months of GI Bill checks could pay for the entire semester at Memphis State.  And four checks would, four months I'd have the whole year paid for, plus books.  So I enrolled in, with the intention of getting a journalism degree, and I spent two and a half years at Memphis State.  I majored in journalism.  And all my teachers and all my advisers, particularly African American teachers there for which there were thirteen out of, out of about 485 teachers at, at Memphis State, I think there were thirteen black teachers, professors, guidance counselors or administrators, because I was working for the student newspaper and made a point of finding out how many there were, and writing a big article about it.  And so, (unclear), monitor the Martin Luther King Awards Committee in my freshman year.  And I was a member of the Black Student Association, and I became manager of the "Black Student Association" newspaper.  That was something I'd always wanted to do.  I was determined to do because I'd studied journalism informally in the Navy.  I was hanging out with the journalists, and while in the Navy, I did a lot of writing for the ship's newsletter and the ship's news, magazine, while we were out to sea.  I'd also did television commentary when I was in the Navy.  When we were out to sea, we set up our own newsroom on board ship, and every night, we'd have a news report from the journalists.  And I decided I wanted to do some commentary similar to, like Howard K. Smith used to do at the end of the broadcast.  And much to my surprise, they said yes, and they let me do it.  So I did a two-minute commentary on TV [television] every night after ship.  And I'd put on a suit and tie, and maybe have my dungarees on the bottom, but they were just shooting from chest up.  And I wrote my own commentary.  Nobody saw it before I went on.  It was unedited, which is amazing to me now, 'cause I could say whatever I wanted if it's going out live.  And I also started a radio station when I was on, on board ship.  And we were--I was in a, I first learned about power and money in the Navy when I heard about something called the welfare and recreation fund.  And at the time, they had over $20,000 in that fund.  And I think there were either one or no blacks on that committee.  I said, how can this be?  And this is when I did my most reading.  I probably read over, over fifty books in a six-month time while we were out to sea--more reading than I'd ever done in my life.  I was reading James Baldwin.  I was reading Norman Vincent Peale.  And thinking Grow Reds [ph.], I was reading "Og" [Augustine] Mandino, a lot of salesman's books, a lot of how to books, a lot of self-improvement books.
Speaker 1: Right.  'I'm Okay, You're Okay.'  All these different books, every book that I could get my hand on in the library that had some interest, or that I had interest in, or that could help me, I read.  And that was a great period.  We had a wonderful library on board ship.  It was a large room, and we probably had a thousand books in the library.  It was just amazing.  It's one of the best things that ever happened to me was being, being on that ship, and having that library, and having the opportunity to write, and to do this commentary.
Story_ID: 192935
Speaker 1: So when I got out, I was determined that what I was going to do was major in journalism [at Memphis State University, later University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  I was going to be the editor of a newspaper, so I could say what need to be said and rattle behind things.  And I, and I became editor, you know, when I first joined.  I immediately rose to the ranks of editor and took over the newspaper and, and stayed editor until the new president decided to fire me.  But that's another story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, how did that happen?  Now this is a, this is something that is not expected but--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --you were chairman of the Black Student Organization?
Speaker 1: No, I was the editor of the Black Student Association newspaper.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, we had an election, and there was a new president that came in.  I never would forget, it was a older, older student, female, out of Compton, California.  She didn't like what I was writing in the newspaper apparently, or there was some disagreement about, I guess, budget or, or something like that.  And since the budget was coming through the Black Student Association, she wanted control over what went into the newspaper.  And I was, was not about to relinquish that control.  So just before actually she fired me, I actually stepped down.  And then they tried to get me to come back and, and run it again and I didn't.  But it was, it was a great time period.  We got a lot accomplished, raised a lot of eyebrows, and it raised a lot of issues, you know.  Yeah.  It's some of my proudest moments.
Story_ID: 192936
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you do, decide to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: --as a result of my activism on campus and my cultural awareness, and keep in mind I was about three years older than most of the students there.  So I was more mature than they had, and I'd been around the world and had a lot of exposure at that time.  And they were coming out of high school.  And they were, you know, like kids to me.  The teachers recognized it and they, and they suggested that I need to go to another school and broaden my skills, and have more access to things where I could really flourish.  And my choices were Howard University, Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], or Clark [College, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], but since I was leaving, or just had left Norfolk [Virginia] area, I really wanted to get out of that area--didn't want to spend another three years or four years in that area.  Although Hampton was a great school and I loved it, it was a smaller school.  I think at that time, it had about 1,700 students, 2,000 students, so it was a small campus.  And I thought that the two drawbacks was that it was somewhere where I'd already left, and I wanted a new experience, and that it was a small school.  And I, I thought the 2,000 was not enough, not a larger student body to get the diversity that I wanted.  Clark in Atlanta got good reviews, and I had picked up all the literature and promotion material from some of the recruiters that had come through and had left materials at our school counselor's office.  Of course, none of the schools, I had any, you know, scholarships or inroads to, but because I had the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], then I could pay my own way.  And I only had a 2.65 [grade point] average when I graduated from high school, so I wasn't exactly knocking down doors academically, but not because I wasn't smart.  It's 'cause I was always busy with multiple extracurricular activities.  But I, I applied to Ham-, to Howard because my guidance counselor's daughter had gone to Howard.  And I figured that, you know, she had sent her kid to the best school possible.  And I was a little hesitant to apply to Howard because I knew the academic, you know, rigorous, and I knew the standard of Howard was high.  And coming out of high school, I probably never would apply there.  I just never would have considered I could have made it there.  But having had two and a half years under my belt now, the college experience in, in knowing what was required, I felt that I could achieve, and all my teachers thought that I could achieve with no problem.  So I was accepted and I transferred, and came to Washington, D.C. on January 1st of 1980.  In fact, I left Memphis [Tennessee] New Year's Eve of 1979, and I was determined to leave the city before the new decade came in because I was disillusioned and disappointed with the Memphis experience at that time.  And I didn't want the new decade to catch me in Memphis.  And so, I remember being at a local political leader and businessman's house at a party.  And they were all trying to get me to stay until after, you know, twelve o'clock midnight, you know, because you never know what's going to happen--people shooting off guns, and people drinking and traffic.  I'm like, no, I wanted to be on the road and out of the city when the New Year and the new decade comes in.  And so I was probably somewhere up around Jackson, Tennessee when the New Year and new decade came in, but I was not in Memphis.
Story_ID: 192937
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, were in Memphis [Tennessee], did you get a chance to strike up a relationship with Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers]?
Speaker 2: Ironically, when I came to Memphis from the [U.S.] Navy, I started freelancing doing little odd jobs of photography.  And I found that I couldn't really make a sufficient living at it.  Without the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and I was, at that time, during my, my dad's [Boyd Johnson] social security and, and drawing unemployment, I was able to survive, but I couldn't make a living doing photography.  I didn't have the contacts, and couldn't get in a lot of the places, and didn't know the major players.  So I teamed up with another photographer eventually in seventy-eight [1978], a fellow by the name of A. [Anderson] Cantrell, and he was sort of like a rival of Mr. Withers, Ernest Withers, and we would see each other at a lot of events.  And he, Mr. Withers on one side with his son, and Mr. Cantrell and I on the other side.  And, eventually, we spent so much time together.  And Cantrell was, was very well known.  He had been a builder and a contractor and painter.  He smoked a pipe, a Kentucky blend.  You could always smell that aroma.  Even to this day, I can be anywhere in the country, and I smell that Kentucky blend aroma, and I think of him.  And he wore these small glasses, and he would look over the top of them.  And he was kinda portly and had curly, wavy hair that was thinning and balding on top, clean dresser, always suit and tie, very neat, starched shirts.  So I found that I remember, they all ask them, if you can't beat them, join them.  And I couldn't beat anybody at that time, so I joined up with him.  And we started doing events together, and he would pay me.  And he got in everywhere off of just face value.  And he, I never saw him buy a ticket to go anywhere.  We shot a lot of political events, a lot of birthday parties, a lot of gatherings, a lot of social events, did a lot of weddings in those days.  We did pretty much of it in everything.  And he kept up with all of that.  He'd just say, hey, we're, we're going to shoot this job at such and such church, and we're going over here to do this--grab your camera, and let's go.  He had a set of lights, and I eventually learned how to use his lights when we did setup, setups for Polaroids, particularly.  And sometimes I would do the Polaroids while he was shooting the thirty-five millimeter cameras inside the event.  And so it worked as a good tandem.  And because I knew dark room work and he did not, or he wasn't proficient at it, and he didn't care about doing it, I did the dark room work when we did large conventions, three- or four-day conventions.  And we went all over the country, California.  We shot the Jay's [ph.] Cleveland Gospel workshop in Houston.  We did the CME workshops and conventions and conferences.  We covered Church of God and Christ.  We covered the AME's [African Methodist Episcopal Church] conventions and general conferences.  And we would go in, drive down, load up the station wagon with all our equipment, enlarges, everything, set up--we'd get two rooms, use the adjoining room, or sometimes just one room, and set up the dark room in the bathroom.  And while he would shoot all day, drop the film off, I would process and print while he was out shooting.  And then we'd hang out in the evening time.  So I only knew Mr. Withers from a professional standpoint, and just watching and observing him, and I, I knew that he was, seemed to me, everybody knew him as well.  And he was legendary.  I didn't know how legendary he was.  And he was aggressive, I mean, he was a take-charge kinda guy.  And you had to really get your shot when you were around him because he'd get his shot, and then it was over, if it was a setup shot.  Or he'd take his chair.  I remember working at the Holiday Inn Rivermont which is a fabulous hotel there in Memphis [Tennessee].  And it had a high stage, and then sometimes on top of the high stage were, were daises.  It was, was risers.  And so you're shooting up at an angle a lot of times at the podium, and that's a tough shot.  He would take a chair and set it in front of the podium, or just slightly to one side, and stand in the chair, and get the shot.  Now if you're behind him, of course, he's blocking your shot.  He blocked many shots during the day.  And so, you'd have to adjust around him.  And he was pretty good with elbows, too.  He'd go up, and if you were standing beside him, you had to kinda jockey for a position.  So it was always a polite robbery, you know, but we didn't do a lot of talking.  It was him and his son, and Mr. Cantrell and I.  So eventually, people start calling me Mr. Cantrell's son--it's, ahh, is that your son?  You know, after a while, you get tired of saying, no, this is--and explaining who he is and after a while, I would say, yeah, that's my dad.  He'd say, yeah, that's my son.  He'd say, hey, son, bring me those camera bags over here.  And so, for the longest time, people thought I was Mr. Cantrell's son, and that's funny when you hang out with somebody long enough.  And, and I--we, we did so much shooting in the summer time now, I eventually stayed with him for months at a time when I was going to school because he lived closer to Memphis State [University, later the University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] than, than where I was staying with my folks.  And until I got my own apartment, but even then, you know, sometimes I'd spend a night with him because we would be shooting multiple events, and spending long hours together.  And it was a great working relationship.  And that lasted all through when I was in college, I would come back in the summer time and, and go out on the road with Mr. Cantrell.
Story_ID: 192938
Speaker 1: Does Mr. [Anderson] Cantrell have a body of work--
Speaker 2: He has a tremendous body of work.  It's one of the best kept secrets--well, it's not really a secret, but he's got a tremendous body of work that hasn't been looked at because he died in ninety-eight [1998], I think it was, died of cancer.  And he had one son.  His son was not really a photographer.  He took some Polaroids along Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee].  And he had some personal problems, and then he died about a year later.  And that body of work now is sitting in a storage facility in Memphis [Tennessee].  It's just under the purview of Mr. Cantrell's lady friend, or who he had lived with for years, but nothing has happened.
Speaker 1: So, no, no publications or--
Speaker 2: No publications, no exhibitions.  I mean it's, it's hundreds of thousands of rolls of film.  A lot of it is mine because we were shooting together, so a lot of things that I shot in those days, you didn't separate out who shot what.  I mean, I know what I shot, but it was intermingled in there.  And we covered everybody, I mean everybody, Billy Stein, Count Basie, Bill Cosby, Tina Turner, Lou Rawls, all the major politicians that came to town, early Harold Ford photos, and all the political campaigns when Harold Ford was running for Congressman, and entertainers.  We, you know, we covered all of those folk and across the country.  I mean, James Cleveland, major gospel acts, from coast to coast, a lot of the bishops in the AME [African Methodist Episcopal Church] and CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church.  He did work for the CME Publishing House which is located in Memphis at the time.  In fact, he had an office and studio in the CME Publishing House [Memphis, Tennessee] for many years when I was in, in, up here in Washington [D.C.].  But that, that work is gone unseen, and his common law wife don't, does not really know what to do with it because she doesn't know all the people in the pictures or the significance of it.
Speaker 1: Have you made overtures to her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I have.  She wants to, to do something, to publish a book, or something to that effect.  But she's lacking the two basic things that's required--that is, the knowledge of the images and, you know, being able to edit it down, and the money to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she's, so far has not been willing to relinquish control of those images.  And, unfortunately, in the latter days before Mr. Cantrell's son died, he sold off some, a lot of famous pictures, and made have sold off or destroyed some negatives which is unfortunate.  And because it's so much work, I have not had a chance to sit down.  I wanted to go through it and pull out my images and my film, but I have not had a chance to do that.  Some of my best pictures were taken back during that time period.
Story_ID: 192939
Speaker 1: Well, let's move on to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I just wanted to ask you about--well, I'm glad I asked you about that 'cause that's really significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very significant.
Speaker 1: What about Howard?  Now you went to Howard in--
Speaker 2: 1980, I came to Howard and, again, I transferred in as a, as a--well, even though I should have been going to my junior year, I think I lost about a year of credits in the transfer process.  So I was sort of like a first year or first semester junior or a second semester sophomore, I forget that.
Speaker 1: And, and your major is journalism?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, one, another one of the reasons why I wanted to come to Howard was because when I was at Memphis State [University, later the University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], I had two very good black professors, David Acey who taught me black rhetoric, and [HistoryMaker] Erma Clanton who taught black theater.  And both of them are legendary there.  And one of the books we read was "The Choice" by [HistoryMaker] Sam[uel] Yette.  And Sam Yette was teaching, Samuel Yette was teaching at Howard University in journalism department at that time.  So I immediately came up to enroll in his classes, but the first year, he was on a sabbatical.  And so, the, the following two years, I enrolled in his classes.  And I took reporting classes from him and advanced reporting classes, and we became lifelong friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was [HistoryMaker, Usher] Francis Ward also at Howard?
Speaker 2: Francis Ward was at Howard.  In fact, Francis Ward was the first, I think it was, he was, at that time, I think he might have been the chair of the radio, TV, and film department.  And he was very instrumental in helping to put WHMM[-TV, Washington, D.C.] on the air, Howard University's television station.  And it was ironic because it would, it would be some twenty years later that I would meet his wife, [HistoryMaker] Val [Gray] Ward, and that was, that was ironic.  I just met her this year, but I remember Francis Ward very well.  I photographed the site for Howard University television.  It would have been built, I mean, coming up out of the ground, when there was just a hole in the wall, a hole in the ground.  I had early photographs of it in the student newspaper.  And, again, I always gravi- toward, gravitate toward the newspapers.  And I worked on all the newspapers on campus there in the school communication and the "Hilltop" [newspaper] and which we had now, looking back an all-star team of writers and editors.  One has gone on to win a Pulitzer Prize in the "New York Times".  And three of them have become authors, and just a tremendous group of individuals that I was working with at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think--
Speaker 1: What are some of those names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Isabel Wilkerson won the Pulitzer.  She's the only person that's got a Pulitzer out of the school of communication.  She's, I think, Chicago Bureau Chief of the "New York Times".  And another went on to become a writer for "Essence" magazine, Benilde Little, and she's authored, I guess, two or three books now.  One book was called "Good Hair".  And then another person, [HistoryMaker] Monique Greenwood, was a writer, business woman.  She started a bed and breakfast in Brooklyn [New York, New York], Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast, and a restaurant at one time, as well as became the editor of "Essence" magazine.  And she had worked for Fairchild Publications, I think it was "Children's Digest" ["Children's Business"], but she was publisher of that for a while before she took over "Essence".  And she worked at "Essence" for a couple of years, and then started writing books, so she probably wrote a book.  And then there were people like Johnson Lancaster who was co-owner of a bookstore in St. Louis [Missouri].  Shaun Powell, Shaun Powell is now a writer for "Newsday", sports writer for "Newsday".  And Franklin Guest on ESPN.  Several other people have gone on to write for the Cleveland [Ohio] "[The] Plain Dealer", or become publicists with the Cleveland Cavaliers and other sports franchise.  Some of the cartoonists, like Barry Wilson, ended up at "USA Today" [unable to verify], where I ended up at for three and a half, almost four years.  They all, they've all gone on to do really well.  And then [Lynne] Scott Jackson started her own PR [public relations] company, Millynneum Incorporated [New York, New York], after working for about ten years for one of the largest PR companies in the, in the country, UniWorld [Group, Incorporated, New York, New York].  And I'm just so very proud of the people that I came out with, and many others are editors at other newspapers in Detroit [Michigan] and Virginia.
Story_ID: 192940
Speaker 1: How long were you at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in journalism school?
Speaker 2: From eighty [1980] to eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I took a little time off and I came back in, in eighty [1980], in eighty-four [1984], and then I came back and finished up officially in ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I suppose in all, that during the time that you were not intensely in school, you were shooting pictures?
Speaker 2: Yes, or, or working on starting newspapers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started a few newspapers, too.
Speaker 2: I went back home to Memphis [Tennessee] in eighty-three [1983] and started a newspaper called Heavenly Times.  It was intended to be a, a church newspaper.  It was a--I think of it as ahead of its time, but it was a great idea--just did not have the funding that I was promised that if you, you know, if you get this out, and you do this, this, and this, we'll give you help from, you know, Small Business Association, the National Black Business League [formerly, the National Negro Business League, later the National Business League, Washington, D.C.], or whatever.  The help never came so--
Speaker 1: By definition in some ways, "Heavenly Times" are ahead of these times (laughter) so--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah, I guess so.  But now, you know, church newspapers are flourishing all over the country.  And, and the only thing about that was it, it helped to reunite me with one of my old childhood buddies.  Another childhood buddy had started a paper called Sunday Morning, I think, in St. Louis [Missouri] by a fellow named Jones, Melvin Jones [ph.].  And he would later move to Memphis [Tennessee].  And I just thought, wow.  I've, I've looked back over the last thirty years and looked at the cross-sectors of people and the intertwining or intersection of folks that I've had opportunity to run across, and just kind of analyze that.  Even in my photographic career, because while I was at Memphis State [University, later the University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] in 1978, I had the audacity to call information in New York [New York], and ask to speak to James Van Der Zee.  And much to my surprise, he picked up the phone and answered, and we struck up a friendship that would last until his death.  And although I never got to meet him in person, 'cause the one time that I was in Washington, that he was in Washington [D.C.], was when he was getting an honorary degree at Howard University.  And he died that same day.  I didn't cover the graduation ceremony that particular Howard graduation weekend because I was in New York.  And I was thinking, well, I'll go to New York.  I had an all-expense paid trip to New York and I hadn't been to New York but once in my life, and that was from being in, in school.  And I said, well, I'll go to New York and then when Van Der Zee comes back up tomorrow from the graduation, I'll go by the studio and see him and hang out, and that kind of thing.  And, of course, he never made it.  So that was one of, one of the few regrets in my life is not having met him face to face.
Story_ID: 192941
Speaker 1: But I did get a chance to meet P.H. Polk at Professor [HistoryMaker] Sam[uel] Yette's house.
Speaker 2: How, how old was P.H. Polk when you--
Speaker 1: He was about eighty-one or eighty-two.  He's a legendary photographer from Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].  At that time, Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: He has such old photographs (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: You would think, I think a lot of people may think he was a lot older than, than that.  I mean, did he start shooting when he was still an adolescent?
Speaker 1: I think so, I think so because he had worked with George Washington Carver.  And I believe he had been in Tuskegee [Alabama] for at least fifty years.  And monumental photographs.  And I had never heard of him until Professor Yette told me about it.  In fact, Professor Yette was not only responsible for me meeting P.H. Polk, but he's responsible for me meeting [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks who I knew about and had been one of my inspirations since childhood, having read the "Learning Tree" and having seen "Shaft", and having read some of his, his other books over the years.  Well, in 1980, I think it was in the spring of '80 [1980], it was either '80 [1980] or '81 [1981], Gordon Parks came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and he was doing book signing in the student center.  And Professor Yette introduced me to him for the first time and told him of my interest.  And we took a picture together and I took pictures of him then.  But it would not be about another ten years that I would really get to know him and become friends with him in 1992 after the release of the book, "Songs of My People", which I worked on as the project photographer, and contributed seven books to that monumental project as--
Speaker 2: --do you think?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So as we went out to promote the book, many times Gordon Parks would be on those trips, and we got a chance to really talk more, more personally.  And he eventually gave me his home number and said, well, you know, call me sometimes if you're working on projects and have a question.  And that struck up a friendship, so it will last eleven years, we've been, you know, much closer.  And, of course, in the last two to three years, we've really gotten [unclear], you know, to be real close friends, much more than I would ever had imagined.  And last year, I coordinated his ninetieth birthday trip in New York.  And we brought together ninety of the top black photographers in the country together for a monumental group photo on 126th Street in Harlem [New York, New York].  And I coordinated that whole event and tied together, he entrusted me with, with that honor.  And we did a dinner for him as well in Midtown, New York [New York].  And [Richard] Dick Gregory was there, all the top photographers, just about all the top photographers in the country from Howard Bing [ph.], and to [HistoryMaker] Chester Higgins [, Jr.] and Roland Freeman.  John Glenn [ph.] was there.
Speaker 2: So it was--
Speaker 1: D Stevens, [HistoryMaker] Roy Lewis, Lester Sloan, Eli Reed, Bruce Tallman [ph.].
Story_ID: 192942
Speaker 1: I wasn't really in deep into photography like I should have been, mainly because I had nobody that took interest in me to really push me and prepare me.  They, they kinda like, well, like some professors, you know, if you get it, you get it, you know, if you're not, you don't.  And I needed that encouragement and that pushing and, and somebody that had me think outside the box and show me some images and say, you, you can create this because in the [U.S.] Navy, you're shooting stuff pretty stock and standard.  It's not a lot of creativity to it.  And when I went off base, I wasn't interested in doing photography off base.  I was interested in partying, you know, having a good time.  And I really wasted a good period of time when I could have been doing some--
Speaker 2: When did you finally get pushed by somebody to, you know, and it's not about you.  Was it, was it in Memphis [Tennessee] with--
Speaker 1: No.  Honestly, the only time I've gotten really pushed and really stretched out and do some, some really good work was probably--well, creatively, I took a class at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] under a fellow by the name of Jarvis Grant, and it was a, a like a creative photography class.  That was very interesting.  I was doing something totally different.  And it was some lithographs and high contrast and films and things like that.  But aside from that, it was really not until about two years ago when I took a workshop in Kentucky, in Bowling Green, Kentucky, sponsored by Western Kentucky University [Bowling Green, Kentucky], which is probably one of the top three photography schools in the country.  And there, that workshop for about four days, it was intense.  It was all day long sessions, reviews at night, writing the stories, and you were getting constant feedback and critique every day.  And it was small group sessions of just, I think, four or five photographers, with an editor and a, and a layout design editor.  And that was probably the best, period, in terms of getting some feedback and getting somebody to really push you to do, to do better, and to try something differently, and to stretch out, and, and have more of a creative eye.  I probably learned more in that weekend or that, that four-day period than I had in the previous four years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, it just, it really taught me that when you have somebody that really knows what they're doing and can really teach it, then it doesn't take years to learn this stuff.  You can, you can learn it in a matter of weeks if it's concentrated and focused.  And then the following year, I went to another workshop called, called "Truth With A Camera".  This--the one in Kentucky was the "Mountain Workshop[s]", which has been around for several decades.  I had never heard of it.  And one of the photographers in "Songs of My People", Keith Williams, a Pulitzer Prize winner photographer out of Louisville, Kentucky, turned me on to the "Mountain Workshop[s]", and I was so grateful to him.  And then I heard about "Truth With A Camera" workshop through the curator of the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk [Virginia] who had been responsible for curating Mr. Withers, [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers, first major show from the book, "Pictures Tell the Story".  And he was on the, on the board of directors with that workshop.  And I went down and did that workshop and learned some more things from professionals who are everyday working photographers, journalists, as well as some retired professionals from "Look" magazine and "Vogue", and other publications that, and, and two of the team members were the head of the Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] photography program.
Speaker 2: At Athens University?
Speaker 1: No, at--
Speaker 2: Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Not Ohio State.
Speaker 2: Ohio University--
Speaker 1: Ohio University.
Speaker 2: --in Athens [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: It's Athens, okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: They sound so much alike (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right.  I always have to pause and think, Ohio State is in the big city, and, and Athens is the one, Ohio University, yeah.  But they have one, one of the top photography schools in the country, particularly for certain genre of photography.  They're highly recognized.  So is Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], so is University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  Of course, University of Missouri is one of the top journalism schools, period.  And so is Syracuse.  Syracuse is known for photojournalism.  They probably expanded now.  A lot of the named photographers went to Syracuse, yeah.  But not having any formal training, I always felt a certain deficiency in some things, technical things, and, and problem-solving creative things.  But that ground could be made up very quickly with on the job training from the right person, or in a tutorial, or in an apprenticeship, or as an assistant to somebody, or in a workshop.  And I'm trying to, even to this day, take as many workshops as possible, and go and hear seasoned professionals, problem solve, 'cause that's what photography is to me, is visual problem solving.  And, and that's what we do all day long.  It's just a matter of how you're going to solve the problem.  You can solve with a camera, solve it technically, you can solve it with positioning, with composition, with light.  It's about problem solving.  And then creativity, how you deliver a message.  With some impact, to make it more meaningful and more memorable.  So, but it's, it's the same thing, same equipment.  It's how you hold the camera.  It's not necessarily the film or the camera.  It's the person behind it.
Story_ID: 192943
Speaker 1: So technique, technique is good, but that doesn't make a good photographer necessarily?
Speaker 2: Well, technique makes a good photographer, but does it does not necessarily make a great photographer.  I mean, there, there are photographers that have great techniques and great printing skills and great composition skills.  And they can do all the rudimentary stuff but it, it'll just look like a good picture.  And it won't necessarily look like a memorable picture.  And depending on the kind of work you're doing, you don't have the time to do all of the fancy composing if you're working in a war zone, a combat zone, or you're covering photojournalism where you're running in a pack of other photographers, and the moments are so fleeting, you're just trying to capture one that will last, hopefully, for an eternity.
Speaker 1: I guess timing is important, too, right?
Speaker 2: Timing is very important.  And knowing when to push the button, and it's a blink of the eye difference.  When you think about the, the really memorable photographs in our lifetime, the Nick Ut picture of the Vietnamese girl running down the street ["Napalm Girl", photo of Phan Th Kim Phuc, 1972], the, the Eddie Adams picture of the, of the South Vietnamese officer shooting the Vietcong [police chief General Nguyn Ngc Loan executing Nguyn Vn Lem, Saigon, Vietnam, February 1, 1968], when you think of pictures of disasters, you know, the Hindenburg [explosion, 1937], or you think of the space shuttle blowing up [the Challenger Explosion, 1986], just think about all the things that took place or the Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald assassination [1963].  They happen very fast.  You have to be on the spot.  The picture of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [, Jr.] being killed on the balcony [of the Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennesse, 1968] and the people pointing afterwards.  The picture of the, the black guy [Ted Lansmark] in Boston [Massachusetts] being jabbed with the American flag over the busing issues ["The Soiling of Old Glory", by Stanley Forman, 1977].  All those and similar photographs stand out in my mind.  The picture of Dr. King at the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.].  And I'm just trying to make memorable pictures that will stand the test of time.
Story_ID: 192944
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your most memorable photographs?
Speaker 2: Probably my most memorable photograph or a couple of them would be the Thurgood Marshall picture that I did for "Songs of My People", some pictures of Thurgood Marshall in his chambers in Supreme Court [Washington, D.C.] about a year before he retired.  And he's wiping his eyeglasses off.  Another one is Colin Powell and Mrs. Bush [Barbara Bush] about to embrace, Bush I's [former president George Herbert Walker Bush] wife about to embrace.  And that was also in "Songs of My People".  Another recognizable shot is a picture I did of a female minister with her hands on her, on, on, two people kneeled down at the altar of a, man and a woman and that appeared in the Brooklyn Museum of Art [New York, New York] as well as in the book, "Committed to the Image".  And then, there's a second picture in that same series with the male minister standing on the steps of a burned out church behind him, and he has a Bible in his hand and just a look of determination.  Those were some of the pictures that, you know, people associate with me as most memorable that they've seen in a lot of places.
Speaker 1: What, what are your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: People.  I associate in people, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you wouldn't be satisfied and be like an Ansel Adams and go out and shoot the landscape or something like--?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not too enamored with inanimate objects.  I like things that move that I can communicate with and say, can you move a little bit to the left and raise your arm up or look this way, or I like things that I can get feedback from.  I'm not big on still life.  I enjoy some aspects of still life, lighted composition, but I usually like to shoot it as I find it.  I don't like to arrange a lot of things as Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] would say, I'm, I'm not into a lot of artificiality, you know.  I just like to shoot things as they are as I see them.  I'm more of a photo documentarian now.  And whether it's documenting social life, documenting environmental life or events, I just like to document what I see as it's happening.
Speaker 1: So, so most of the work that you do today is, is documenting events?
Speaker 2: A lot of event documentation, a lot of corporate event documentation, such as press conferences, conventions, speakers, news events, hearings, testimonies, events in which people have some vested interest who I have inclined to, wants to see the faces clear, and want primarily shot from the front and not the side or the back, not in a journalistic way necessarily.  I also do Zangler [ph.] portraiture, a lot of that, and now I'm starting to branch into a large scale individual commission portraits called the "Fabulous Fifties Series" ["Fabulous at Fifty" Series] and that's photographing people in their fifties and just really trying to show the infinite beauty in people when they hit their prime time.  I think it's one of the last periods in which people really wanted to get photographed to document where they are at this stage of life.  And we're much younger now than our parents.  We're much healthier than our parents.  And it's a critical age range, I think, to photograph and really to show how good we can really look.  And that's the "Fabulous Fifties Series".  And those are going to be large scale and custom hand-printed and cropped photographs starting off at, on an average, $5,000.  But it's one of a kind.
Story_ID: 192945
Speaker 1: Now, have you, have you branched off into digital photography?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't need to rush into that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Why not?  A lot of people talking about digital now.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good reason there.  A lot of people are going to it.  I tend to go into the opposite direction of the herd, you know.
Speaker 1: So you, you print a lot of black and whites [black-and-white photographs] yourself at home?
Speaker 2: I print all the black and whites in my own lab.  I think one of the aspects if you're going to buy a photograph is to see as much of the outcome of the image as it was an initial vision of the photographer going into the picture.  And I want to control as many steps from the beginning to the finished product as possible.  And there are about five steps in between when you first take a picture as to when you see it hung on the wall.  There's a person that shot it, then there's the person that processed it, which could change its whole demeanor and composition depending on how it was processed.  There's the person that printed the picture which determine the crop which determines what you actually see.  Then there's the person who actually mat and frames it.  All of those steps along the way can change the initial image of what the initial intent of the image was.  And then, it's how you hang it, and where it's hung, and how it's lit.  So those are all the important steps along the way that I want to try to control as many of those as possible, so that the finished product is as close to the vision of the photographer as you can get.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In terms of color, you, I take that you send that out to a--
Speaker 2: I sent the color to various labs depending on my need, yeah, and their level of quality, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If you had your choice, would you rather shoot color or black and white?
Speaker 2: Probably black and white because I can control it.  And it is less subjective, more objective, because you don't get into the elements of, of color.  Color clouds people's opinions in almost everything in every aspect of life.  When color is introduced, it, it heightens and then it elicits a different part of the brain, a different part of the sensory perception.  And it engenders thoughts and opinions that you don't necessarily need to hear when looking at a picture, or to consider when looking at a picture.  I just want you to look at the beauty, the content, the conceptualization, the symmetry, the art of the photograph, and not get bogged down with another element of whether you thought that shirt was too blue or didn't, didn't match the pants or those shoes and didn't go with that hat.  You, you start majoring in the minor unless it's a color shot, a color photograph that could only be rendered by color film.  If the intent is to show, say, fabrics or materials, or costumes or some ceremonial aspect, or the color of different beans or wheats or food, you know, those shots lend themselves best to color--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your favorite--
Speaker 2: --for fashion, fashion, obviously, in some cases, fashion needs to be shot in color.
Speaker 1: What, what's your favorite formatting?  What do you, do, do you like shooting thirty-five [millimeter] better or--
Speaker 2: I like thirty-five better because I can hold it and I can roll with it.  In the studio, I prefer two and a quarter.  I actually prefer the rectangular format over the square.  Square is nice, but I found the squares just what it is, a square.  And, eventually, you're going to have to crop it to either horizontal or vertical anyway, so I might as start with a horizontal or rectangular format.  In life, it's really rectangular.  Life is not square.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?  Life is really not a square.
Speaker 2: Well, when you go outside and look at things happen, it really, it's more compositionally suited for horizontal, or if it's buildings or narrow things or trees, it's vertical.  Rarely is, is, are scenes square where you would fill every corner of the image.  I mean, if you go out and photograph a landscape, you don't need a square to show all the sky or the gray [unclear], you want to have a horizontal or a rectangular shape, and more sky above or more ground below, and not put the horizon right in the middle of the picture frame.  And with a square, negative square photograph, you will probably be cropping down part of the top and bottoms anyway.  Square was great when we had album covers 'cause you had a square format.  Now, it doesn't matter with CDs [compact discs] because CDs are so small.  The largest picture that's going on a CD is a four by four anyway.  And a thirty-five millimeter does that very well.
Speaker 1: Now, did you shoot any album covers [unclear] shooting?
Speaker 2: Not album covers, but I've done three CD covers.  I, I love doing CD covers.  I like to see, and the work reproduced in other formats and forms other than newspapers and books and magazines.  I've done about thirty-five magazine covers.  And I've worked on about twelve to fourteen books that I've had work in, and I'm currently working on my own photographic book on the black church.  It's been a six-year project in the running.  Over 15,000 images is what I'll probably end up with and narrow it down to about 150 images for a book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 192946
Speaker 1: What's been the most exciting subject you've ever shot, the most exciting shoot you've ever done?
Speaker 2: Oh, unmistakably, Million Man March [1995, Washington, D.C.], yeah, hands down.
Speaker 1: Now, there's one photo here that I saw that has a, that's a group of the [unclear] of Islam.  I suppose they're waiting to get started, and their leader is whoever is the captain of the [unclear] is coming down the line--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --giving instructions.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --look, looks like it's at dawn.
Speaker 2: It was.  It was probably about between six and six-thirty on the morning of October 16, 1995, the day of the Million Man March.  And, and, ironically, that shot, that entire day in color, I think I did about twenty rolls of film that day.  And although they shot less good in black and white, in color, what caught my eye was--again, this is where, where color helps to add more information to the picture.  Everybody had on dark shoes except one guy.  He had on a pair of red shoes.  And I thought that was interesting.  One day I'll print that in color the way it was shot, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is what I'm saying.  One, one member of [unclear] had on a red shoe?
Speaker 2: Right.  I thought that was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was, that was a, that was a monumental day.  I spent a lot of time thinking about it, preparing for it.  I carried a lot of heavy equipment but it was necessary.  I enjoyed the twenty minutes I had with Thurgood Marshall and [HistoryMaker] Dr. Dorothy Height in his chambers.  That was a monumental day.  And it was interesting meeting Princess Diana [Spencer], photographing her--didn't get any really great shots out of it because some of the restrictions that was placed on me, but nonetheless, it was fun.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a contract to shoot that or did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was shooting for the home that she was visiting.  It was a home for babies with the AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] virus.  It's grandma's house and grandpa's house [TERRIFIC, Inc., Grandma's House, Washington, D.C.], and she was coming to visit those two homes.  But because those kids were, I guess like wards of the state, or their faces could not be shown.  So it's kinda hard to show emotion and reaction, particularly with kids and interaction with babies, and her picking up babies when you can't show the babies' face.  And then you have to shoot everything from behind the kids looking at Princess Diana.  In a lot of shots, you know, somebody's face would be inevitably shown and you can use it.
Story_ID: 192947
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you normally shoot it with?  I mean, what, what kind of--
Speaker 2: I use a Nikon thirty-five millimeter with basically three lenses, seventeen to twenty, twenty to thirty-five, thirty-five to seventy.  Now, let me refresh that, twenty to thirty-five, thirty-five to seventy, and the seventy to two-hundred.  Those are the three basic lenses.  I need to get one on the, on the wider angle lens side, maybe a fourteen or a seventeen to twenty.
Speaker 1: Do you usually carry three cameras when you go out, go out in the field to shoot a--
Speaker 2: No, I carry two cameras.  One is strictly for backup.  And when I'm shooting with the Nikons, I shoot with the Leica cameras.  We had two Leicas.  And in the studio, I used the Veronika System ETRS, which is a 645 format, so I still have the rectangular shape, or I use the Hasselblad [camera] of that with a square shape.  So I basically have four systems that I shoot with for specialized jobs.
Story_ID: 192948
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Jason Miccolo Johnson, J-A-S-O-N M-I-C-C-O-L-O J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a photographer.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, Twenty-One, Fifty-Six [November 21, 1956], Hayti, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 29, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: We're at my studio and home at 47 Q Street, Northwest, in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 192949
Speaker 1: And we're continuing an, an interview that we started last week.  Sir, tell, tell us about USA Today, how you got involved with USA Today.
Speaker 2: I actually started at USA Today in September of 1985 after my school alumni president from my college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] School of Communications, the alumni president, informed me that they had an opening there for a lab technician.  And I went and applied and they looked at some of my photography work, and they thought that I was more skilled and more suited to be a photographer, but I would have to go to a smaller paper and try to work my back.  And I didn't want to leave the city, so I settled on the lab technician job.  And within six months, I'd taken over as lab director and I ran the photo lab there until May of '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did, was that, was that useful to you in terms of--
Speaker 2: It was very useful.  It was one of the best jobs, probably the best job, other than working for myself that I ever had.  It allowed me a chance to develop my management skills.  I managed four lab technicians, and also gave me a chance to travel around the world.  During that time period, I went to some of the major events in sports, as well as in the political arena, the 1988, 1988 Winter and Summer Olympics, the Winter Olympics in Calgary [Alberta, Canada], and the Summer Olympics in Seoul, Korea.  I also went to two NC-double A [National College Athletic Association] Final Fours.  I ran the lab during the 1987 Pan American Games in Indianapolis [Indiana], as well as outside of the Super Bowl in Pasadena [California], and World Series in 1988 between St. Louis [Missouri] and Minnesota.  So it was a great experience.  And going to the Democratic National Convention, setting up a lab, newly designed, and having to set up and built inside the Superdome [ph.].  And the Republican National Convention, as well as the Democratic National Convention in Atlanta [Georgia], was a great experience.
Speaker 1: So you went from one big event to the next.
Speaker 2: One biggie to the next, and the month of September, I think I was gone out of the country the entire--all but maybe two days.  And most of February because I spent about a month on each of the Olympic assignments.  We had to get in a couple of weeks before the photographers and all the editors and writers came in to get things set up.  And then we'd always stay several days afterwards to break things down and get all the equipment through customs, all the serial numbers, and the checks and the shipping that was under my purview.
Story_ID: 192950
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do after USA Today?
Speaker 2: Well, after I left USA Today, I started out on my own, freelancing, and I've been doing that ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have to look back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean, was, was it easy to get out there on your own?
Speaker 2: It was easy for me because I had always done some part-time freelance work while I was working there.  And I'd just use those contacts, a lot of my church contacts, as a sort of a foundation to stabilize the business while I garnered new, new clients.  And I had a job the day I left and I've been working ever since, and it's primarily through word of mouth.  I've never advertised.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What have been some of your most memorable jobs?
Speaker 2: Of freelancing?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Probably the most memorable was photographing Thurgood Marshall and Dr. Dorothy Height in Justice Marshall's chambers [Supreme Court, Washington, D.C.] back in 1991 for the book, 'Songs of My People.'  And working on the 'Songs of My People' project was a similar event.  Also, the Million Man March [Washington, D.C.] was probably one of the greatest single events I've ever photographed in 1995, October 16th.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  How many rolls of film did you shoot at the Million Man March?
Speaker 2: I think I shot about twenty-two rolls that day.
Speaker 1: Did you get there before it started?  I mean, before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Got there early in the morning, probably about five-thirty, six in the morning, got my press credentials, and then took about half hour to wade through the crowd.  At that time, I wanted to get up to the front area where the press was on the risers.  And it was so packed at that time in the morning until the guys had to lift me up over some of the walls and partitions twice in order for me to get to the press area because it would have taken too long to go all the way around, and come around to the side entrance.  And I didn't know there was a side entrance at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you think that there, there were a million people there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I was certain it was more than a million.  And I followed up with the Million Woman March in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania, 1997].  And they had, in my estimation, more than a million, and I also photographed the Million Family March [2000].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where, where was that held?
Speaker 2: That was in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 192951
Speaker 1: Have you ever had any difficult days as a photographer?
Speaker 2: Oh, many difficult days.  It's usually when you're trying to cover an event that people don't want you to cover, or when you're fighting for a position, it's always difficult, particularly when you're trying to get to the front, say, of a march or a lineup.  And you always have handlers or press people who are working with the organization who are trying to move you of the way, and prevent you from getting the really key shots.  And I find that it's, it's usually more difficult working events in which the people look like me.  I always have the most difficulty there, it seems.
Speaker 1: In what sense and what do they do, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, they tend to be great doorkeepers as we could say.  And they tend to shun and move you out of the way and tend to hassle you more, while letting other photographers do their job, and get the great shots and the great position.  It's almost like--well, I'm sure it's systemic left over from slavery or self-hatred.  And that, how dare you be in position to get these great shots?  Let's see, position in or access is 75 percent of photography.  If you can't be in the position or have access to the event or the personalities, then you can't come away with the great shots.
Speaker 1: Now, that raises an interesting question about you.  You're, you're a very mild mannered person, soft spoken person.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you be that way when you're trying to get a shot?
Speaker 2: Yes, you can, you can, but as people ratchet up, the aggression that you have to sort of match that or you alter your style.  And I've learned to alter my style, rather than have a chaotic presence, I think.  One of my trademarks is that I work quietly and not try to be part of the, of the action, which I'm there to document the action.  And I don't want to be part of the story.  Some photographers work very nosily and they always want to be shouting instructions or directions, or they've got to stand on chairs or stools or in the middle of the whole scene, and that's just, just disruptive to me.  So when I'm faced with a pack of photographers always trying to get the same shot, and they are almost taller, I just yield the high ground.  And I go to the low ground, and just kneel down and shoot from low, and get a position and point of view that they wouldn't get.  Or if they're on the inside, I just float out to the outside.  There are great shots in many different positions.  It's just a matter of what you make of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, photographers who, who photograph celebrities are all are usually, you know, will run into a lot of criticism and trouble lately, especially after the death of Princess Diana, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the big focus on the paparazzi, you know, people, you know, shooting celebrities.  Have you ever had a rough time with a celebrity?
Speaker 2: Only one time that I can really think of that stands out, and that was with Oprah Winfrey from her handlers, but I had, you know, press credentials to be there.
Speaker 1: Where was it and what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a long story, and I'd rather not get into it but, needless to say, they wanted to ask me to stop shooting and, you know, pull my press credentials, and threaten to call my bosses at USA Today.  And I said, "fine, call them.  They're the ones that sent me here." So I didn't, never knew why they did that, but it wasn't, wasn't a good feeling, particularly when you have credentials to be somewhere.  But that's never stopped people from harassing you, whether you have credentials.  I've been harassed on assignments where I was hired to be there, and you still have a difficult time.  That's why I, I don't do a lot of events at which there are multiple photographers.  I prefer to be the only photographer to have exclusivity.  It creates problems.  And I never do paparazzi work.
Story_ID: 192952
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, can you kind of characterize the type of work you do?  I mean, basically, what would you see as--
Speaker 2: Well, right now, I primarily do corporate work, executive portraits, corporate events, some conferences and conventions, not as much as I used to.  I do some magazine work, editorial assignments, and I do some news assignments for new services and occasionally for newspapers.  The remainder of the time, it's individual commissioned work, commission portraits, or what I would call associate documentation, documentary work.  And that's what I'm trying to move more towards is doing documentary work, working on books, working on exhibitions, long-term projects that have some meaning and that will lend something to the culture and to the community, and leave a legacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what would you, in your opinion, what makes a good photograph?
Speaker 2: A good photograph, in my opinion, is one that has emotional impact, and the more senses it can touch, the better the photograph.  It, it should, it should cause you to feel something, either pain or laughter or sadness or joy, warmth, or you should be moved, you should hear something when you see the picture, or, or feel something, or if in case of like a food shot, a great food shot, it should almost make you smell the food.  But it should move one of your five senses, and the more senses that a photograph can move or motivate, the better.
Story_ID: 192953
Speaker 1: What is the field look like for young black photographers these days?  I mean, what, what does it look like to you?  It, it seems to me that it's something that if a person was dedicated to it as a craft, you know, you could, you know, you could do well if you had, you know, the talent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the field is wide open.  I think it's, compared to certainly, but for those who have a particular niche, or who have a particular point of view.  And that's what they really should be working on is just to hone in on their own point of view and their own skill sets, and that thing they bring to the table is the way they look at the world.  And that's what people are looking at is they're looking for unique views.  So you really don't have to fashion yourself after anyone, just become the best you that you can.  I think it's unlimited.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there are a lot of great young photographers out there who are under thirty, who are doing fantastic work in magazines, album covers, motion picture industry.
Speaker 1: Who are some that you-- can you give us the names of some?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly Kwaku Alston is excellent.  David Lee; Jeffery Alan Salter; C.W. Griffin; guys like Eli Reed.  Of course, he's been around longer than others, but they're just outstanding in what they do, and they're dedicated to it.  D Stevens, Bruce Talamon, motion picture, as well as some of the longstanding photography professionals like [HistoryMaker] Chester Higgins, Jr. and Howard Bingham.  But there are a lot of great photographers out there, and they, they're constantly coming up, you know.  Somebody will have an exhibition that you never heard of, or Michael Cunningham who just did the "Crowns[: Portraits of Black Women in Church]" book.  So there are a, there are a lot of great photographers out there and, and some good female photographers coming up along as well.  And, and, of course [HistoryMaker] Sharon Farmer who was former President [Bill] Clinton's Chief White House photographer.  And Jeanne Moutoussamy Ashe has been out here while.  But there's some great female photographers on the horizon, particularly in photojournalism.  They're, they're at many of the metropolitan newspapers now and they're honing their skills, and they're getting better all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How has digital photography affected your work or, or has it?
Speaker 2: Well, digital photography has affected my work in the sense that I have more clients asking for digital because of the quick turnaround.  And clients like to have it as fast as you can shoot it.  If it spit right out like a Polaroid, they would prefer to have that, but I don't do digital.  I don't have digital equipment at this time.  I may look into digital at some point down the road, but because of the things that I do, I'm not so deadline conscious.  There's really not a drive and need for me for me to invest five to $7,000 in a digital camera, equipment, the software, the printers, scanners, things like that. Right now, I'll, I'll ask a client if they need an assignment turned around in less than an hour.  And most of the time, they do not.  Ninety-nine percent of the time, they do not need it faster than an hour or two.  And in an hour or two, I can have that film put on a disc and you've got digital.  And that's really all it is, is images on the CD [compact] disc that you can essentially send around the country fast by using the web or using the internet or email to get the photo around to multiple sources quickly, and without having to, you know, utilize excess costs and making prints, or the time it will take to ship things out.  So I do that all the time.  That's not a problem, but I don't feel that I need a digital camera at this point.  And I don't like to be in the speed game, and digital is a speed game.  I'm not trying to be the fastest draw out there.  I'm just trying to do what I do to the best of my ability and keep pushing envelope.  I mean, I want to take photography where Miles [Davis] took jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me now, do you, do you have much interaction with young people that, that, in terms of teaching them photography or, or--
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I see some young photographers who will come to one of our organizations.  I'm outgoing chairman of the board of the African American Photographers Association here in Washington, D.C., known as the Exposure Group [African American Photographers Association, Washington, D.C.].  And I'll meet some at some of the monthly meetings, or they'll see me out on assignments and may come up to me.  But I don't get a lot of requests from young people to show them anything or work, you know, with me.  Occasionally, I'll get a photographer who says they want to intern or they would like to do some apprenticeships.  I just don't have a lot of opportunities for those type of assignments because most of our assignments are solo type of opportunities.  But as, as many will ask and avail themselves of time, I'm willing to, to show and teach whatever I know.
Story_ID: 192954
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: For photography, or just in general?
Speaker 1: Just in general.
Speaker 2: Well, in general, I, I think that--well, my hopes would be for the black community to fight the true number one enemy which is ignorance.  That is the overriding and prevailing enemy of black people, is ignorance.  And I say that from the dictionary sense of the work, lack of knowledge.  And it's lack of self-knowledge, lack of history, lack of community knowledge, lack of family knowledge, and just overall lack of information, and not because it's not available, because they have not gone out to seek it.  That isn't the number one issue, I believe.  And even those things that you cannot necessarily eradicate because they've been institutionalized like racism, or because they are human dynamics like discrimination, you, through knowledge and through information, can address those behaviors.  And you will have a better sense of how to react to them.  And it's not so much what happens to you, but it's how you react to it, how you respond to what happens to you.  Certain things are inevitable.  You're not going to be able to stop, but you can, you can come up with defensive strategies, I would say, and ways to combat it that makes your life much smoother and keep you on track.  So my hope would be that we would be become more knowledgeable and utilize information to move us forward and that we would develop a financial base because people who cannot finance their own freedom will never be free.
Story_ID: 192955
Speaker 1: When you look back over the body of work that you've been able to create so far, I know you mentioned photographing [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height and Thurgood Marshall--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's, I guess that'd, that'd be part of a legacy, but tell us of that, what was, is there any, any, are there any stories from that shoot that you could tell us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, yes, that was an interesting twenty minutes.  I had requested twenty minutes with Justice Marshall, and had been refused at least three different occasions through phone calls and through letters.  And the term, the Supreme Court [Washington, D.C.] term had ended in November.  And I had started making requests probably back in May of 1990 and, or 1991, rather.  And this was after we had began shooting "Songs of My People" which was in June of ninety [1990].  And we were not able to get him to say yes, and we were rolling to the next year.  And I remember--I thought to ask Dr. Height if she would join in this great photo, and make it really historical, these two great giants together.  And I asked her to make the request on my behalf of Justice Marshall, and he said yes to her.  And so, I got the call one December, December 7th, and we went down to the Supreme Court.  And I had more stuff than I needed.  I had all kind of things because the call came that morning, and I had to be there, I think, about one-thirty that evening.  And I knew that it was going to be really tight for parking, to find a parking space.  And so, I had my neighbor to drive me down there, and, fortunately, he was home.  And I had all kind of equipment and bags and back drops since I didn't want to be without anything I may need, but it was much more equipment that I, that I needed.  And I went in and, and set up two umbrellas.  And I was getting ready to plug in my power pack, which has the three prongs, and I had an adapter for the three prong to switch it to two prong.  But as most of my new equipment now, one of the prongs on the outlet on the plug is a little larger than, than the other one.  It's the ground wire.  And as I looked around to try to find somewhere to plug in, none of the plugs, none of the outlets in Justice Marshall's office took three prongs, nor did it take the current--today's two prongs with one of the prongs being wider.  It was a old style straight two prong, same size, and I was about to panic.  I was thinking, what am I going to do?  I have no way to plug in my power pack.  I have no light source.  And I had a piece of equipment that ran to another flash outlet that had the standard electrical outlet plug, but it was very narrow.  It was very small.  It's only about eighteen inches longer, this particular cord.  So I ran that cord into the power pack and I set the power pack on the edge of a desk, as I recall.  I couldn't move very far.  I could move about eighteen inches, so I had to vary my shots using different lenses, which did not give me a lot of leeway.  But I was able to get in one plug.  And I think I may have even used a two-prong plug on a three-prong adapter and probably ran two of the, the prongs off of the side.  It was a floor mounted electrical outlet source which is very unusual.
Story_ID: 192956
Speaker 1: So I finally got that done and took some pictures, I didn't feel like I really captured what I needed, you know.  You can usually feel when you get the great shot because Justice [Thurgood] Marshall wasn't the kind of person to do a lot of smiling.  And he always had this very serious look.  And I asked him if he could smile and try to get to liven up a little bit.  And he had kind of a, just a little bit of grizzly grin, but not much.  And he said, "this is about all the smiling I'm going to do."  And then I thought about--I had previsioned the shot of the two of them sitting maybe on the couch or two chairs with the coffee table, maybe having coffee, something sort of relaxed or having tea.  That's how I previsualized it, but, of course, when you get in these rooms, you see none of that.  There were no couches.  There was a chair across from his desk.  And then there was this huge chair in the corner of his office in which there was a monkey skin hung over it.  So I'm trying to look and see where I might do this shot at.  And I had him to tell me about the monkey skin and this big chair.  I think he said he'd gotten the monkey skin from Kenya, on a trip to Kenya.  And so, that's where I decided to do the picture.  And I asked Dr. [HistoryMaker Dorothy] Height to sit down because Justice Marshall said once he sit down, he wasn't getting back up.  So he stood beside her on the chair, and I remember her turning to sort of look to him to see was it okay to sit down in his chair.  And I guess she sort of, you know, gave way to him to give the cue that, you know, it was okay since it was in his office, and all this certain amount of respect and decorum that she had afforded him on that.  And we, we got some, some nice portraits, but it really wasn't that uhh shot that I'd thought that I should have come away with.  And as I was breaking the lights and, and he asked me, if I'd gotten the shots that I needed.  And I said yes, and we were talking about some other things and about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [, Jr.] and things happened during the Civil Rights [Movement].  And he and Dr. Height were talking.  I was breaking the lights down, and I left one light up, and I rotated the umbrella towards his desk which was on the opposite wall from where we did the former shot of the two of them.  And I photographed Dr. Height seated across from his desk.  I think I did probably about four or six shots of her.  And then I just took a couple of shots, just four frames, I think, of him, as he has sit down behind his desk.  And he had taken off his glasses and was wiping his glasses with a big napkin.  And those four frames proved to be, you know, very humanistic and natural looking shots.  And, and much to my surprise, one of those were selected to go into the "Songs of My People", as opposed to the shot of the two of them, and--which hurt me for a while.  I, I was excited that I'd photographed him.  And I ran back and immediately called one of the editors and told them, I, I'd finally, you know, got Thurgood Marshall, I got Thurgood Marshall.  I photographed him.  I got the film and I was nervous when I was rolling the film up and processed it myself.  And I was just trying to think of everything to make sure nothing went wrong as I was processing the film.  And I made some quick contact sheets and ran it over and showed it to the editor.  And he said, well, that's fine, but the book has already gone up to New York [New York], you know, they were in the draft stages.  I said, but you gotta put this picture in there.  So I lobbied hard for them to put the picture in there 'cause they weren't going to use it initially.  And they took out some pictures and made some adjustments, and ran that one photograph of Justice Marshall wiping off his glasses.
Story_ID: 192957
Speaker 1: Let me ask you at this point.  You're still young, you know, but at this point, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: At this point, I would say my legacy is probably the work that I've done with the African American Photographers Association--the Exposure Group [African American Photographers Association, Washington, D.C.] having really reinvigorated that organization and being the--becoming the first president, writing the bylaws, the constitution, one of the three incorporators, and serving for five or six years as president, and then later as chairman of the board.  I think that would be one of my strong legacies because that's more institutional building.  And I'm more concerned with building institutions than becoming an institution.  Also, I think the work that I've done, or the work that I'm doing currently, on the black church will probably be one of my great legacies.  I could see that taking the rest of my life to complete or doing multiple volumes on it in fact.  And probably the third thing will be the tribute that I did to Gordon, for [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, on his ninetieth birthday when I brought together ninety of the top African American photographers in the country to help celebrate his birthday, and not only in the group shot on 126th Street and Harlem [New York, New York], but also with the subsequent dinner that night where [Richard] Dick Gregory gave an outstanding performance.  And I think that, that tribute bar none that was probably the greatest single event that I've done photographically in my life.  It touched so many people and it would have so many great memories.  And there are ninety, ninety-five, a hundred different stories that could be told from each person's point of view.  It will rank right up there with the great jazz photo ["A Great Day in Harlem", or "Harlem 1958"] that was done by Art Kane in 1958 with all the famous jazz artists, incidentally, on 126th Street, but East 126th Street in Harlem.  And we were on West 126th Street.  So those three things, the Gordon Parks tribute for his ninetieth birthday, my work with the Exposure Group, and reinvigorating that organization, as well as the work that I'm doing now on, on the black church, documenting the black church across the country.
Story_ID: 192958
Speaker 1: So, do, do you see yourself as, as a more of a part of a community than as a lone individual?  A lot of your work is solitary, you know, but I'm sur-, and it's kinda surprising that you frame yourself within the context of the community.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I've always been a team player.  I played baseball in high school, football in junior high school.  I've always been a part of team efforts in softball teams.  I like the team concept.  And photography is a solo type of profession, particularly as you're doing it, unless you're covering news events with a lot of photographers around, or you're covering major social events, then you have some camaraderie, but the act itself is a solo act, like a painter.  It's a very solo act, and if you do dark room work like I do, then you spend days upon days by yourself working in the dark room printing pictures.  And I love that process because it frees your mind to, ironically, to think about everything else but photography, and at the same time, it is a single minded focusness to get that one picture just like you want it.  And that could be anywhere from a five to thirty second process to make each print.  It's, it's a very interesting profession in that way that it's both solitary and communal.  And the results are--can be viewed singly and solo, or by thousands of people coming through it in exhibition, or seeing a picture in a book.  And so it has that, that wide distribution and the opportunity for many people to appreciate it and I like that.  And it has lasting qualities which I, I really love--the institutional quality of photography like words and books.  And, therefore, I tend to work towards those things in which my pictures will be used in ways that it will have long-lasting staying power, books, exhibitions, museums, private collections, then magazines.  Those stay around much longer.
Story_ID: 192959
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you had to do it again?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have, I would have gone to Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] graduation the year that James Van Der Zee was getting an honorary degree and met him face to face after having talked to him so many time on the phone as a college student when I was in Memphis [Tennessee].  I really wished that I could have met him face to face but other than that, I have very few regrets.  There were some, sometimes I would have chosen a different lenses or, you know, you can always go back and say, I would have shot this differently, or I would have lit this differently, or I had the wrong lens, or those kind of things, or particularly scenes that you probably would never see again, or places that you visited, that you'd probably never get back to.  Those are the ones I tend to think most about in advance because you have a sense that this may be the only time I will do this, and this would probably the other time I will be there.  And I think about the Thurgood Marshall shot in December of 1990.  And then the following year in ninety-one [1991], I was at his retirement press conference, and then later on, he died.  And everybody looked back.  And it's, it's hard to believe now, you know, ten or twelve years later, that I had to fight to actually get that photograph in the book, that they weren't going to include it.  But as soon as he died, people were calling me and said, oh, man that was really prophetic that you got the picture of Thurgood Marshall.  And my aim at that time was to get the top African American official in each of the branches of government, the legislative, the executive, and the judicial.  And I'd photographed Dr. Sullivan, Louis Sullivan, who was at that time, head of health and human services, and was the highest member in the executive branch.  And Thurgood Marshall was the highest ranking African American in the judicial branch.  And I sought to photograph Congressman [William] Bill Gray [III], who was the highest ranking in the legislature branch at that time, but unsuccessfully was able to, to get in touch with him, but that was the goal.  So, you look back and you say, I could have done something differently, but there are no major regrets other than not, I really regret not having met Van Der Zee face to face.  I enjoyed talking with him, enjoyed listening to his stories.  I would have loved to have known about Mr. Withers' [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] working career much earlier.  I think that would have just been a really enormous thing to have found out about in high school, say, for instance.  I think we would have, we would have had just that many years to forge a close relationship.  And we have a close bond now that's as close as any brother that I have or any uncle.  And I would have loved to have known about his work much earlier.
Story_ID: 192960
Speaker 1: Do you have like, say, can you name for us maybe five favorite photographers of yours?
Speaker 2: Yes, five favorite photographers.  It's going to make the other ninety-five of the top one hundred a little upset.  But the people's work I most enjoy who are--I'll, I'll do the five that are alive.  I love [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] Mr. Withers' work, Jeffery Alan Salter, C.W. Griffin, Kwaku Alston.  I think they're just fantastic photographers and they bring a fresh look.  Mil-, Milbert Brown is outstanding.  And [HistoryMaker] Bob Black, John White--that's more than five.  It's hard to name five because I think about so many things.  I look at photography as in charge of about three things, those who inspire me to be a better photographer through just talking with them, the knowledge they pass on, the information they share.  I look at those who have a unique point of view, unique shooting point of view, I mean, those who really come back with a shot that make you go wow!  How did he do that or where did he take that?  Which vantage point?  Or something that you can't quite figure out, or those photographers who, whose style transcends everybody else, and it's really pace setters.  That's what I look at.  And those are the ones that really move me.  And, and incidentally, those are the photographers' work I collect, you know, or Roland Freeman, I have.  I have Jeffery Alan Salter's photographs.  I've got Roland Freeman photographs on my wall.  I have Bob Black's photographs.  I've got--recently acquired the photograph from [Charles] Chuck Stewart, legendary photographer.  But I, I also love the work of some of the great jazz artists like Herman Leonard and Cartier-Bresson, Henri Cartier-Bresson, or some people say "Henry" Cartier-Bresson.  Arnold Newman, whom I've worked with, is an excellent photographer.  I mean he's one of the so-called fathers of the environmental portrait, and it's fun working for him, with him, around him.  And he's a great guy.  And, of course, [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, just legendary.  But those, those photographers are the ones that inspire me and motivate me.  They are the photographers whose books I buy, whose photographs I collect.
Story_ID: 192961
Speaker 1: And, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as, as the man who tried to move photography along the same parallels, and push it to the same limits that Miles Davis pushed jazz.  I'd like to be remembered as somebody constantly striving to do something new and fresh, as a person who really strived for excellence, and to bring together the community of, of photographers, particularly African American photographers, and to get more exposure for their work, and to get them better paid and better compensated, and better appreciated.  That's the way I'd like to be remembered as a photographic institution builder who worked more towards building an institution and not just becoming one, and as a person who was a friend of photographers and photography worldwide.  But, mostly, I'd like to be remembered as a person who had a good eye and could bring home a good image.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 192962
Speaker 1: This is a photograph from when I was in the first grade in Central High--well, Central Elementary, Central High School in Hayti, Missouri.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of all my brothers and myself.  I'm the one with the shades on.  That was taken about 1978 at the funeral of one of my uncles in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Are you ready?
Speaker 1: This is a more recent picture of me taken in probably 1994.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother in--I think that was taken in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  In what year?
Speaker 1: Probably, I don't know the exact year, but I would say that that was before I was born, so that was probably in the late forties [1940s] or early fifties [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And this is a shot of my dad and that was probably taken in the early fifties [1950s] or mid-fifties [1950s], probably sometime during the fifties [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is another photograph of me taken around 1996, I believe.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a very recent picture just taken in 2002, a self-portrait, taken here in the studio.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks and myself taken during an awards dinner in 1989 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And here's a shot of me at the scene of the great gathering of photographers for Gordon Parks' ninetieth birthday tribute on 126th Street in Harlem [New York, New York].  I'm calling out the names of the photographers who are to be in the picture so they can go across the street and get in position.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bob Black was talking about that, that evening, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And this photo is the result of that effort--ninety, actually, it end up being ninety photographers in the photo with Gordon Parks on his ninetieth birthday.  And that was taken at 126th Street, West 126th Street in Harlem on the steps of [HistoryMaker] Vy Higginsen, who was the creator of the stage play, "Mama, I Want to Sing".
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, wait, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: All right.  Here's a picture of myself and Arnold Newman at the White House with [former] President [Bill] Clinton.  We were just finishing up the photo shoot of President Clinton.  I assisted Arnold Newman.  And the gentleman on the right is another assistant to Arnold Newman.  It's--we're just looking at a book that Arnold Newman was presenting to President Clinton.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  When was this?
Speaker 2: That was, I want to say that was probably 1997 or ninety-eight [1998].  I think it was the last year that Clinton was in office.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was 2000.
Speaker 1: Was that 2000?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1999, yeah, 2000, that was when the election was.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And this is from that same photo shoot.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Myself greeting President Clinton with Arnold Newman standing in the center in the background and Arnold's assistant.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: Are there any dates on the back of these?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, this one says, official White House photograph, no date.
Speaker 2: No date?
Speaker 1: It just says, official White House photograph.  It's in numbers (unclear).
Speaker 2: August of ninety-nine [1999], seventeen August of ninety-nine [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How about this one?
Speaker 1: This was taken in Chicago [Illinois] in 1997 at a National Association of Black Journalists Convention.  We were back stage.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right, next.
Speaker 1: And this is Arnold Newman photographing President Clinton in the Oval Office [White House, Washington, D.C.] in August of '99 [1999].  And I'm assisting Arnold, setting up the camera on the tripod.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an interesting photograph of myself on the left with legendary historian, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin to the right, and [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, Jr. in the center.  Lerone Bennett, of course, is the editor, "Ebony" magazine, senior editor.  And that, the story behind this this shot--this is taken at the National Airport in Washington, D.C. on a Saturday morning in 2001.  And we had just finished awarding [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson, who's Lerone Bennett's employer, with an award in which Mr. Bennett came to pick up the John H. Johnson's Friend of Photography Award.  So I was seeing him off at the airport the next day to make sure he'd gotten the award there with no problem, and to make sure it was all wrapped and secure 'cause it was a large award.  And I get to the airport and ran into [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. and John Hope Franklin, and I didn't have a camera with me, of course.  I was dressed casual on a Saturday morning, but I ran into a local store inside the airport, and bought a disposable camera.  And I gave the camera to Jesse Jackson, Jr. and he took this picture.  And then I took some of him with John Hope Franklin and Lerone Bennett.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's cool.
Speaker 1: Jesse Jackson, Jr, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Photographer on [unclear].
Speaker 2: And this is one of my philanthropic efforts which we hadn't talked about.  But one of the things that I've loved to do is--I like to think of myself as a junior philanthropist.  And this is one of my efforts to reward intelligence and education.  This young lady's name is Skylar Byrd.  She had recently scored a 1600 on SAT.  She ws a [Benjamin] Banneker [Academic] High School student from Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C.   And during an assembly--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Gordon Parks and myself in, in Mr. Parks' New York apartment.  That was in, I believe, 1999 with--  This is a photograph of me on the fantail of the USS Puget Sound, probably somewhere floating around in the Mediterranean [Sea].  And I was shown in my gear there, my flight gear.  I would photograph the helicopter landings and departures.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, year?
Speaker 2: That was in 1976.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What about this one?
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken inside the, the dark room on board ship where I spent three years, USS Puget Sound, AD38--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: --and that was approximately 1977.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Story_ID: 192963
Speaker 1: Ah, and this is one of the great cool photos of me in high school, probably my junior year, or maybe my senior year because I think I wore this suit to the prom.  Yeah, that was my senior year.  That was 1974.  And I think that might have been the night of my prom, complete with red pants, red vest, red bow tie and a red (unclear).  And this photograph is a picture of myself, my uncle, Elmore [ph.] Stewart [ph.], and his daughter, Serenthia [ph.] K. Stewart [ph.].  I was reared by my aunt and uncle.  After the death of my parents and after the death of my grandmother, I moved to stay with them in 1968 until I graduated from high school in '74 [1974] so they took me in.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So this photo was nearly that period naturally?
Speaker 1: Right, that, that photo was probably about 1972, so I think my cousin may have been home from college.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This shot was 1990, no, 1976, probably off the coast of Italy, maybe Augusta Bay or Catania [Italy], and that's when I was in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And we're just floating around on a little time off, a--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this young lad is a seventeen-year-old who had just finished boot camp and that's the official photograph of Great Lakes, Illinois, 1974.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's probably September 1974.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's--then, again, nobody else would know so it sounds--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.  We know what this is, like (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is the--my famous picture of Thurgood Marshall and Dr. Dorothy Height taken on December 7, 1990 for which I thought was going to be for "Songs of My People", but it didn't make the book.  But it made her walls and it made her proud.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was taken in Justice Marshall's office--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Ten/eighty-nine in New York at a--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Start once again.  You caught me, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right.
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in New York City [New York, New York] in 1989 at a tribute to the designers of Seventh Avenue [New York, New York], and doing a fashion show tribute at the convention of the National Association of Black Journalists.  On the left is Caroline Alexander, followed by Naomi Campbell and Sheila Johnson and Alan [ph.] Cephers, all top models--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 1: --a very young Naomi Campbell in that very--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of a reverend in Charlotte, North Carolina, Reverend Larry Matthews [ph.], shortly after one of the old churches had been burned down, when the old church buildings had been burned down.  This was in--there's a--I think it was called Merklyn [ph.] Presbyterian Church.  And they have a new facility, which is in the background. that this is one of the older original buildings.  And it had recently been burned during the rash of burned out churches that happened in ninety-six [1996] and ninety-seven [1997].  This picture was taken in 1996.  And it really was the early beginnings of my photographic documentary on the black church.  And then up in the book committed to the image, it was also in the exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum of Art in New York [New York].  Are you getting any reflections from the bookcase and all that stuff?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The bookcase is fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we got it.  Next.
Speaker 1: I think it--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, that's the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good.  This is a photograph of the Newark Penn Station in Newark, New Jersey.  It was taken in this year 2003.  As I was riding along the Amtrak to New York, I looked out of the window.  It was the first time I had sat on the left side of the train riding up to New York.  I always sit on the right side, on the sun side, on the east side.  And it's ironic all the things you see--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: --when you just change sides.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: And I never noticed this before because usually when I come back from New York [New York] to Washington, D.C., I'm on the right side, but it's night time.  And I just had my camera prepared to shoot.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Well, this is one of the great pictures from my pregnancy series.  It ran on the cover of my postcards when I had an exhibition entitled "Nine" celebrating the beauty of expectant mothers.  It's a shot in 1997.  And I was really just trying to portray various stages of pregnancies and really show the beauty of being pregnant.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I've never seen a belly that looked so much like a breast in my life.
Speaker 2: I've heard a lot of people say that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Nicely lit, huh?
Speaker 2: Thanks.  And I wanted to show this, light that, up around her neck, please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a, a shot from my nude series and I just like the lighting and the curves and angles.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: It was taken in 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
