Story_ID: 658628
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Isaac Feldman is the videographer, and we're gonna start out by slating the interview, so I need to have you state and spell your name, and give your date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones, or William Tass Jones.  Bill, B-I-L-L, T period, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, or William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M Tass, T-A-S-S, Jones.  I am--J-O-N-E-S.  I am the artistic director of New York Live Arts, and I'm the--one of the co-founders of Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company.
Speaker 1: I need to have your--
Speaker 2: My birthdate.
Speaker 1: --your birthday (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born February 15, 1952 in Bunnell, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'd like to have today's date.
Speaker 2: Good question (laughter).
Speaker 1: Eighth I think.
Speaker 2: Today is October 8, 2014.
Speaker 1: Our location?
Speaker 2: And we are at 219 West 19th Street in Manhattan [New York], at New York Live Arts.
Story_ID: 658629
Speaker 1: Okay, I usually ask occupation, but you already answered that, so five questions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they're People magazine-ish, short answers--we ask everyone. Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  Right.  Okay, well, anything that my companion [Bjorn Amelan] makes for me.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think it's now the spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: In the mesa of northern New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Favorite color.  I can't say that I have a favorite color, although I like color.
Speaker 1: Okay; and favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: "Naming things is only the intention to make things." That's a quotation from 'Memorial Day 1950' by Frank O'Hara.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm just always amazed at how people have their favorite phrase that comes up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, those of us who are interviewed all the time, you have them.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know (laughter)?
Story_ID: 658630
Speaker 1: I wanna start out by--and I know--we do biographical, and I know you've documented this a lot, so I'm just gonna ask you some, some questions about your parents.  I'd like to first ask you about your father, so can you give--
Speaker 2: Now, before we start this, you know, of course, I've just--Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] has been promising and, and pursuing me for the last five, six years; finally, I'm supposed to be going on to do his 'Finding Your Roots' project, and I just finished spitting into a little tube today, and they asked--a questionnaire; it was embarrassing how shallow my understanding is of the background.  My sisters--every--we all got together--simple question, what was my father's father's name?  What was my father's father's name?  So, I'll do my best, but there--the information is not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you were asking me about my--
Speaker 1: Your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Augustus Jones, and I should say Augustus Jones, Sr.
Speaker 1: And he--his year of birth?
Speaker 2: This is a--one of those questions (laughter).  I'm not sure; I think it was 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's describe your, your father.
Speaker 2: My father, Gus Jones, was one of--and this is another one of those questions; I'm going to stretch and say eight children.  I believe he was near the end of that group.  He was, according to Grandma Flossie--Flossie Jones, who married Ike Jones and they were both Joneses, the, the family originates in Columbus, Georgia.  Now, my father, was he born in Columbus, Georgia?  I'm not sure; I think he may have been, and he was a colorful character.  I mean every boy makes his father colorful, pro and con.  He was a--quite athletic, he was called Red, as a lot of black men at that period were called who were light skinned; he was obviously enterprising and physical.  At the time that he and my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] met, he was a runner on the turpentine plantation, and this was in Georgia where they met, and I'm not quite sure where--was it in Valdosta [Georgia]?  My mother was born in Waycross [Georgia]; it was somewhere in that area.  He would run all day, slashing the pine trees and putting in the shivved funnel, so that others would come by with a bucket and catch the, the sap; that's what he was doing.  When my mother met him, he--according to what he said, he had been in--left--run away from home to join the gypsies (laughter); somewhere before he was fifteen, he was--spent--according to him, time on the chain gang.  It was rumored that--not rumored--actually, he had actually killed at least one person that I know of, in a family dispute.  He was never in the [U.S.] military; he married my mother when she already had four children, and they proceeded to have nine more, one of whom died.  His great break was--great break, he made it for himself; in 1948, he decided to become a contractor for the migrant stream, which was obviously a, a growth industry.  I believe that they had moved from Georgia to Bunnell, Florida because they were--it was more year round work, and as I understand it, they were cutting cabbage and doing those sorts of things, but he was going to start his own business getting a few trucks, bus, and collecting people and traveling up and down the eastern seaboard, harvesting fruits and vegetables.  The money crop at that time was in Upstate New York; it was potatoes in the Finger Lakes region [New York].  I was born in '52 [1952]; they stopped migrating in '55 [1955], and business was good until it was not good.  Mechanization, competition from Puerto Rican or Hispanic workers, and they--it was not a stable business, the workforce was very unpredictable.  People would come to the North with you, and there was a contract--they were supposed to work, pay a certain amount, and then they would go back, but after a while, people were using it as a one way ticket to the North, so the business didn't do well, but he did decide in 1955 that he would be a black Yankee, and he wanted his kids to have what, quote, the white people--white man's kids had; I take this to be that he was fed up with even the remnants of Jim Crow which, at that time, was supposed to be officially over but we know it was not.  And he decided to settle in that German-Italian community.  To talk about my father seems to be I'm talking about the, the whole family, but that's what he represents in my life.
Story_ID: 658631
Speaker 1: Let me ask you then about your mother.  Can you talk about her?
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: And give her name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Estella Lucivee; maiden name Walden [Estella Edwards Jones].  Her mother was Anna Edwards and her father was Tom Walden.  She was--I believe, I believe she might have been the youngest of Aunt Mattie, Uncle Cap'n, Aunt Purity [Purity Roger], Estella.  I think there were only four of them.  Oh, there was another, Willie Mae [ph.].  And, as I say, my mother was the youngest, and she was called Priss because I imagine she was, I don't know, officious (laughter).  She was the good girl, she was always, I don't know, telling people what to do.  They called her Priss, and I thought it was a very nice name until I understood what Priss meant, and it made me understand her in a different way.  She is a large woman, she said that was her punishment because when she was a young skinny thing, she and her sisters would sit on the porch in the South making fun of big women, and her mother said, "Ah, be careful, 'cause someday, the Lord's gonna strike--." And surely enough, she--was--she was a big woman.  She had this particular blend of kind of a robust assertiveness, and a deep insecurity, she never felt that she read very well.  I think my mother had--at one point, we were in--a fourth grade education; my father's [Augustus Jones, Sr.] was maybe six or seventh grade education.  He was known--he loved to read dime store novels, particularly Westerns; she read the Bible.  She saw herself as a God fearing woman, she would--she was the one that reminded us of what hard work was, how--when they picked cotton, her mother expected them to lead the field, and we were so spoiled because we were in the potato field, we were out there working in the sun as well, but we were so busy running our mouths like these Joneses do, that we weren't out there working our hands.  So there was this kind of feeling that she wanted you to toe the line, carry your own weight, be good people.  But she did not approve of house cleaning; she said, "I've done enough of it for all of you, I don't want you to clean house."  We were potato pickers, but that was their own business--that was different.  She and he were partners to a degree; I think the educational distance between them made for problems, and I think their temperament made for problems.  She was extremely hurt woman by the world, which made her quite belligerent oftentimes, and really difficult with raising children--spare the rod and spoil the child.  I'm sure that's not unusual for a lot of African American people of her generation.  "Son, you can do whatever you want, but don't go to jail."  Because the understanding was that they, white people, would like to see you in jail, if not under the jail, so that's the one thing; she knows you're gonna be who you are, but don't go to jail--that was some of the wisdom.  And she was a great spontaneous speaker, preacher.  When she and my father moved to San Francisco [California] from the Upstate New York area--they moved in about 1970, '71 [1971], she adopted a church [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, San Francisco, California] there in Divisadero [Street], which is a very large black church under Reverend Lumpkin [Eugene Lumpkin, Jr.], who's quite famous.  But she was invited to bring the prayer because she had that old time fire, at least she said, "They always turn to me to bring the prayer, why do you think that is?"  I know why it was, because she could make that connection with her God very, very quickly; she toured with me, as you read in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones], in 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' ['Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land,' Bill T. Jones] and did a benediction every night before this work, which was a dream come true because she'd always wanted to be a professional singer and performer.
Story_ID: 658632
Speaker 1: So, how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My, my parents met when my father [Augustus Jones, Sr.], this young, dashing man who was one of the best turpentine runners, I'm not sure what the name was, was living the single man life, and he met these young, these young kids who were running around all the time and they really needed a man in their life, and he began to charm them with--what do you call that--peanut brittle; he had whole--big cans of it.  So the kids would be coming home with hands full of candy and, and they kept talking about this guy.  His mother--I'm sorry, my mother's mother, Anna [Anna Edwards], was doing wash for the white farmer, and my father, this young man, wanted wash done, and he said, "Oh, I know a gal who will do it."  The mother took the laundry, but my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] actually--and my father met; as a result, she already at that time, I believe, had four children, as I--just--had just said.  And there was a, a romance that started, which sounds like what they both needed at that time.
Story_ID: 658633
Speaker 1: What do you take from both your mother [Estella Edwards Jones] and your father [Augustus Jones, Sr.]?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Middle age makes this question come back every day (laughter) in neon.  From my father, I take a, a dreaminess, a kind of affability or a desire to be affable; my father was a great back slapper and storyteller, he had an introspective quality; like I say, he did like to read.  I think he was a very passionate man, but he had a drinking problem, he had all these demons; he would talk to himself and all, and my mother would say, "That's because of the dead people haunting him."  I think he had a lot of stuff.  Like I say, he had been in the chain gang.  My mother was a rock, but a volatile one; she was never--she never got over the fact that she could not go and sit with her mama [Anna Edwards].  We had the cult of mothers in my house, the mother; the father was less important, so--her mama.  One night when the house was on fire--the house had been--it's been set on fire; she takes us children in her night clothes, run it--down the hill in the car--in the middle of the woods--'cause we lived way back in the woods, and I remember her getting out of the car when her car stalled, and just screaming, "Mama."  I never heard my mother call her mother that--said a great deal.  And my father was cremated and his ashes distributed in San Francisco [California] at the Zen monastery [San Francisco Zen Center] there, with their permission.  But my mother, when she died--and I was sort of taken aback, she didn't wanna be mingled with him, she wanted to go be buried next to her mama.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting (cough)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know; that's interesting right there.
Story_ID: 658634
Speaker 1: I wanna ask what your earliest memory is, of growing up.
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Earliest memories--at this point, a lot of them were quite fictionalized, but I will do my best.  I do remember one that had to do with all of us kids having a party of, of, of chaos, as kids will, and I guess we had been warned that we should go to sleep.  We didn't pay attention; we were jumping--I was one of the youngest one, if not the youngest one at that time.  We were still in Florida, and suddenly, Estella [Jones' mother, Estella Edwards Jones] comes in like a--literally, a tornado, a whirlwind, with her switch, beating anybody she could get her hands on.  And I panicked and, in my nightshirt, ran out, and my--one of my earliest memories is kind of an out of body experience of running down the road and they--in the--we lived in the quarters, they called it--the, the black neighborhood [in Wayland, New York], and there was a juke joint, and I'm running toward the lights and I hear her behind me saying, "Don't run from me, I ain't no bear."  Now, that's a--that's a dark one to start with (laughter).  Another one might be my father [Augustus Jones, Sr.] also, when we were still in the South; this would be a--probably somewhere like--if I'm born in '52 [1952], what I'm saying is probably '54 [1954], maybe '53 [1953], '54 [1954].  My father gave me the great pleasure of being trundled up with him 'cause he wanted to go do some business across the--across town, or what have you, and taking me to another black community, and we're, out and he's, he's talking and I see a dirigible, a blimp; it was like hallucination, a silver thing in a blue, blue sky, and standing and looking up at it.  Those are two early memories.
Story_ID: 658635
Speaker 1: Now, you said you were two o'clock--I mean two--you were two--age two when you moved to--
Speaker 2: No, actually, I'm not sure if I was two; I know I was born in '52 [1952] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: We stopped migrating in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you're right, I was--I'd be three.
Speaker 1: Yeah, two or--two or three.  You had said that, you know, I--we moved to New York?  I wanna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we stopped migrating and stayed in New York.
Speaker 1: In, in, in New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sorry; okay, that's--so, I want to--so, really, you're growing up; you remember more in New York.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--if I just speak about my spiritual home, it is in that upstate community, forty-three miles south of Rochester, New York, about twenty miles north of Bath, New York, or thirty miles north of Corning [New York], in a place called Miller Road.
Speaker 1: So, can you describe the area where you lived in Miller Road?  Can you describe that?  I loved in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones], you know, the photos that sort of--'cause I'm reading, but then the photos--
Speaker 2: Don't they help?  They do.
Speaker 1: --they added another texture.
Speaker 2: Well, the disclaimer, I'm sure in all of these oral histories, is everyone says, "I remember it this way."  But we're talking like twelve people who all had this experience in all different ages; my oldest brother could be my, be my parent.  Well, what do I remember about it?  It was, in some ways, a, a, a fantasy for a child, and there were--we were surrounded by dairy farms, and there were fields of, of wheat and oats.  I always loved the, the beauty of the nature. My mother [Estella Edwards Jones] and father [Augustus Jones, Sr.]--their, their feeling of having their own home again.  They had left the home that my father had literally built--must have infused us because the house, which was an old Victorian; I think it--God knows when it was built, could have been built as early as the 1880s or even earlier.  It was a shade of orange when we moved, moved there, and then we, at one point, when people were feeling particularly prosperous or the--Corporate America found us, they covered with pink and white aluminum siding, but it was a palace for us.  I, I was so proud of my father, and there were--they're even digging a foundation that was going to be--they were gonna up the migrant business.  Little did they know that, that, that day--that labor business was dying, but they were gonna build a barracks out there, and the people are--and they cut back all the trees for about, oh, god, a quarter of a mile from the house.  The house was, borrowing from Little--Laura Ingalls Wilder, 'A Little House in the Woods' [sic. 'Little House in the Big Woods'].  When I think about it, the first impression, in 'bout 1958, but then they--my father mobilized all the people working with us to cut back the forest, and the house was--you could see what it was, and one's imagination could go back to a time when it must have been with horse and buggy, although I--as I said, we moved there in '58 [1958].  It wasn't easy being one of twelve (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean '56 [1956], or '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958] is when we moved to Miller Road.
Speaker 1: Miller Road, okay.
Speaker 2: We'd been living in a converted tractor barn from '55 [1955] until that time, so you can imagine how they felt having their own place, and him making a commitment to us going--that was the year I started school as well, K through twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade].  What else can I say?  It was a house in a valley that was on a hill, and that was always very poetic to me--a house that was in the valley on a hill.  And my mother and father--I had never known anything else, but they must have--I wonder how they felt about that, but they were members of black communities; now, not Chicago [Illinois], not Baltimore [Maryland], not Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but they were black communities.  I didn't know there was all of the white world that my mother and father communicated with, and later I went to school with, and then there was this tribe of us--extended tribe, because we still had--even though the business was dying, there were still black people around us living on the property, working with my father.  How I felt--there was one way of speaking in the house and another way of speaking when you're out in the world, and we were scared to death of, of the stuff that Hollywood was feeding us, and I'm repeating things from the book like Frankenstein, vampires, all that stuff--and the folklore, you know, that sort of stuff.  When a woman is pregnant, she must be careful about walking because she will attract snakes.  I was terrified of snakes, and yet there was always a pregnant woman around (laughter).  So, you know, this, the stories, it, they were--it, it was challenging.
Story_ID: 658636
Speaker 1: So, give your siblings' names in order.
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was Harris [Harris Jones], there was Janie May [Janie May Jones], there was Richard [Richard Jones], whose name was sometimes Boot.
Speaker 1: Was it Roosevelt [Roosevelt Jones] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I--yes (laughter); you know them already.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, go on.
Speaker 2: Harris--because you know this has been a litany in pieces that I've made.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Harris, Janie May, Roosevelt, Richard, whose name was sometimes Boot, Iry Lee [Iry Lee Jones], Azel [Azel Jones], Flossie Anna [Flossie Jones], Rhodessa [Rhodessa Jones], Vileana [Vileana Jones], Bill T. [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones], Stevenson [Steve Jones], and Gus, Jr. [Augustus Jones, Jr.].
Speaker 1: In large families like that, people are in sort of groups--
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.
Speaker 1: --and so, can you talk about your group?
Speaker 2: Well, there were the old--four older kids; there were the two transitional brothers, there were the three sisters, and then there were the three little boys; I'm very close, to this day, to my sister Rhodessa, who was the middle of the three girls.  The three little boys were--we were, for the most part, northerners, because like I was born in '52 [1952], but I came into consciousness really around the time that we moved to Wayland [New York], which already was a bit of a gap with my older siblings.  We were three boys, so we had certain privileges, but also certain expectations.  I remember longing for the day when you miraculously would wake up and you'd be a man, and to be a man meant that you would have a nice flat stomach, big arms, and you wouldn't be afraid of the dark, and you wouldn't wet the bed; that was just supposed to--that was a contract that you--when you became a man.  Athletics were part of it, academic achievement was something that was--actually came from outside more than from my parents [Estella Edwards Jones and Augustus Jones, Sr.] 'cause they--like I said, they both had rudimentary education.  We grew up in the '60s [1960s] and so everything was changing; even in that small German-Italian community, things were changing.
Story_ID: 658637
Speaker 1: I have a question.  How much of the, the, the black community existed before the migrant workers? And was there a difference between that?  Because that wasn't clear to me, even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know; I'm sure, 'cause I was vague about it; no one could ever give you a good answer.  Of course, the whole world is (laugher) is born with you, and maybe there is pre-history that you have a little glimmer of your parents.  There were people--for instance, there was Richard [ph.], and I think his--he would--we unkindly called him Buzzard, who was a black man who was unaffiliated, and he was living in the town of Wayland [New York].  The question was where had he come from?  Had he come up as a Pullman porter?  Had he come up--there were no ra- rail--well, there were railroads everywhere.  Did he have a past?  Many of the people had--were running from something.  There, there was a man who we had known for years who'd been in the area--big, affable stri- his name was--I think his name was Cap'n [ph.], and one day, you know, this man always in a starched shirt and all, the state troopers put up--pull up and handcuff him because he was wanted for something terrible, I think it was murder, in Texas.  And he, he was like a fixture, you know.  So there was the family with this--what was left of the, the migrant camp which we, we'd call it, and there were this family related to--for instance, there was a place called the crossroads which was over near--in Atlanta, New York or, or I think it was a little further than that, that was run by a man and a woman--I think a man and a woman, and they were--had they also come up as migrants, or had they been there longer?  There were people in other towns; you knew this because there were so few of us in the area, that everyone would congregate on the weekend at one of these places, the crossroads, there was a place up in Springwater [New York], and there was other places--a place called the ranch, that I talk about, that was--'Monkey Run Road' [Bill T. Jones] and so the ranch--it must have been kind of an improvised nightclub; the people were there.  There was the, the Williamses [ph.]; the father was probably--they were slightly more middle class than most of the people, but certainly they were--they didn't--I don't think they mingled with the rest of the black community.  Like the Greens [ph.]--now, god knows, he didn't like this name, but we used to call him Booty Green--Spooty Green [ph.]; he was, you know, he looks like a--out of a James Van Der Zee photograph, always with a--either a cigar or a toothpick out of his mouth, hat askew--actually, an affable man, as I remember; but, of course, there were all these jealousies and so on.  Who was there before my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] and father [Augustus Jones, Sr.]?  My father started this business somewhere in the--'48 [1948], I believe?  I have a feeling there were people who'd been living there for a while, but everybody--I, I could be wrong; was there anybody there from the turn of the century?  Were there any families that had been there?  I don't believe so; everybody were pretty recent, as I remember.
Story_ID: 658638
Speaker 1: So, what about the, the Irish--you said Irish, German.
Speaker 2: German-Italian.
Speaker 1: Ger- Ger- I'm sorry, German-Italian (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And of course Irish, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right. So, what was that community like, and what was the interaction between that community and the black community [in Wayland, New York]?
Speaker 2: These are big questions and I'm embarrassed that, that I don't know the answers to them.  We were there, and I think a lot of the black people were there because we were agricultural workers.  Did anyone own their own farm?  No.  Did people own their own houses?  I think the Williamses [ph.] owned their own house, I think the Greens [ph.] owned their house, but people were renting.  People were just a step away from being what do you call it, itinerant workers.  What were the relationship of the I--so--they--we worked for those people.  To this day, now that I have some position--I'm, I'm in the public eye; somebody'll write back and say, "Oh, we knew you," and, "Oh, my mother and your mother [Estella Edwards Jones] were friends."  God, I remember my mother was so anti-white people, for such a Christian woman, but to hear someone say, "Oh, I was your mother's best friend."  Now, is it possible that my mother had a life that I didn't know about, that I have made her into one thing and she wasn't (laughter)?  I remember that I made friends with a young guy whose father was an executive in Rochester [New York], young white guy, his name was Russell Brant [ph.]--Russ Brant; he was my--he had--we became friends, and they lived in a big house over the hill and I--we lived on Miller Road up and over the hill in the valley, and he invited me to come over all the time.  "Come hang--spend the night."  It was a big deal to go spend the night, you know?  So, that--because there was this suspicion and fear.  I'm sorry, so much of this is in the book; I--the mother--they didn't really socialize, although my father [Augustus Jones, Sr.]--they didn't socialize with the white community.  Did the white community socialize with us?  It was complicated.  No, I don't remember--I'm sure it happened--some adventurous soul coming over and wanted to play cards or, or dance, because if white men came around, and I can't imagine white women, it was probably because they were looking for sex, at least--and, and I was a young boy, so I don't know the truth of this; maybe someone can correct me on it.  The white women that you saw, who would be there with a black man, were people who were pretty dissipate.  Not all of them, but that is the impression that you had.  One of my first impressions of a white woman in a social situation was a Saturday morning or a Sunday morning, and this car pulls up with some black men that we knew they'd probably worked with my father or what have you, and they were--they'd been out partying all night, and the door opens and this woman leans out the window and vomits--a white woman, you know?  And her hair and all, you could--now, god knows what that meant, but that was what an interracial relationship looked like.  My friends were those, those--the children of these, these white farmers and, and I--some of them, to this day, were people that I--I valued so much their friendship and we have stayed in touch with many of them; sometimes people come to my performances, and I do feel that since I wrote 'Last Night On Earth' [Bill T. Jones] they've read it and they never knew me.  They didn't know you, you--are they thinking, oh, you were wrong or are they thinking, we never knew you were thinking that, which makes me doubt what was I thinking as well, but we grew up together, and children, God bless 'em, children learn to love and be together, and then a thing called puberty happens, and then the world begins to happen.  I think it was easier for my--for the boys than the girls.
Story_ID: 658639
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sights, smells and sounds.  I'm a big fan of Proust [Marcel Proust], so I know that this question is a, is a big question.  I was a very--I think I was very alive, olfactorily and--in terms of sounds.  The sound of people singing, the sound of people reminiscing about their world that they remember in the South, the sound of the juke box, and it always had black voices; the sound of my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] praying, the sound of the people fighting, the sound of men and women fighting, the taste of collard green liquor and cornbread soaked in it, the taste of the--the most valued sacrament was my father's [Augustus Jones, Sr.] dark coffee with--sweetened with condensed milk, and the grounds that would be left in the bottom--who would get them, and you would just suck on those grounds; my mother's fingers either feeding me, or feeding a young baby when she took that cornbread and dipped it in the liquor and put it in the mouth of a child; body odor (laughter)--little snooty bodies.  People were very proud but, you know, people were workers who were out in the sun all day working.  Potatoes--the smell of the, the potato field; it's kind of wonderful, and then another smell when they sprayed it with the DDT and they had to shake it out (laughter), that was--as you read the book, that was our job as the kids, to go ahead shaking out the, the, the, the potatoes from those wilted leaves have just been sprayed with some sort of defoliant.  And the smell of rotting potatoes because that was the work in the wintertime.  You would--in the warehouse, my image of seeing down the, the, the barn which was actually the barn up the hill from the tractor bar where we were all living as--living in, was a potato storage facility, and my ta- dad took me up there on a couple of occasions; I looked down and saw men up to their knees in potatoes sorting out them, and the smell of rot.  And the, and the glistening sweat on people's bodies, and Evening in Paris perfume or Patou [Jean Patou]; these, these either fake Parisian or actual fragrances that might have been big around the 1920s or '30s [1930s]; by the time the '50s [1950s] came along, they were mass produced and sold--the cheapest perfume sold to people.  Dove soap--my mother and her Dove soap or Ivory soap.
Speaker 1: Sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds?  Oh, to get that car to turn over on a cold morning, or the chains, when it's freezing outside and you gotta get the chains outta the back, and laying down; the wind is blowing, and laying the chains down and--so you can get home because you'll never get up over that hill to that quaint little house in the warm weather, Siberia in the cold weather.  Always people talking, laughing, or fighting.  The sounds--the school bus coming; act right, the school bus is coming.  The worlds--the two worlds meet then 'cause you've gotten--you go through this transformation.  The sound of white kids' voices and the sound of our voices, the sound of the state trooper's voice. When he addressed you, if he ever addressed you, it was a different sound. And what proper English was; understanding how to speak proper.  And where did we learn that?  The sound of the brand new TV, the TV.
Story_ID: 658640
Speaker 1: How do you emerge out of that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) How do--?
Speaker 1: How do you--I mean--I don't like to keep ref- you know, as referencing the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones], but how does a Bill Jones [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] emerge out of a family that you come out of?  That's a hard--it's a hard life, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Although there are harder ones.
Speaker 1: There are harder ones.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had, you had moved--there was stability there.
Speaker 2: There was stability; I had a mother [Estella Edwards Jones] and father [Augustus Jones, Sr.].
Speaker 1: You had a mother and father; there was stability there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--but I'm still saying--and you have--you are in a, a community where you see different aspects, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There's, you know, different socioeconomic--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I'm asking you how do you emerge out of there in that way?  And, and, and I wanna add--what's--I wanna ask that question, but then--
Speaker 2: It's a big question; I mean like how, how did your life become what it was, in a way?  Well, I, I'm--I would say bless the era of the Kennedys, Camelot, because with Camelot the school [Wayland Central School, Wayland, New York] expanded, this little--the school that was built in a, in a, a potato field suddenly had a big gymnasium and a swimming pool, so there were things like that which, I think the farm kids around there probably never had even before we, as black people, came.  There was a--they hired a drama teacher.  Did they call it drama?  Can you imagine?  They actually thought it was important enough that they would actually hire somebody who was--as I remember, I don't know if she was part time at first, but she became full time by the time I got to high school, and this person opened up a world to me; her name was Mary Lee Shappee, you know?  Praise her, wherever she is right now--her spirit.  She really brought a lot of the world there, and she was able to actually see me for what I could be. And she really must have really believed in me because she knew there was racism in the community, she knew that, and that there were certain things that if there were--if she, she needed to give me an opportunity--okay, like I mention 'The Music Man' in the book (laughter); I'm supposed to be doing the Buddy Hackett role from the movie, and he's supposed to have a girlfriend?  Well, you couldn't have a girlfriend in that community; at least that was her estimation, at least not at that time.  I know later that was--it was happening, but--so she actually gave me a solo.  There was a, a play, and she, she did a production twice a year, and she let me direct 'The Crucible' [Arthur Miller], so it was quite a learning experience, how to take responsibility and to think, not only about you--your performance, but how the stage looks, and she was that--she was right there.  I think--I give her a lot of credit, and I think there were some really good teachers there, Mrs. Shaw [ph.], for instance.  I, I mention in the book, she always smelled of lilacs, and she was like a woman that, to me, she--it was like 19th century woman, and she probably was born--I'd say she was a woman in her forties at that time, and this was 1958; so she was born around the turn of the century or so on; she had that, something Victorian, about her.  And these people were trying to--they were helping; they were, they were decent people, they were quote lifting us up, and I was a bright light, I think.  I went through periods where I really hated myself and I thought that I was a trained monkey or something, but no, no, they were--yes, it's true, they were white people who took me under their wing, but not to make me a toy, but actually because they believed in something that I didn't know about.  Maybe they believed what Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was saying 'cause it, it was in the news every day, these things; this was just--the--in the air.  That's one way.  That drama club made all the difference.
Story_ID: 658641
Speaker 1: Excelling in at least one thing, which was track, and finding a voice and able to communicate abstract ideas.  I loved the discussion that followed reading anything.  I think those things made a difference.
Speaker 2: So you're--you said it was the three younger boys.  Are they having similar experiences as you?  That's--I mean the two others [Steve Jones and Augustus Jones, Jr.]?  That's what I'm--and what is the age difference between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I think I am--what?  My sister before me is thirteen months, I think, and my brother after me is twelve, is that possible?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then my youngest brother is maybe about two years, two and a half years, three years younger than I am.  Did they have the same experience?  We've had such conflict as time has gone on that--and I--sometimes and I scratch the surface, they felt in some ways that I got all of the attention.
Speaker 2: And why was that?
Speaker 1: I don't know; maybe I struggled harder for it.  I don't--maybe it was, I, I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were you, were you better behaved?
Speaker 1: I was well behaved; I was--I think I was very--I was, quote, he's a--he's scared, he's scary, he's a little--he's--something about him, he's like a girl or something like that.  He is--I liked to hang out with my sisters; their stories were more interesting (laughter).  I liked to tell a story and I don't know why.  Why did Mrs. Shappee [Mary Lee Shappee] take an interest in me?
Speaker 2: So, up until you get into high school, how are you doing grade wise?  I mean are you a good student?
Speaker 1: I was a good student, I wasn't a great student.
Speaker 2: So, so what, what, what elementary school--what's the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 1: It was Wayland Central School [Wayland, New York].  Now, you know, there were three levels; there was the A, the Bs and the Cs.  I was always in the A group.  Maybe one year I was--no, I was always in the A group.
Speaker 2: So you were always--so you're--so that's when they're tracking students.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  And I did have remedial speech because I have a lateral lisp; once I couldn't even say that, but this very kind lady, something out of a Henry James novel, used to come in as a speech therapist.  "Make your tongue into a straw when you want to pronounce an S," that sort of thing.  And it felt--I didn't feel demoted when she be- I be- during reading class, I'd be taken out; I felt actually privileged.  I'm so glad the way that--they must have been very sensitive because I would have felt, oh, this is great attention.  Obviously someone said, "He, he has a good mind but he has a, a speech impediment."  And then--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, were any of your, your bro- the brothers and--were they in the A track, any of them?  Do you remember that?  Were there--
Speaker 1: I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Were there other blacks in the A track?
Speaker 1: Now--no, there wasn't.  I think the A track stopped--the track stopped by the time you were in seventh grade, I believe; I believe, I'm not sure.  But I don't think I--I, I was always the only one except--now, no--once a year, but you probably also read in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones], the people who were still doing the migrant stream would descend on the town and be there for--just, just as we had been in the past, for a few weeks until they would leave, and so suddenly you had this wave of associations I barely understood.  I, I, I knew from my family, my family's African American parlance and body language and so on, but suddenly there were lots of black people mixing with these--with the white kids.  And I was--I guess I had been--I became an official member of that nib of the community, whereas those people were the outsiders, and I didn't want them to be outsiders; I want to--I wanted to belong, but it was kind of confusing where you belonged.  Were any of those kids who came in in the A track?  I don't think so.  There was a thing called adventures in thinking that probably started in freshman year.  What's that?  What is freshman year, fourteen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Ninth grade, fourteen, fifteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And they would--we would do special outings; we'd go Genneseal State University [sic. State University of New York at Geneseo, Geneseo, New York] and have a, a--take a special course with a drama teacher and we were, we were exposed to different readings and all.  I felt taken care of there; I felt cultivated there.
Story_ID: 658642
Speaker 1: Your teacher--let's--so this 'Music Man' ['The Music Man'].  You had--had you done any theater?  I wanna go back, though, to the burning of the house.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I, I, I'm sorry.  I do wanna go back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I don't mind; I mean I felt that you might wanna get--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to get moving, okay.  Oh, god, okay, let's go ahead (unclear).  Okay, (makes sound) okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what about the burning of the house?
Speaker 1: Did that affect you in any way?
Speaker 2: Probably in ways that I could not imagine.  I'm just now--middle age is difficult 'cause you just--you think you know some stretch of psychic terrain, and suddenly, you know, it's pockmarked with sinkholes and, and, and landmines.  So, I--like I say, I was proud that my father [Augustus Jones, Sr.] owned this house, and then to have it--because of jealousy; and it was actually the person who I loved as much as my sisters, and that was Elizabeth [ph.], who we called Midget, who I was--she named her first son William [ph.].  She and I were so close; she was my babysitter.  I just loved her.  And Otis [ph.], who was a--sort of a stepbrother and she were married, and Otis was having--at least she thought he was having an affair with the woman who lived in the back; I don't know if, was her name Shirley [ph.], who was a single mother who had her own place, and Midget was obviously moody and so she, she thought she would just burn out this woman--burn down her part of the house.  She burned down the whole house.  Imagine the--the allegiances, how torn I was.  She was not a bad person, and yet I could see what it had done to my parents--what it did to us.  We spent the whole next year living in a room which was probably twenty feet across and maybe fifty feet long with, we're talking men and women, probably what, fifteen people living in that room?  And this is from--we had had our own house.  Yeah, I--it was--it was pretty devastating.  And I remember the feeling of helplessness when the thing was burning, and I was like a little boy and we--we're trying to get things outta the house and trying to pick up a mattress (laughter), you know; having to drag it.
Speaker 1: So, I, I wanna--but the family continued and then when did--what happened with the housing after that?  The house got re--
Speaker 2: The house got put back together; I mean it got--there must have been some insurance money, you know, kind of a--I, I look back on it and I know people were doing the best they could do, but they, they bought this--somebody sold them dry--what do you call it--sheetrock that you--you would normally put it underneath and, and do the seams and then you would paint it.  Well, this was all ready with a knotty pine veneer (laughter), you know?  So here it is very, very tacky building material, and you could just put it up; you don't have to wallpaper and it looks like wood.  It doesn't look like wood.  And the seams, you know; they're like--you can see the, the, the drywall exposed.  And was this at the same time that the--maybe that's why they were able to get that very tacky, very '50s [1950s] pink and white aluminum siding to cover this house, and then the shingles that we used, as a kind of proto-frisbee, for years when nobody--piles of stuff was just left lying around--construction materials; people didn't have good technique ab- how to do those things.
Story_ID: 658643
Speaker 1: So when you--so, so sports becomes your big thing and you--you know, this is what I find interesting.  So within the family structure, you talk about your father [Augustus Jones, Sr.] being a storyteller but you don't talk about--you--I--you know, when you were describing things, it was not--you weren't talking about music so much, but then--
Speaker 2: No, I said you hear people singing all the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Time.
Speaker 2: --and the sound of the jukebox.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can--there are very few times that anybody picked up an instrument.  I do remember once we were over at Spence's, another one of these black enclaves--Spence and Helen and Rosa Lee [ph.].  They were--we--it was a Saturday morning and we'd been working, and I was young, and there was a man there who actually produced the guitar, and he was picking it, and he was playing--I'm sure it was blues, in the style of Mississippi John Hurt or some--it--just--people play--when they would open their mouths, that's what came out of them, but how often did we see somebody with an instrument?  I remember my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] went into debt to give my sister Flo [Flossie Jones] piano debt--lessons, and even got a piano, an organ or whatever it was.  Didn't--Flo didn't wanna do it; she didn't want the pressure, but that's how precious it was.  The singing was my mother singing on Christmas morning or at Easter or what have you, and then my sisters making a singing group, and I was the, the, the singer--I was allowed to be--it was called Candy and the Sweets, and I was one of the Sweets.  Yeah, so there was music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--so you're talking about their group, that's what you were just referencing, your, your sisters' group.
Speaker 2: Candy and the Sweets?
Speaker 1: Candy and the Sweets.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But they performed, and they had a, a certain level of--a success with that group, though.
Speaker 2: Oh, we were just purely amateur (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kids.
Speaker 2: --purely amateur. No, no, no, they, they did go on--they, they sang--they made some appearances in a, a--in some talent shows here and there, and a nightclub up in Rochester [New York].
Speaker 1: I meant at--local success; that's what I was saying.
Speaker 2: Oh, you knew--at least I remember them singing at the high school [Wayland Central School, Wayland, New York] or at the church, this Methodist church, singing at Christmastime, and they, they rocked the place, they did.  My sister Flo had quite a beautiful voice and--in, in the sense of that kind of Etta James, rhythm and blues, big chest voice, and yet she was also being--if, if she was a little different--I think Mrs. McLaughlin [ph.], the choir teacher, liked her and also heard something in the voice.  Mrs. McLaughlin was trying to train her more toward an operatic or musical theater set of standards.  You know, that stuff takes a lot of care. She was a young woman, she was--you know, my mother was very difficult.  Why did Mrs. Shappee's [Mary Lee Shappee] attentions toward me allow me to do what I--to go to university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], and why did Flo and Mrs. McLaughlin--and it was just as close, as I remember.  Why did that not take?
Speaker 1: Well, that's what--that was the question I had; how did you make your way?  That's what I was asking.
Speaker 2: I had people there along the way, people that--the hand was out and there--you could see hope in their eyes, and a child responds to hope, particularly in a house where there's just not a lot of, lot of extra attention to go around.
Story_ID: 658644
Speaker 1: So that's what--so let's, let's talk about--so sports was--track was really the thing that you excelled with and you're doing theater (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then how does dance become part of, of who you are, because those are, those are--sometimes those never intersect.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, they didn't actually; I mean I think dance--taking seriously a career in the arts was actually in a way the end of athletics.  And I've told the story many times that I was, I was accepted to New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York].  I believe I also was accepted to Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and SUNY Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  I took the--I don't remember exactly; I took the first one that came in; it was called Harpur College [sic.] at that time, or I took the one--all of them would have had New Yorkers, you know, 'cause I had, I had seen 'Another Country,' Baldwin [James Baldwin]; I had--somehow, the--Henry Miller, sexist with all the naughty bits, had come into the house, so I knew there was another world, and I wanted to go to school where people from that other world were, and I went to Binghamton and they had a track program and it was a good track program, and they had a theater program, and then they had Percival Borde, who was quite a artist of note in New York [New York] circles, you know; he was a--quite a beautiful performer from Trinidad, married to a quite legendary dancer and teacher, Pearl Primus; he was on the faculty.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Percival Borde, married to Pearl Primus who made--who came and taught a few workshops there, and the dance teacher was Linda Grandy, and all I know about her, other than the fact that she and I didn't get along very well, was that I think she had been in the Humphrey-Weidman Company, so she would teach ballet on one day, and the next day would be Humphrey-Weidman modern dance technique.  This all started when I was encouraged by my niece, Marian Young [ph.], who now lives in Charlotte [North Carolina], to not go to those--to track practice, come to these African dance classes; they are so cool, you know.  It was, it was the easy way to go back to Africa, easy way to answer the call of the era and its authenticity and its identity.  And I went and, as I told the story, I opened that door, and there was a kind of--there's a kind of a smell that comes out of a room full of people sweating, and there were the drums--mixed race drummers; the room was mixed.  Yes, it did belong to the young authenticity seeking young black people, but it was a room that everyone could fit into, and Percival Borde had the personality.  And I had never, other than seeing the black men and women, dance what people danced, kind of show business, kind of folk dance, kind of hoochie coochie whatever they were doing; all sorts of--which I loved, but here was a person who was quote, there was a kind of cultivation and education, and a specificity in the movement.  I loved it.  I began to go less and less to track practice, and more and more to the dance classes.  I was cast in productions with the dance department, and I was doing it in the theater department as well.  So, that energy that would be used toward athletics shrunk with time.  It was an easy--an easier jump to make, as well, because I thought that dance was about the muscles like athletics was.  And in a way it was, but there was a--in, in many ways it was not.  What about your ballet?
Story_ID: 658645
Speaker 1: What about understanding European concert dance and not--what was it my--I don't know--freshman year, or second year [at State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York]?  Percival Borde decided to do the original choreography called 'Goliath' ['Death of Goliath'] but he said, "Okay, you all will be fine for the chorus but I'm going to New York [New York] this weekend to get a real dancer" (laughter), and he brought back a person who was a real dancer, with beautiful--at least to my eye at that time, he seemed to have beautiful alignment; the feet, the flexibility; he, he could, he could turn, he could stand and hold shape.  He, he probably was an average Horton [Lester Horton] dancer, but to me he looked like a god, and he had the lead; that was very, very important to work with a person, and he told us, "Oh, Mr. Ailey."  Yes, I'd heard of Alvin Ailey.  We were in--we revered him, said, "But child, don't you even go to Mr. Ailey's audition unless you can do a double turn, unless you got a six o'clock penche."  Six o'clock penche, I could barely, you know (laughter), double turn.  I can only do one and fall out of it.  But it was, it was a gift that Percival gave us to, to be exposed to that person.  And he brought with him something of feet, it's true, but something also, the culture of black gay men in the art world.  It's the first time I'd ever really felt it 'cause I was surrounded by white people all the time, and there was a whole culture, kind of a--the way he was on a Saturday night, when you're all drinking, and the way he was in the studio on Monday--different world, you know?  And here I was, this home grown boy who had been at Woodstock [Woodstock Festival; Woodstock Music and Art Fair] the year before; because after all, at age seventeen, I wanted to join the, the counter-culture, I wanted to be like Jimi Hendrix, I wanted to be like the shaggy, long haired white kids, I had taken LSD at Woodstock, all those things.  So I, I didn't see myself as a Afro wearing black nationalist and I certainly didn't see myself as a, a svelte technician in the style of Alvin Ailey.  I wanted to be beautiful, it's true; I wanted to be effortless, but I wanted something else, and that just opened the door for Arnie Zane, and it opened the door later for Lois Welk and the American Dance Asylum, that was reminding me of something I couldn't have known about, which was another tradition of the avant-garde in Lower Manhattan [New York, New York].  They didn't have the same rigorous standards of technical perfection, was not as showy, showy as, as maybe Mr. Ailey or the ballet or, or Broadway; it was about ideas and architecture and literature, and so on, and a lot about thumbing your nose at all of the world.
Story_ID: 658646
Speaker 1: It made sense in finding an identity in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so that--so the thing that strikes me about your story is that you--you've been allowed creativity at--you've allowed yourself to be creative, or you've, you've had that--
Speaker 1: Allowed?
Speaker 2: Well, not everyone has that ability, and so this is why I'm saying you start in a partnership, so you meet a--talk about your meeting of Arnie, and how that happens.
Speaker 1: Well, let me give you one example before--about--
Speaker 2: When I say, allowed--
Speaker 1: Well, no, it's in--it's important because in a way--they say a little knowledge is a dangerous thing (laughter); sometimes it can be a good thing.  I remember being allowed to take--allowed to take a workshop; it was an acting workshop with one of the respected, most respected persons on the faculty--very serious woman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is when you're at Binghamton [State University of New York Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].
Speaker 1: At Binghamton--and I was just a beginning drama student, and they were talking about an actor and their body and motivation; they said, "Well, who wants to take a chance and go from this point to that point and feel the pull and tug of two impulses?"  And I, I'm sure it was shapeless and indulgent, but it was fully committed, what I was doing.  Now, you might--you'd say it was dance that I was doing, but I was taking her to--what does it mean to be pulled, and the emotions I used--I relied on everything I knew; that's how I understood art, that's how I understood dance--that, that, that, that impulse, that spontaneity.  Arnie Zane, in some ways, was that as well.  I met him, he was from New York [New York], he was Jewish, I had this romantic idea about Jewish people, that they were--that somehow there--was it reading Baldwin [James Baldwin] or what have you; they were--if, if--they were sophisticated, they were cultivated, and they weren't rank and file white people, so I trusted him.  And so our sexual bonding was coupled with this idea about what does it mean to live in the world as an independent self-created human being, for instance, an artist.  And he had lived in Europe; he was a photographer, he had seen things, he'd seen concerts and heard music and I wanted to, I wanted to do those things, and I trusted him.  And he held--he made me honest in a way; not as honest as I could be, you know.  Don't pretend that you know how to move, go find--go get information.  So that was a very important--that, that partner; partnership was very, very important.  Now I think I've lost the line of your question.
Speaker 2: Oh, no; no, you haven't lost the line of the question.  So, the, the thing that I--I was asking about the, the whole thing about your story, and I said that you were allowed to be creative, and the reason I said that is that here you have a partner--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and he's creative.  Now, you've already identified your--you know, your--you, you talk about your sexual identity, that you knew--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and you knew at what age?  That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know if I knew it; I, I knew enough about it to know that I was--
Speaker 2: Different.
Speaker 1: I was different.  Now, different, yeah.  It's important to read 'Another Country' [James Baldwin] 'cause there's a graphic description of two men having sex; I didn't know what they were doing, I couldn't even imagine what they were doing, but I knew these feelings I had, so you're saying--and Arnie Zane, I met him and it was very clear that there was an attraction on every level, and I was very moved, you know.  Did I want to just show off sexually with him?  But there was information there; I wanted to--an experience there.  So yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: But the thing, the thing that I find is that both of you were--I mean--'cause he was a photographer, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He's more of a photographer.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were more focused on dance, but at this--
Speaker 1: Theater, theater (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Theater, theater, okay.  Theater in terms--
Speaker 1: For better or for worse, I didn't make a distinction between the two of them, theater and dance.  My critics would say I probably should have stayed in theater (laughter), and--but for me, I wanted something that would allow the body to be expressed as free as possible, and also the use of words and language.
Story_ID: 658647
Speaker 1: So you have this attraction; you and Arnie [Arnie Zane] have this attraction--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's, it's a sexual attraction at a time when people are finding their sexual selves.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and you go off--you tell the story about going to the--I wanna say Netherlands--no, no--is it Amsterdam [the Netherlands]?
Speaker 2: Amsterdam, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Amsterdam, okay.
Speaker 2: The first major city I ever lived in, actually.
Speaker 1: Right. Which is--that's--and your--and even the story of him coming to get permission from your parents [Estella Edwards Jones and Augustus Jones, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (Nods head) With my moth- with my--yes, my parents, my mother in particular.
Speaker 1: And--but what--where does the focus--this is what I--you know--where does dance become the focus?  I mean wh- at what point in this--because you come back--there's something--see, what I--that's what I'm saying--in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones] it's almost like--it feels like movements, but I'm often lost in how the intensity of the creation, you know, starts to come to be, where you're really serious about being--doing dance and being creat- being creative people, and being very serious about the creative--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) creative part. Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I think we sometimes are the worse chroniclers and the worse analys- analyzers of our own experience, and that's what a book like that was at a time when I thought life was over, that I wanted to try to get down the story.  So your que- your que- question is well placed, but I would say--what was it like when I took those dance classes and was so moved, and watching Percival Borde, and watching LeVon Campbell dance.  I mean was that that moment?  This is what I wanna do.  I was also thinking about writing; I'd read James Baldwin.  I was always writing poetry--expression.  Tried my hand at drawing. Then I meet this man who is a photographer, and it--and he has--he takes me to Amsterdam and I see, I see for the first time probably a real painting at the Rijksmuseum [Amsterdam, the Netherlands] or the Stedelijk  Museum [Stedelijk  Museum Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands], Rembrandt [Museum het Rembrandthuis, Amsterdam, the Netherlands]--things I'd read about. 'Cause--you know, in my mind, even today, I say art making is participation in the world of ideas.  So, what did that have to do with being a dancer?  I felt that I was becoming an artist, a person who understood the world.  Is it through signs?  Is it through a self-invented language?  Is it through a kind of communion with other like minded individuals who are refusing a certain life?  All of these things were happening at the same time as the dancing was happening.  When I came back from Amsterdam, I was going to be a--I was gonna get serious, and it was shortly after coming back from Amsterdam that we had the idea and I know who- whose idea was it; was it because of my education, or was it because--I'm not quite sure, but the levers of the relationship are--shift, and I think at that point, I--Bill's [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] goals maybe were--was the thing that was driving the two of us.  Bill wanted to go to a school that was more focused on dancing, and that is when we came back from Amsterdam; now what year would that have been?  Seventy-two [1972]?
Story_ID: 658648
Speaker 1: Was that when I decided I wanted to be serious?  I was still--I still knew I need to be training, and I went there; I met Garth Fagan at that time.  Garth Fagan was, was interested in me coming out and training with him, but why didn't I?  Was it because of the, the pull of the relationship with Arnie?  A lot of people oftentimes faulted Arnie for not having greater access to me.  Now, was that because I was holding to him--as mother said, cleaving to him?  Or was there something else about my priorities--the heart, a partner.  Was this Estella [Estella Edwards Jones] and Gus [Augustus Jones, Sr.] that I wanted to play out but on my terms?  But we were also this thing called artists, and he could make photography, he could paint, we could--I could do poetry, I could sing; in other words, we didn't think yet in that way.  When did that happen, you're asking me?
Speaker 2: I'm asking when that happened.
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: 'Cause it did--I don't think it hap- did it happen in Amsterdam [the Netherlands]?  It didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I--no, Amsterdam, Amsterdam is just like student time away, I think.  And although I was thinking I had the image of James Baldwin being an expatriate and all, there was something about leaving the university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], going to Brockport [The College at Brockport, Brockport, New York], meeting Lois Welk, who will be reading here, 'Story/Time' [Bill T. Jones] in a few weeks, a piece called "History" ["A History"]--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: --and then being invited to come, "Let's go hang--hang out with us in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]," hang out.  And while there, Lois was the one that was saying that Cliff Keuter, a beautiful dancer, formerly of Paul Taylor [Paul Taylor Dance Company], was teaching a workshop in San Mateo [California], I believe it was.  "You should come--let's go hang out."  We would hitchhike over.  She was my guide, my--I, I love her to this day; she was such a, a kind mentor, and she could sort of see things that I couldn't see, that I--things that I needed to know, and so she was exposing me.  And doing--the French have a term, eating breeds appetite?  (Laughter) That when you eat, you find your appetite?  And as one begins to practice as a dancer, one begins to see more dance, one begins to read about dance; suddenly, you're, you're defining yourself as that.  And the ambition--make a solo, make a group work, be in your friends' work.
Speaker 2: Right.  But see, and--but you leave the Bay Area because you feel that the energy's not there, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I, and I was definitely Lois and, and Arnie.
Speaker 2: So that's Lois and Arnie who's propelling you.
Speaker 1: I was--I wanted to be--like I say--Lois even expressed to me once, she said, "Well, you know, I was always worried that you would just--you and Arnie would go off and do something else," since we were known for doing that.  We went together, though; so, if Arnie and Lois talked about, "We wanna go someplace where we can be more serious about dancing," I want to be with Arnie, my family was there; my family was there.  I could have stayed there, but why did I go with them?  Because I was already identifying with being an artist, or was it Arnie Zane's partner?  They were the same thing; it's--they were the same thing.
Story_ID: 658649
Speaker 1: So, you, you go back and it's the three of you at that point?  I thought it was the two of--
Speaker 2: No, no, we went back to Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], and Lois [Lois Welk] came with us because we knew of a--spaces that we could find there 'cause when Arnie [Arnie Zane] and I had been in the cinema department or hanging around the cinema department, we had made friends with a young man, whose name was Phil Sykas, and he had found a loft in the old Elks club [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks], so we knew of that, that place; space was important then, as it is now; Lois came with us, and we didn't wanna be in New York [New York], we wanted to be centrally located.  I remember these conversations.  Nobody wanted to live in Babylon, which was New York City where everybody is the same.  We were still the kind of counterculture people; we were individuals and living a--an undefined life.  And it was a good move, and we met--through them, we met Jill Becker, we met Donna Joseph; Lynda Berry came on later.  These were--we began to make a collective.
Speaker 1: So, what are you saying?  How are you identifying, or how are people self-identifying?  Who's part of your collective and how do you come up with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very loose; it was really very loose, and this was the, the, the legacy of the--what I call the, the Woodstock generation [Woodstock Festival; Woodstock Music and Art Fair] if you will; I'm sure it's more complicated than that, but for me it was.  You're sleeping on someone's couch, you hang out together, you're hitchhiking, oh, I think I'll stay in this town for a while; the next thing you know, you're a member of that group.  It was just that loose.  Now, there were some people who were in it for the long haul.  Lois was our teacher and our architect.  I--she had stewarded the thing from being the Ring of Bone dance collective when she and her friends were graduating from Brockport [The College at Brockport, Brockport, New York], which is where I met her, to it being called the American Dance Asylum; that's Lois' humor--sense of humor; a place where you could find refuge, and a place where you could be as crazy as you wanted--that's how I understood it.  No, she was--unlike a lot of other people who were--it was a lifestyle choice.  She was--there was not a lifestyle choice, it was not an affectation, it was truly something she's gave--she gave her life to and is still giving her life to it.  And I think in a way that was the pact that she, Arnie and I had, and she and Arnie bonded on ways that--I'm just now learning Lois has written certain stories that she's gonna be reading next to my stories here in 'Story/Time' [Bill T. Jones] and the intimacy that she and Arnie had, and the agency that the two of them had I, I was humbled by it.
Speaker 1: So when you say the agency, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: They made the dec- they made decisions about, let's get a building, let's get a dance studio, let's go and take loans out.  You know, adult stuff; nobody knew how to do it (laughter), but--you know, upgrades, you know.  Let's really understand what it means to apply for a grant to the New York statehouse in the arts.  Did we know what a board of edu- board of directors was?  Not really. Did we really know what it meant to--some of the things they were asking us in that--in those forms?  Not really, but we'd figure it out.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And the two of them were the ones who were doing the figuring.
Speaker 1: So what about the, the rehearsal schedule, or the create--you know, the--'cause when people start dance groups, they have some concept about what they want to be, even if it's counterculture, or what they don't wanna be.
Speaker 2: Well, we wanted to make wild and exciting work as theatrical and meaningful as one of our idols, Daniel Nagrin, a great soloist.  We wanted to make beautiful movement like we had seen from Cliff Keuter, who got inspiration from Paul Taylor; we, we wanted to be a kind of a scruffy--we didn't wanna be cookie cutter, we didn't wanna wear tights and leotards, we wanted to be like the Grand Union--these were the big kids that we had read about and, unfortunately, not seen a lot about.  But we wanted all of that, and yet Arnie was a photographer, a New Yorker; Lois was a Catholic woman--Catholic girl from Buffalo, New York, very smart and, and very--very driven by her German-Polish ancestry, you know?  And then I was [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones; I was this black man who was full of all these questions; I was a natural performer.  I think I was also probably kind of wild to see on stage; it was so raw, but there was--I don't think there were many Bill T. Joneses around, that's why people kept saying, "Oh, you gotta go to New York and let Alvin Ailey finish you."  But no, I thought, oh, no, no, I don't have to, I can, I can be like--oh, my feet don't point beautifully?  No, I can still be valuable because of my ideas, and the storytelling of my parents [Estella Edwards Jones and Augustus Jones, Sr.], and what have you.  That's what we thought we were doing.  And then there was Jill Becker and there was Donna Joseph; these are all people that Lois had gone to school with; they had history, they had all been studying dance history together.  They were becoming women, and their--they had a relationship and a conversation that was going on in which Arnie and I were and were not a part of.  Lois was like that center, and she found a soul mate in Arnie, and Bill came with the deal.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 658650
Speaker 1: And classes?  We--what was a class?  We used to say what is technique?  Technique is whatever you do that helps you get the skills to do your--what you do in your choreography.  If you wanna stand on your head or pick your nose, you should stand on your head and pick your nose daily.  Now, yoga--yoga is good for you; it's some abstraction.  If you wanna learn how to make a phrase, you have to have a class to learn how to make a phrase--a dance phrase; how to manipulate it, how to work with music.  And then, of course, there was an idea; you had this space.  Well, we need--we were very interested in group work and non-trained dancers, so we taught classes, and the classes sometimes turned into pieces.  We were making a community around our exploration as a collective; we were teaching ourselves.  Should we have had more focus teachers?  Should we have had more serious ballet, or actually been studying Cunningham, or what have you?  Maybe we should, but it was not the zeitgeist--it was not so important--yeah.
Speaker 2: But you, you talk about being influenced by Graham also--the, the technique; so is this later, or is this around this time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, when you say influenced, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: I mean I thought I had read that you were influenced--
Speaker 1: Well, that part in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones] says, "I knew who Martha Raye was, I knew who Martha Washington [Martha Custis Washington] was, but who was this Martha Graham?"
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes.  And it was like an es- an es- they were visiting our school [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], they were co- they were doing a gig--probably doing a tour, now that I know how companies work.  And I went, and I saw, wow, this is what a professional dance company looks like.  And that's the way that they are moving their torsos and the way they're going in and out of the floor; oh, that's a style.  This is what Linda Grandy was trying to teach us.  Oh, that's what a style is.  And there were black people!  At least--that--was there one or two black people at that time?  Wow!  And look at those men!  Those--you know, it's not Percival Borde; they're not doing African dance--no, no, Martha Graham.  But quickly, the snobbery, that was already--that's not the thing that we wanna do; no, that's old fashioned--even then it was.  And Merce Cunningham was maybe respected, but Merce Cunningham was a little too aloof, too cold.  We wanted the funk; we wanted--of some--that's why I keep saying, back to the earth, or counter-culture.  It should feel homemade.  Meredith Monk, big spiritual leader for us--singing, movement, storytelling--all that stuff.
Story_ID: 658651
Speaker 1: In '76 [1976], is--I guess it's Lois [Lois Welk] and Arnie [Arnie Zane]; you get a C- a CAPS award [Creative Artists Public Service Program], is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  I think Arnie got it first, is that true?
Speaker 1: Well, that's where 'Everybody Works' ['Everybody Works/All Beasts Count,' Bill T. Jones]--
Speaker 2: He got it for, he got it for photography.  I got it--yeah, I'm not sure who came first.  I think he got it for photography first, but maybe I'm wrong; then I got it for a, you know, a series of dances I had done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The creation of those dances--how are you documenting them?  I mean one, how are you creating them, but how are you documenting them back then?
Speaker 2: You know, Arnie used to--it would drive him crazy, but--let, let me back up.  There was the Experimental Television Center [Binghamton, New York]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --with the--what was it called?  CV--these reel to reel video machines.  And with the portable camera to be sure, but the battery was so big you had to pull it behind you in a kind of wagon, and we were able to borrow the, the equipment.  Arn- matter of fact, Arnie and I had actually been working at the Experimental Television Center before we went off to Amsterdam [the Netherlands], so we knew about them as a resource.  I think that probably was another thing that attracted Lois to the area, so we were using it.  Now, tape was expensive, so I would be the--, "Oh, let's just tape over."  And Arnie was always, "No, you must not tape over it."  I thought, what are you talking about?  And, to be sure, a lot of them now the tapes (unclear) totally dissolved, or poisoned--been poisoned.  They were--what the work--was very rudimentary, but he was already aware of legacy and history, and telling the story of your development.  So, that was one way it was done, through the video.  Arnie was a great maker of notes and Lois was a genius at it; she has files to this day of the exercises that she made, and she was a real theoretician.  That was one way.  I would remember a lot in my body, but I was an improviser; I could always find another way to get the audience's attention or, or move it into the realm of something that happens when--in, in the spirituality of movement.  That's how we did it--imperfectly, imperfectly.
Speaker 1: So, are you saying then at that point you would improvise on stage without--that would be separate from what you had rehearsed?  Are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we even rehearsed the improvisations 'cause Jen--Lois had worked with Daniel Nagrin and Daniel Nagrin had a group which was an improvisational company called The Workgroup, and--oh, god, I'm pulling a blank now.  A great teacher, a great inspiration--Dick Bull [Richard Bull], who was head of the department at Brockport [The College at Brockport, Brockport, New York], was also a great--he was a jazz musician, and he had made scores that people would move in the same way that jazz composition was made, by improvising around a theme.  So improvising was--it was in the air; everybody was--im- improvisation was a strategy that was ex- respected, actually, throughout the contemporary dance world.  Maybe not Miss Graham's [Martha Graham] world, maybe not Mr. Cunningham's [Merce Cunningham] world, but definitely the generation after them was--improvisation was important.
Story_ID: 658652
Speaker 1: So, who were you having your eye out on at that point, too, also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who's--
Speaker 1: What other groups are you looking at and, and--
Speaker 2: Well, I wish I could say that we were in the hot bed of it all, but we were looking at Binghamton [New York], which was--I think, at that time, Binghamton was twice as far away (laughter); it's much closer now, but--yes, we knew about certain contact groups, we knew about companies called Mangrove, or Tumbleweed from the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], which was like their names, kind of wild; once again, countercultural, communal lifestyles.  We all knew about Merce Cunningham, we--Mer- like I said, Meredith Monk we revered.  We traveled by bus.  I don't know--actually, I don't know how we got down there to see 'Einstein on the Beach' with Lucinda Childs on a--just doing--I think it was called 'Three Characters and a Diagonal' [sic. "Character on Three Diagonals"].  This half an hour solo where she just skips forward and backs--forward and back; blew us away.  The music--we'd been listening to Phil Glass [Philip Glass] already.  Who else?  I was aware of--I was aware and very proud of Alvin Ailey; I felt a little like I was not of that culture; I just didn't, didn't fit in, I wasn't sleek enough, but until--then I met Alvin, and Alvin was very kind to me and he--the greatest compliment he let me make a piece for him; of course, it was '83 [1983].
Story_ID: 658653
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977] is when you have your--your debut (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Debut at the Delacorte Theater [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So tell me how that came to--came about.
Speaker 2: Around this time--was it around the same time that we had seen Robert Wilson at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York]?  I'm not sure; the dates don't quite work out.  But we were down in one of our few visits to New York [New York] like I--as I say, we had this kind of--we were dismissing New York.  Came down, and we went to take a class in release technique, which was the rage in certain quarters; very slow moving, getting at some sort of primal state of ease to release unin- uninflected or unaffected movement.  I think her name was Susan Kline [ph.] was--and, and in her studio, at least the space that we were teaching, there was a poster advertising auditions at Clark Center dance festival--at the Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York] for the dance festival.  And on a lark, I thought, what the hell?  I don't care what they say in New York; it doesn't matter, but I'll come down and try.  And I came down and I did a piece that I had premiered at the American Dance Asylum with me on a pair of shoes, dancing to a high--white blocks, actually--a piece called 'Everybody Works' ['Everybody Works/All Beasts Count,' Bill T. Jones] which had been a larger piece; it had one solo, and then it was a piece about unemployment with animal heads--don't ask me; stamping your--'cause we were all unemployed--stamping your--you know, with the unemployment--you know, to get your check every week, you have to show that you looked for work.  So that's what it was--'Everybody Works.'  And it was Jesse Fuller, this old one man band from the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. (Singing), "Got the blues from my baby down by the San Francisco Bay," ['San Francisco Bay Blues'], that was one of his hits, and (singing), "Everybody works at my house but my old man" ['Everybody Works at My House but My Old Man'].  So those were all musics in the solo; I auditioned it.  It must have been a mess, but I--obviously it was something to it.  I improvised by shouting to a stranger to turn the lights on and off 'cause, of course, they hadn't given you any time, and I was just being provocative and I, I threw in an obscene gesture in what I was doing, and I was doing everything to let them know that I was free person and I did not care.  They were all sitting in the dark.  For years later, people would come say, "You know, I was there the day that you did that."  Now, were they the ones who voted for me or not, I don't know.  And then I got a call, or some sort of notification, back in Binghamton [New York], that Louise Roberts wanted to speak to me.  Louise Roberts, is a feisty Jewish woman, really important to--
Speaker 1: Dance.
Speaker 2: --progressive dance, who invited me--but with a caveat that I had to change certain things.  And I said, "You are trying to censure my work."  And she says, "Listen buster, you got a chip on your shoulder and New York's gonna knock it off; do you wanna do this or not?"  And I sputtered a bit, and I said, "Yes, I do."  And so I did the, the Delacorte Theater--biggest audience I'd ever been in front of, on the same program with the Joffrey Ballet and Charles Moore and--I don't remember the other people, but it was, it was serious dance world, and who is this person out of nowhere?  That's how it happened, and it was actually well received.
Story_ID: 658654
Speaker 1: So, when you, when you--that's like having, you know, just--going from here to here, really (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, the thing is, what happens as a result of that then?  So what is the next thing?  Because basically, you know, in the next--you, you go very aggressively, you and Zo- Zane. And a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First me; I was invited to do this series of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --performances at the--was it at the, The Kitchen [New York, New York]?  I'm not quite sure, but--and Clark, Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York], of course, and they invite me to come back with whatever I wanted to do, and I brought the dance asylum [American Dance Asylum] with me and it was a mixed bill with works by myself, Arnie and Lois Welk; maybe even Jill Becker was on that--so--became as a group.  I attracted the attention of people who wanted to represent me, I think that's how it happened.  More opportunities followed; somewhere in there was--the CAPS grant [Creative Artists Public Service Program] was there; I'm not sure because I won--I was--
Speaker 1: CAPS grant was before; it was '76 [1976], I--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]?  Okay.
Speaker 1: But you know?  But maybe--
Speaker 2: I, I don't--I'm not sure, except I know that around that time I--some--I was approached about working at The Kitchen, and I did a performance there as well, which was primarily solos, but it had a couple of duet components as well.  Well, now my dates are all getting jumbled.  But that Clark Center performance [of 'Everybody Works/All Beasts Count,' Bill T. Jones] was very important; I was sort of on the map.  I was a voice.
Speaker 1: So, how were you handling it, being on the map like that?  And when that--
Speaker 2: Everything was always handled through Arnie Zane helping me, and he could--when the crest--when things were moving, he knew something about momentum; he knew how to say, "We should do this, we should do this, we should do this."  That's one way it happened.  I think when--as you said a moment ago, you asked what happens when you have a success like that?  All of your questions, all of your true beliefs come to the surface.  For instance, you think you're countercultural and you don't care about success. Once it's offered to you, things begin to change, and I think I was too honest to hide that.  We wanted things, and began to feel once again--is this true?  I'm not sure what I'm about to say, but I began to feel like a black man because success on your own, something that you have, now has potential and value.  And you realize that, you know, I'm the, I'm the child of a man whose work had failed, you know?  I'm the first in the family--not the first, but one of the first to go to the university.  I'd left the university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], and now here it is, you're in a big stage, you're suddenly written about in The New York Times.
Story_ID: 658655
Speaker 1: I wasn't gonna do it without Arnie. He--where I went, he went.  I needed him and he was, he was a New Yorker; he knew something--he didn't know about the dance world, but he knew something.  That began happen- began to put strain on Lois [Lois Welk], Arnie and our relationship.
Speaker 2: That's what I was gonna ask.  Okay, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, it did; it did.
Speaker 2: So, can you talk about how that--but--'cause I was thinking that it had to, but that wasn't in your narrative, so what kind of--what, what were the strains?
Speaker 1: You know, I feel like such a, a child because I think that they were having more profound discussions than I was; I just knew that I'm the one that got written about in the paper.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After--when they were the ones in charge--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and the ideas.
Speaker 1: And they both have really sheltered me and helped me, but now the world was offering something, now Lois couldn't go there; they--dance asylum's performances were not as successful as mine had been.  Maybe we could have worked it, but suddenly the dance world in New York [New York] made room for me and for us because when Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] and--Bill and Arnie began to make work together, there was also, oh, this is a new thing.
Speaker 2: Well, they liked the, the intersection between your bodies.
Speaker 1: Well, first of all, two men--
Speaker 2: Two men.
Speaker 1: --a white one and a black one--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I'll tell ya, I don't know where--show me where there'd been a successful duet of any kind between a white man and a black man; it was not a minstrelsy; it was not in the Harlem Renaissance, as far as I know.  Now, we know that there--these relationships have been going on under the radar, but suddenly the times allows it, and we were the people to do it.  That--and Arnie Zane--we knew that; now, I remember us having fights with Lois, who was a--she was a big person; she was a big, gentle person--very smart, and she knew which way the wind was blowing, and I, I said that, you know--in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones] I said that we weren't--that we didn't like each other; we thought that maybe someday we would again, but at that time, we didn't--at least maybe that's the way I was feeling, I don't know.  And that we knew we needed to make a change, and we couldn't take the dance asylum [American Dance Asylum] with us.  We were not loyal, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that, that can create a lot of problems, you know--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --because they--I mean--right, that can create a lot of problems (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was loyal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She stayed in Binghamton [New York]; she kept the dream alive at the dance asylum.  It was not about only--it wasn't only about her, it was always about a, a group of people coming together and doing something.
Speaker 2: But all that work had allowed you to be what--I mean all that work that occurred in Binghamton had really--beside your natural talent--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --'cause you're very--see, that's the other thing.  People are saying what you look like on stage--your physique, you know, the movements.  I mean all of those are interesting to watch, right? That--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  And it--and suspect, you know, for us; because who are the people primarily?  Black people in the audience, at least in the downtown scene.  Now, I was not dancing for Mr. Ailey's [Alvin Ailey] audience, and there it was already suspect then.  Like I say, I began to feel like a black man.  Hard to describe, and particularly with a Jewish-Italian companion; it's very complicated.  I was still--I was--I think I can safely say that I had--sexually I had bisexual tendency, so I was still working that out as well, which made hell in our relationship, but I was all--trying to seduce the world, and in, in turn being seduced.  It was a very confusing time--very exciting, and it takes a certain type of, of durable, and I dare say male ego, to be able to, to negotiate or stumble one's way through it as I did.
Story_ID: 658656
Speaker 1: So, what you were, what you were speaking of was one--the, the, the dance community, black and white--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --well, black da- didn't know who you were, right?  You sort of come in on this--the scene.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're not--you didn't come in the regular way.
Speaker 2: I did not.  No, I hadn't gone to let Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey] finish me, so to speak (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And, and then the other thing that I find interesting is that--you know, people--like when you think of--in the black--I'm gonna say in the black community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you think of dance couples, the only, you know--it was, it was [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder and--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Carmen De Lavallade--I mean they were like Arnie [Arnie Zane] and you in, in some respects.
Speaker 2: But did they, did they create together and do a duet show?
Speaker 1: Yes, they created together (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, I thought--'cause they both had pretty substantial careers--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --independent of each other.
Speaker 1: No, no, and also together, in their early--okay, in their early careers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just wa- looking, looking at some pictures of he and she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In their early career.
Speaker 2: And then there was this--these two guys, Gary Matthews [sic. Gary Masters] and--I think they were two former Limon dancers [Limon Dance Company].  I remember them on the cover of Dance Magazine--very classical modern dancers with tights and beautiful physiques and all, doing its kind of expressionist modern dance.  There was something--because we looked so odd together, and we were black and white; that's why I say--and maybe someone listening to this will--who were--what were the--what was the precedent before black men and white men actually making a team and creating work together--performance work?  It might even been the case with music; it's certainly probably the case with music, but was it the case with painting or sculpture or literature or--where was it?
Speaker 1: But, but you also were self-managing.  I mean your, your--that's why I think--
Speaker 2: Self-managing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well--well, I mean you were managing your careers, or he was managing your career--however that dynamic worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a big deal, you know.  When we came to New York [New York], we were loved, and then there came a moment where we got, quote, management.  And I remember people saying, "What do you think you're doing?  You're becoming careerist," you know.  "This is not what we, what we bought into when we saw you come in here, you know?"  But we--what was that about?  Was that his ambition?  Well, I was right there with him, wanting what he wanted, and we thought the sky was the limit.
Story_ID: 658657
Speaker 1: So, what about your, your improvised solo of: "I love white people, I hate white people--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --I'd like to kiss you, I'd like to tear your fucking heart out." I mean what about that, and the response?  Because--
Speaker 2: You know, it would be nothing now, would it--wouldn't it?  It would be nothing now, but it was 1981 at the Dance- American Dance of Fest- American Dance Festival, which was still very much a bastion of classical modern dance, and Charlie Reinhart [Charles L. Reinhart], who was a dear friend, at that time was very suspicious, I think, of the, of the avant-garde. That's--I, I could be, I could be faulted for that. But I think that he was a bit offended by that solo, and it was improvisation, it was in the moment.  What--you were asking me what about it though?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying--because that, that hurt you at some point.  I mean--well, Ar- Arlene [Arlene Croce]--what about Ar- (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Was I at that point, or when, when did she first write?
Speaker 1: It's 1980.  I, I have a note (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--what did she write?
Speaker 1: 'Social Intercourse' [Bill T. Jones].
Speaker 2: Did she write about 'So-'--oh, yes, right.
Speaker 1: She did, she did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she wrote about, she wrote about 'Social Intercourse,' but--what?  What was that?  That had nothing to do with the, I love you, I hate you.
Speaker 1: I thought that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause if--their solo was at the American Dance Festival, and I--
Speaker 1: Right, the American Dance Festival--
Speaker 2: And not the--yes, and then this was down--
Speaker 1: You weren't emerging, you were billed as emerging choreographer.
Speaker 2: Yes, but the piece that she was taking umbrage with was at--downstairs at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] when they were starting a series down there, and they would--people would come in there, we'd do things, and I brought in a piece that--she reviewed it. That's when--
Speaker 1: Right, that's 1982; I'm sorry, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One is 1981.
Speaker 2: And then the next time that she took me to task was when--wait a minute.  No, did she--maybe it was in that article she said, "He's leading a community into the fever swamps."
Speaker 1: That's right, that's--that was 1982 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I named my piece, for Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], 'Fever Swamp' [Bill T. Jones], which she thought was outrageous (laughter).  What he's saying is critics shouldn't talk back.  Because I name my piece ironically?  Oh, my god--well, anyway, anyways.  But--yeah--how did we get to her?  'Cause you, you'd been asking--
Speaker 1: I--we got to her because I said you, you know, what about this piece that you did--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, and--
Speaker 2: At ADF, or the one 'Social Intercourse'?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two [1982], the 'Social Intercourse.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and so, I'm just asking because this becomes--first of all, critics can make or break a, a person--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and The New York Times critic can make or break, you know, what they say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think Anna Kisselgoff's first writing about this solo, 'Everybody Works' ['Everybody Works/All Beasts Count,' Bill T. Jones], called me a young humanist, who was--work deserves to be looked at, probably helped. But she wasn't the only one looking, you know?  There were people at the national endowment [National Endowment for the Arts] looking, there were presenters looking, and--you know, there's always a tension between the critical establishment and, quote, tastemakers, and architects of trends and--as I can see very much in this house right now, so, she wasn't the last word.  Now, to me, I was devastated; I thought so, but obviously, it didn't break me, you know?  I, I, I kept contributing.
Story_ID: 658658
Speaker 1: So, how did the Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] then--how did that come that you were commissioned?  And at this point, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bless him, Alvin [Alvin Ailey]!  How did that happen?  Alvin, Alvin.  You know, I tell that story, but it--when I was invited to--by Denise Jefferson, I believe.  They would ask someone to come in from--I don't know where, but I know--I thought it was always they were looking at new choreographers and work with their students, and you make something in like--god, three days or something, if even that much?  And I just made this kind of wild rock--kind of dance theater actually piece that--just remember a little Japanese woman that all she had to do was stand and arrange her bangs (laughter) like this, 'cause I loved the, the fragility of that movement, and then there was a showing.  You would think someone would tell me but, as I say, the door opened and there is Mr. Ailey himself with Pearl Primus, and an entourage of the black intelligentsia, the dance world.  And--so we did what we did.  And then he and I talked.  Now, this is supposed to be a general talk back, but became about us talking, and I, I remember it as being--everyone going quiet and leaning in to see what the exchange was, and my impression is that we liked each other.  And that is--he was--we liked each other, and he did not have to squash me. He--I don't know if he could have squashed me 'cause I was pretty arrogant young dude, you know?  But he actually said--I was--he was asking me questions--he would ask me questions, I ask him questions.  "Well," I said, "well, what do you think of the downtown?"  He said, "I like them when they dance," you know (laughter).  Things--it was back and forth like that.  Then, he invited me to make a piece for the first company.  Now, that says a lot, doesn't it?  The first company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It says a lot because the company was in its prime then, too.
Speaker 2: Well, I--was it?  It, it was a good--it was a beautiful company, but I, I think that--he, he had already had his public scandals at that point.  I remember that he was--that once beautiful body was not being taken care of; I think he was depressed.  But he still--he, he saw something in me, yeah, and I remember him (laughter)--the company was performing in UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I, I was--Arnie [Arnie Zane] and I must have been at UCLA performing, as well.  They were in--and came over to have a drink with him or something. Was it talking about 'Fever Swamp' [Bill T. Jones], the piece I was going to make? And he played, played me his latest work which was made with the French virtuoso Patrick Dupond--was that his name?  Patrick Dupond was a great star at that time, and he was making a piece for him on Jim Morrison, and he said, "You know, I--it's a lot of things--I have a little bit of you in here," he said.  I could never see what was--what he considered me but, you know, here we are, saying that.  I was like, wow. And it was--I learned a lot.  Here was a man that, back at the university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], had been told, "Don't you even go to Mr. Ailey's audition unless you can do a double turn," and the man corrected me on the, on the petit allegro--how to say it correctly (laughter).  Suddenly, he and I are sitting alone like two men.  You know, it's all sorts of room; he never put any moves on me or anything like that, it was respectful, and he was, I think--without flattering myself, I think he was hungry to know a young man like me.
Speaker 1: I think he may have seen--what if--well, let me ask you, do you think he saw some of himself in you?
Speaker 2: I wonder.  In fact, what he did see was the ambition, and maybe the idealism.  His story was totally different.  But--yeah, I mean, I was nowhere near the dancer he had been.  I mean I was, I was, I was something else, you know, but he--I think he wanted me to succeed.  I think he, he really wanted me to succeed.  So that, that meeting in his room--and, what did I get?  This is what it means to be the director of a dance company.  He was in a lovely room at the--there used to be this place in Westwood [Los Angeles, California] there, West Hollywood [California], that had a kind of kidney shaped pool--a real hold over, kind of beautiful, with palm trees and bungalows, and they all--that UCLA always put up the companies there until it closed, around the time that we started touring, and he was alone in that room.  And it was like kind of bare, you know?  He had his, he had his, his recording equipment, so he was obviously working on his work, but he was alone.  I was not alone, you know?  Had never been alone.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 658659
Speaker 1: So, next, let's talk about some of your works.  And I'm more interested--I--this is what I would like to understand is, you're being, you know--you've, over time, had things where people would commission your work--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but I want you to talk about your creative process because I know you say it's much--you know, you still--improvisational is very important and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, not so much as--I'm not--since--that was me as a performer.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Hold on--
Speaker 1: But I mean--but here, what is the--what is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're talking at this time?
Speaker 1: I'm talking about in 1980--the 1980s, that's what I'm talking about.  And there's now--
Speaker 2: Well, the works that I think--that have been most durable--not all have been those early duets with Arnie.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, I mean 'Monkey Run Road' [Bill T. Jones]--I just saw a--oh, god, what--it's--now--oh, there's another name, but there was, there was video of you and--you and Arnie, black and white footage--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but it's called Black--no--
Speaker 2: Well, there's, there's a trilogy; the first one was called 'Blauvelt Mount-'--no, 'Monkey Run Road' was the first one with a big wooden box; the second one was called 'Blauvelt Mountain' [Bill T. Jones]; it had two parts, and that's the one that Janet Wong, my associate director [at New York Live Arts], has actually edited archival footage of he and I, and then other casts doing it; and then there was the last one which was called 'Valley Cottage' [Bill T. Jones].  And then we made one called 'Rotary Action' [Bill T. Jones] and a couple of other smaller ones.  Arnie began to get sick, so we didn't continue that, but--and the company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company] came about at a certain point.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So all that energy with--about a duet.  Now, you might ask what was there about--
Speaker 1: The creative--I'm asking what was the creative process for that?
Speaker 2: For which ones?
Speaker 1: For, for the trilogy--let's start with the trilogy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, they were, they were pieces made over about three years, so they're all--the, the creative process came from what is the potential in these two bodies?  They're very different.  What do we do with support?  Who can support whom?  We were very taken with the cinema, the avant-garde cinema, which was quite formal, the cinema--about shapes over time, repetition, the base principle being that film was twenty-four still frames moving in front of a--a, a, a transparent medium moving in front of a sour- a light source, gave the illusion of movement.  So we, movers, were trying to deconstruct movement so that it could be like a film, played forward and back, stopped and started, and we were--so it made us very interested in pictures.  Arnie Zane was a photographer; that was very influential.  We both bonded around looking at the, the work of Lartigue [Jacques Henri Lartigue], or Jerry Winogrand, or--Garry Winogrand.  We loved Matisse, his cut outs; we were great fans of Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas that--the way that Gertrude Stein made language almost like cubistic art, like painting or sculpture--repetition--blocks of meaning.  Meaning was not the most important thing; meanings arose out of the materials we manipulated.  That was a very important thing; that was pulling everything that we were together.  Arnie had the discipline to actually try to record things so we could repeat them.  He made notes.  Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] would have flights of fantasy; flights that would take us in certain directions, and Bill added a patina of, quote, showmanship, to what was pretty cerebral exercises if--without that.  And we were the subject but we didn't know we were the subject.  We were just being, we thought. But actually the world saw us as a relationship being rather exotic and unprecedented.  We didn't know that, of course, 'cause we had seen the combinations of the dance asylum [American Dance Asylum], we had seen Meredith Monk, and all those things.
Story_ID: 658660
Speaker 1: So that's where that started; the trilogies became finer, we started touring in Europe.  I believe that we became the--Arnie [Arnie Zane] probably was more aware from the beginning--the precedent of, of something like the Triadic Ballet [Triadisches Ballett]--Oskar Schlemmer, the, the constructivism of, of earlier periods in European art; all of that mixed with a funky, homemade quality--gym- gymnastics, and my penchant for speaking and dancing at the same time.
Speaker 2: Which is--I mean that, that is--I just--just lovely.  I mean it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When it works; it can be quite effective, yes, um-hm
Speaker 2: And, and when it works--because a lot of people--one wouldn't have that ability--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to do that, and--
Speaker 1: Well, it, it--there were people who were working in that style; a great one was Trisha Brown; hers was all, I think, much more set than mine.  I had a stream of consciousness happening.  I was inspired by her but I never saw the work, I only read about it.  It took me years before I actually saw--was it 'Water Motor' [Trisha Brown]?  And those, those pieces of hers--very influential, but influential from a distance 'cause I just read about them.  David Gordon, another one who is a, a master of construction--stage construction, which is time and space, and gesture.  And a narrative or some sort of theatrical device, oftentimes delivered by his very beautiful English wife Valda Setterfield.
Speaker 2: So but--with those--that--when you're doing that--because as the moves--you might repeat the moves but the words can be changed.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so--and that has--then it has a whole different dimension.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, my question is, is Arnie recording this?  Are you recording it so you--the--it becomes actually a piece because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do I repeat my words?
Speaker 2: Right, do you repeat your words?
Speaker 1: We repeated--we got to the point where the movement was more repeated, much more repeated than the, than the text.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The text was often stream of consciousness; it was seldom captured and transcribed.  I remember we made a piece which was--the, the text was, what if we could not Merce Cunningham?  (Laughter) Or, the whole world is going bananas; pretty soon it will be all bananas--one big banana.  Just these kind of absurd phrases that would take on almost a musical quality with repetition, which was something from Gertrude Stein, which was something from Meredith Monk--all those people; we were absorbing all those things.
Story_ID: 658661
Speaker 1: What is the formation of Bill T. Jones/Arnie Dance--Arnie Zane Dance Company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company]?  When does it become formalized in that way?  That's nineteen eighty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we, we celebrate 1982--
Speaker 1: --two [1982], right.
Speaker 2: Yes, when we wanted a permanent company, and at the same time that we were being represented by Arts Arcadia [ph.], and they said to us, "You know if you want a company, you will be asking for money until you retire."  And we said, "Oh, yeah, we can do that."  But they were saying something very important, if you want to institutionalize, things change.  And I'm just now really beginning to feel what they meant by that--yeah.  You know, it's in- it's odd because I'm so resistant. I, I appreciate these questions.  To say that--what I was doing and thinking then is what I have always done and said, but in a way, there have been things that have stayed the same.  The entrance--the interest in the tangible, whatever you consider that, be it the text in relationship to a moving intangible, which is movement or vice versa.  This disjunction; we were very--we were not interested in a smooth and flowing narrative event; it was all, all kind of, kind of crashed together if not cobbled together; that aesthetic, that, that kind of--we found it very, very exciting.  And I think, I think in some ways those things are still going on.  When he stopped dancing, when I stopped dancing--well, he stopped dancing as he got ill--
Speaker 1: Sick. Um-hm.
Speaker 2: As he got sick.  And--
Speaker 1: That's 1985, but you know, in 19- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and we had to remove our bodies from it, another thing went into play.  What is style?  What is training and all those things?  When you're now working with people who are getting ever younger, and they're not yourselves, your ideas have to, in some ways, become more concrete and you, you make some mistakes but then sometimes you actually transcend yourself, and that's what I--why I still want to maintain a company.
Story_ID: 658662
Speaker 1: So, things became difficult.  I mean the com- the, even the management of the company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company] became difficult--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then the illness came on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--but this illness is a pretty serious illness, and what I read is that you threw yourself more into work?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But how are the dynamics working?  Because at some point, I mean you're endangered--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and he is dying.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he's been the rock--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--'cause that--or that's what you're telling me, that he was the rock.  And how, how is all--and you're throwing yourself in the work.  I'm trying to figure out where is the emotional underpinning or--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how are you handing--handling everyday life?
Speaker 2: I got black, you know?  (Singing), "Before I be a slave, I'll be buried in my grave" ['Oh, Freedom'].  I'll be damned if I'm stopped.  Because it's not just me; this is Estella [Estella Edwards Jones] and Gus [Augustus Jones, Sr.], this is all of those things.  You set yourself on a trajectory, you were gonna show the world you're gonna do this, and you'll--I'll be damned.  And if Arnie [Arnie Zane] as well.  You know, there was a dream that we had that became my dream; that's one way of saying it, and I think it has something to do with race, that's all I can think of.  I had to keep this thing going; I am not gonna be, I'm not going to be a failed black man who has stuck his neck out and gone way off the beaten track, as white people could--are allowed to, but I'm gonna go out there and I'm not going to fall into drug addiction, I don't know what is gonna happen with HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], but I had a wonderful partner who wanted nothing more than to live, and he had a dream for us.  Every time I walk outside right now in my, my garden, you know--the house that he and I bought in 1980, and I, I--we have this vision. It was like a little--like kind of a, a funky little swamp that this little funky little house sat in, but now it's a beautiful garden, and I enjoy that garden with my new spouse, Bjorn Amelan; we've been together twenty plus years.  But, you know, he makes room; he knows that there's a third, or even a fourth person, because there is his companion, Patrick Kelly, as well.  He knows there are other--there are, there are benign ghosts there, and we enjoy.  No, I didn't stop--no, no, no.  This enterprise, I say, is an extension of my practice.  It's trying to stay involved in the world of ideas, it's about people. No, this is not the American Dance Asylum, but I'm still--I draw on that.  I try to understand what it's like to have a group of people--that, that's a part of the upheaval here, is how can you have a group of people all dedicated to a vision?  It's easier when you're a single choreographer company, but if--when you try to run an institution, how do you get everybody on the same page about this sense of the we?  And that's still there, that's still there.
Speaker 1: But I--that--I just--I mean--there was--it was the end--I mean--you had--you knew life in one way, that was the two of you together.  You--at that point in time, the only life--I know time is best, but--
Speaker 2: And we were in a collective, remember?  We were in a collective; we were two of us together and we had had a dance company; he died in '88 [1988], the dance company had been formalized in '82 [1982], so there was already a community; I wasn't left completely alone, you know.  My dancers circled me when he passed, and there were friends in that circle--bigger group; the--Robert Longo whose painting is downstairs right now, Cindy Sherman, Michelle O'Dare [ph.], there--Gretchen Bender, a videographer who did the video for 'Still/Here' [Bill T. Jones]; those people, they circled me, they embraced me.  So, no, I wasn't, I wasn't alone.  Now, Arnie had said, you know, "Let this company go; you're not temperamentally suited to do it.  Go do solo work; go do what you want." And I didn't.  That was--I didn't, I didn't, for all the reasons I just said a moment ago.
Speaker 1: So, how were you--how long did it take you to redefine yourself?  I mean--or was that not a part of the equation?
Speaker 2: You had to do it on your feet. Had to do it on my feet.  I'd always been an improviser and always been able to grab that moment, and I had their--at that moment, no, I'm hurting, but the only thing that made sense was to--how can you get to that next piece?  How can you keep the company together?  How do you keep going?
Story_ID: 658663
Speaker 1: But is it--let me ask this question.  Is it--does the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] crisis--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the, you know, in American society but also--in the gay community but also in the dance community.
Speaker 2: In the art world.
Speaker 1: In the art world, I'm sorry, that's right.  I should say art world. Does that, in some respects, propel you forward in some respects?
Speaker 2: The crisis in and of itself?
Speaker 1: Not the cri- the--I mean your--there--it's not like it's just you, okay, at that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, although we were leaders and actually being--trying to talk about it, trying to normalize it, make it part of life, not something you had to push to the side or whisper about.
Speaker 1: But does that give you a, a mission focus, you know, for a period of time?  That's what I'm trying to, to understand.
Speaker 2: What do you mean, the, the tragedy of losing him?
Speaker 1: No, not the tragedy of losing him.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's what I consider the AIDS crisis was for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a tra- but there are a lot of tragedies happening around you.
Speaker 2: Not like that for me.  Who--how many of us actually have lived and loved someone and built together, and then have them snatched away?  You know, I mean there's--children die every day, but when your child dies, that's a tragedy like no other, isn't it?  And a loved one.  So I'm, I'm not quite sure.  I wanna say--I wanna understand something.  No, my whole life didn't become a, a demonstration anti-AIDS event.  As a matter of fact, it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but, but, but it catapulted you.  I mean in some--
Speaker 2: The AIDS, the AIDS crisis catapulted me?
Speaker 1: I'm asking you that.
Speaker 2: No, I don't that--oh, it was an interesting--
Speaker 1: I meant--
Speaker 2: --part of a formula.  You asked me before how did coming out of Wayland Central School [Wayland, New York] and migrant parents produce a [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones.  Well, the same thing I'd have to say right now; the world calls, and then you answer; that's what happened there.  You know, I don't remem- I, I did make two of my most famous pieces right after he died; the first one was called 'Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin' ['Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land,' Bill T. Jones], but what was that piece about?  It was--was it about AIDS?  No.  It was when I sat with a minister and asked him, "Is AIDS punishment from God" was a conversation starter around the nature of sin and, and, and spiritual belief.  All questions about my African American heritage, my mother's belief, and what have you, AIDS was there; it was--I did the story of Job, about a man having everything taken away and so on, but it ends with everyone naked and bathed in golden light, and my mother [Estella Edwards Jones] standing there--something she hadn't done when Arnie [Arnie Zane] was alive--standing there next to me; I'm--in her Sunday best, and I'm stark naked on stage, right?  Then, there was 'Still/Here' [Bill T. Jones]. 'Still/Here,' which was a work that was trying to understand what connects us as mortality. Mortality is a fact that we're not gonna live forever.  Most of the people involved in the, the, the survival workshop, participants would help make the piece, why not men dealing with AIDS?  They were breast cancer survivors, cystic fibrosis, cancer, what have you.  So it was trach- it was not--I say--to this day, I say AIDS--so here was not a piece about AIDS; it was not.  It was informed, and I was a very public person; everyone knew my story, but it was actually trying to do something the dance asylum [American Dance Asylum] talked about, make a community around your questions.  And there's a name that must go into the record and that is Freda Rosen.  Freda Rosen was the gay--I mean the lesbian socialist therapist that the GMHC [Gay Men's Health Crisis] had suggested that Arnie go to when he had such anxiety about getting sick.  Sh- he brought me in; she was the mo- one of the most important voices around this period.  What took you, Bill, from A to B is not, in your life, what's gonna take you from B to C; you have to make moves.  You have to start understanding something about your history as a man, as a black man, and as a gay man; you have to understand something about what you would--what you and Arnie represented.  And now that you're losing Arnie, what's with your relationship and what's with you?  All of that made it possible to make pieces like 'Last Supper,' to make pieces like 'Still/Here.'  So, I'm trying to lay it out for you.  That's what it was; let's not put it all on the AIDS crisis.  We used to say every generation has their, their disaster.  The World War I [WWI] generation, those people look back on that and said how much it had dis- decimated their youth--World War II [WWII], you know?  That, that--this was our war; that's how I understood it.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 658664
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't wanna beat a dead horse; I'll go--but was there--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Are you still not getting something that you--
Speaker 1: Well, no, I'm just wondering, did you--was there any guilt?
Speaker 2: Guilt?
Speaker 1: Guilt that he left and--I mean--not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Survivor's guilt?
Speaker 1: Survivor's guilt.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  (Singing), "I'm sorry, that's all that you can say, years go by and still words don't come easily.  I love you, I love you" ['Baby Can I Hold You'].  Now, that's Tracy Chapman.  Me crying, listening to this music and this I'm sorry.  Now, what was I apologizing for?  I was apologizing for the indignity of his death--what he had bee- what had happened.  He was full of love at the end, for me, and I loved him.  I stood in front of a mirror, I think I might have written that in the book, when my friend Robert Longo was paying for a hotel room so I could be with Arnie [Arnie Zane] and I came in one day after being around the clock there, and I was in the hotel and I stood in front of the mirror and I said, "This is the body that he loved; honor it.  If you love him, honor what he loved."  That's one way of answering your question--guilt.  (Makes sound) If I'd not been a gay man, if I'd not had the (laughter)--why were gay people picked out by--because of our patterns of having--the way we had sex, or what have you, if that's what you're asking.  Did I have guilt about that?  Well, yeah--I can't say I had guilt about that; I had--like I say, what made me, the son of potato pickers, want to go off and live a life as a experimental dance maker.  "You should get yourself a job, man; you should be a doctor, a lawyer."  No, no, no, no, there's something else.  What, what, what was that arrogance to do that?  Well, that's the same way I felt in some way; this is one of the things that came out of life--is a movement in a piece called 'Verbum' [Bill T. Jones] that we made, oh, about 1994 [sic. 2002], and as a--as it came out of an improvisation where the knees are wobbling and the arms are slapping, and you're trying to walk, and I was explaining to my dancers, "This--imagine that you're in the Sanctified church."  "The what, Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones]?"  And you're saying, "Work me Lord, work me," you know?  That is the supplicant; in the face of the circumstances, the exigencies of being alive; that is what the hot core of the creative process has been about since Arnie died.  That's it. I'm open, I'm trying to find something.
Story_ID: 658665
Speaker 1: How do you meet Arthur [Arthur Aviles]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Arthur.  Arthur was in my company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company]; Arthur--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the last Christmas that Arnie [Arnie Zane] was alive, Arthur was our charge--a gifted, young Puerto Rican dancer who would--came to an audition, we didn't even know we were looking for him; we took him, and he's one of the greatest dancers the company has ever had.  And Arnie loved him, I loved him.  He didn't celebrate Christmas.  We actually went out and bought gifts so that he, on Christmas morning, would have gifts. And a, a Christmas tree, I think, even.  You know?  Oh, yes, he loved Barbra Streisand; Arnie loved Barbra Streisand (laughter); they, they bonded around that.  And then when Arnie died and we were in rehearsal, I think I mention in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones'] there, end of the day, it was one of those--the first few weeks and a month out, and nobody--I was going home alone.  Remember Mr. Ailey [Alvin Ailey] in that hotel room (laughter)?  And I said, sort of kidding, "Well, does anybody wanna go with me--go home, have dinner with me?"  And he said, "I will."  Here is, in a way, my baby, our, our baby, and it was--yeah, okay.  He did.  And he was my partner for five years; he was HIV negative [human immunodeficiency virus] when I met him, and when we stopped being companions five years later, he was still HIV negative.  Says something about how I valued him--how we, how we worked.  And then some ways he, he--it, it was through 'D-Man in the Waters' [Bill T. Jones], a piece probably critically, most appreciated dance.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: He had us--he was the spirit of that piece, he was in 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' ['Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land,' Bill T. Jones]; he was stupendous in that piece.  He was in--and 'Still/Here' [Bill T. Jones].  And then he had to go his own way; I met Bjorn [Bjorn Amelan], and they--once again, this is Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] as the kind of looking the other way.  There was a changing of the guards, almost, between he and Bjorn.  Bjorn could tell this story and Arthur, as [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou said when told the circumstances of this changing of the guard, she said, "And that is--that was a grand gesture that Arthur made."  What did Bill need?  Who did he need as a partner?  And it was good for him, too, you know.  I'm eleven years older, he wanted to be his own man, and you would always be Bill T. Jones' companion, or a lead dancer in Bill's company.  So it worked for everybody; it was painful for him, though.  He was a great artist; he was--and Arnie--Arnie and I both saw that together when we took him, and I'm so glad that he knew Arnie--that was important.  He was one of those people who is like unrepeatable because of the experience of life--of my life.
Story_ID: 658666
Speaker 1: This period of time--I wanna go to--wait, I wanna understand that just last statement, so the--your, your partner of twenty years now, you're saying that there was--how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it twenty?  I think it's al- twenty-one now--
Speaker 1: Twenty-one.
Speaker 2: --almost twenty-two.
Speaker 1: So you're saying there was a, a--I don't wanna say a switch up, but there was a--
Speaker 2: A changing of the guards.
Speaker 1: A changing of the guard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that they worked that out between them.  I didn't know that I was even looking for another partner.  I didn't know; I, I was--Arthur [Arthur Aviles] had stepped right in, he literally could--he was the same size as Arnie [Arnie Zane]--different taste, different personality, but he was all enthusiasm, openness, and love, and I needed to take care of somebody. In the process, he was taking care of me, 'til it came to a point wherein I met this other person who was a friend to Arthur and me for a while, and then we stepped over the line and our relationship became something else, and I thought I saw, oh, that's what it would mean to be ab- to have a lover who is older, a man who is--that's what you--who has more of the experience that you have.  And--yeah.  I'm not sure what--how, how immoderate you want me to be, but I do remember at Jacob's Pillow [Jacob's Pillow Dance, Becket, Massachusetts], the day that it became kind of apparent to Bjorn [Bjorn Amelan] and I that I think we were falling in love, and then how he came back for their matinee show and I was lying there and Arthur, who never said things like this, said, "Am I gonna lose you to Bjorn?"  Now, we were all friends.  I didn't think he was paying attention, but he was, and I said, "I won't do anything without your permission."  'Cause I was--I thought that I was--
Speaker 1: Committed.
Speaker 2: I was committed to saying to Bjorn, "I'm sorry, I love my life.  This man has carried me; he is--he and I are together, and I can't do this."  Arthur took that and he called Bjorn and said, "Let's have a drink."  And he said, "Bill's [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones] supposed to be speaking in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] next week, and he wants you to go with him."  I never mentioned anything like that.  So, next thing I know, I hear that--from one of them, "Oh, I'm gonna be going with you to Milwaukee."  That's what I'm saying, it was like it was--that's what Maya meant--[HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, she said, "That was what you call a grand gesture," you know?  Everybody behaved exemplary at that moment 'cause there was some other exigency, some other force that was at play that, that--those two men knew; maybe I didn't know--yeah.
Story_ID: 658667
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--I mean that, that's sort of a beautiful story 'cause you've had these--how long were you and Arnie [Arnie Zane] together?
Speaker 2: Seventeen years.
Speaker 1: So, wow, book end almost relation.
Speaker 2: Yes, and like I say, half of my life; I met him when I was nineteen, then Arthur [Arthur Aviles] and I were for five years, and now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this, for twenty-one [with Bjorn Amelan].
Speaker 2: And we're married.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, we got married this summer.
Speaker 1: December?
Speaker 2: This summer.
Speaker 1: Oh, this summer; congratulations!
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--congratulations!  See, the world, changed in that time period.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The world, the world has changed, the world has changed.
Speaker 1: Dramatically.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  There's big emotions in that, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, 'cause it would not have been possible before, but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean dramatic changes in the last eight years, really, in that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658668
Speaker 1: So, the thing that I wanna ask you about is the, the--being notified of the MacArthur genius grant [MacArthur Fellowship], so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, what about it?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I never know if I'm being indiscreet because when I tell it because we were performing--we were rehearsing at the Emerson Majestic [Cutler Majestic Theatre] in Boston [Massachusetts], and I get a phone call (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Emerson Univer- (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're--the--no the Majestic is a theater and now it's pretty fancy, but that time it was just a few years away from being like a kind of a seedy porn theater, actually (laughter), but now it was--with Jeremy Alliger and the Boston Dance Umbrella, it was a place that was a really nice place to perform in, but funky.  We were in there rehearsing and it was a Saturday morning, and a phone rings and somebody says--and to this day I don't remember who she was--she said, "I'm not supposed to do this, but I was there the other night and afterwards I thought you looked a little down or something on stage, and we--I thought that you needed to hear some good news."  And I said, "What?"  And she said, "Well, you know, you've been awarded a MacArthur award."  And I thought, this has got--this is not, not possible; not me.  I still felt like such an outsider.  You know, you give MacArthurs to Merce Cunningham; you give MacArthurs to Trishas [Trisha Brown]; I mean even, even then, Trisha probably, I thought in my mind, was still maybe a little too radical for it, and then this person is telling me that, "No, you're gonna get--you're gonna get $250,000!"  You know, now, it--what it is, 650,000 or something?  (Laughter)  And it was--and I--, "But you can't tell anyone," she said.  What you do you mean, you can't tell anyone?  This is the greatest thing that's ever happened in my career, you know?  I'm really now vindicated--validated, I should say.  And that was--it put a little bounce in my step; what can I tell you?  Some of it went into making life as a--how old was I?  I don't know, a forty plus year old dancer, easy--
Speaker 1: You were forty-two.
Speaker 2: Forty-two.  Some of it, I could think a, a bit more about my house, I could think about the car, I could think about health insurance, you know?  And I felt, oh, wow; so, somebody thinks that you are valid.  Because there's always that nagging feel, you know, that you have been pushing for so many years against the--Arlene Croce, if you will (laughter), and she loomed much bigger than she should have been.  That, oh, that, you know, you're, you're not--you just passing, so to speak (laughter).  You know how we used to pass for, for white?  Well, now you're passing for a real artist.  No, you're not passing; people can see you, and they think it's valid.  That's what that was like.
Speaker 1: So talk about--what is the MacArthur?  It, it's the genius grant, it's the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't like that, I really don't; I, I've nev- I try to--when I get away from it, I say, the MacArthur award.  MacArthur genius award I--makes me cringe; I don't feel myself to be a genius--no.
Speaker 1: But the--it's a very, it's a very competitive process, and it allows--
Speaker 2: I had nothing to do with it.
Speaker 1: No, I know, but--
Speaker 2: You know?  But--
Speaker 1: --but they--it's a very competitive process where they vet lots of people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's not--and I don't know how many they award each year.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think in dance, how many was, was--how many came?  Maybe two of us?  Three of us?  I can't remember even who the other people were.
Speaker 1: But, but the thing is, is that you get the money to use.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's, it's the ultimate gift to an artist, in many ways--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because you get to use the money however you so fit, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes you do, you do.  Yeah, and you know, it's funny, I don't--I think this is--once again, having my--my companion Bjorn Amelan knew very well what it meant financially, but for me it was all about the imprimatur of the effort and the work, and maybe even the life. Maybe even the life--that this was--you did the--you, you followed the right path.  Because I always--the world is saying, "You are important to the world," and one of the most insidious emotions is that what you do is somehow or other not of any import to their society.  And that--when I realize how much I care about the society, a lot of things opened up, you know?  The fact is it's okay; go, go make Broadway show, go, go do these things, you know?  Yeah, the world--you're, you're of the world, and you have talent that can flourish in different forms; don't be afraid.
Story_ID: 658669
Speaker 1: So, did you create--did, did 'Still/Here' [Bill T. Jones] come as a part--as, as a result of the MacArthur genius [MacArthur Fellowship], or around that period of time?
Speaker 2: As a result of it?
Speaker 1: 'Cause--no, 'cause you don't have any strings with that, but sometimes people--
Speaker 2: Well, once again, it's back to that question, how did coming out of Wayland Central School [Wayland, New York] and being a child of migrant workers, how did it make me [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones?  Well, how did the MacArthur add to Arnie's [Arnie Zane] death add to the aftermath and the scandal around 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' ['Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land,' Bill T. Jones] how did that--how did 'Still/Here' come about?  That's how I understand it; it's always ineluctable and mysterious.
Speaker 1: But then, people are--at the same time you have this, you know, this great honor--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which is totally validating; it really--I mean MacArthur genius takes away almost any, any criticism because it says--it's an independent award that has a status of its own.  But, the thing--
Speaker 2: I would have to buy into that; I mean they--maybe others do, but I really do feel I'm only as good as my last work and that's, that's kind of brutal, you know; you're never allowed to have anything in the bank, in your estimation (laughter), but to me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean that's the pressure you put on yourself.
Speaker 2: That's the pressure.
Speaker 1: That you put on yourself.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--but, you now, there also people crit- you know, being criti- you have Irene still very active (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arlene.
Speaker 1: Arlene, Arlene, sorry, Crok- Crok--
Speaker 2: Croce.
Speaker 1: Croce, okay--Arlene Croce is still very active, and--even I read something from--I don't know if--was it Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.]? No, okay.  But an anonymous critic saying that--I don't think it was--but saying that, you know, is this dance?  Or it--or, you know, is this really dance?  We don't know what it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they ask those questions.  Right now, after I see where the dance world is and what the young people are doing, and what people are finally understandi- able to see, you think, why don't they just like be quiet and watch?  You know, do I need to tell you what you think they made of--out of the work of Cezanne [Paul Cezanne]?  What do they make out of Merce's [Merce Cunningham] work, even?  No music, it's disjointed, all those things.  It's not beautiful, quote?  So, we can talk--we can talk about them now if you like, but it was painful as hell when people say it; it's painful now when they say it and, as Gloria Steinem said to me once about public criticism, "Why does it sting so much?  Because they're touching an area that you thought was healed but actually down beneath it's never been healed; so it's easy when they touch it to make you wince."  But what do we wanna say about those criticisms?  Is it dance?  My god, the, the value of the--the dance values in my group, and you look at--there have been movements in the last fifteen years that were completely anti-movement, that's where the new radicalism was, don't dance.  Thwart the expectations and people will have a refreshing experiment; now, how long can that go on?  But that's the way the art goes; it's like a--now it's about movement, now it's not about movement, he talks too much, it's too confessional, it is--or, it's not--it's, it's confusing, what's he doing?  Too many elements, you know?  You, you probably interviewed a number of artists, what can you--you see this gesture?  (Gesture) What can I do?  What can I do?  I cannot change the way they feel, I've just got to persevere.  Now, you don't just persevere. As I've said in this whole narrative today, there's always been somebody there, be it Mrs. Shappee [Mary Lee Shappee], be it Lois Welk, be it Dick Bull [Richard Bull], be it the MacArthur--there's always been somebody there who will say, you know, we see you, you're valid; keep going.  Now, the trick with time is, of course, when you're no longer the flavor of the month.  Not--let's--kind of pejorative, flavor of the month--no, no, when you're no longer the new thing.  Do you have the inner resources to keep going?  Do I?  Why make it--that's been my real--it's been really difficult the last ten years.  Why make another work?  You've won major awards, they're teaching your work in, in colleges, why do you keep doing this?  Is it habit?  Oh, bad!  Is it kind of a tick?  Or is there--or you don't know better (laughter)?  Or is there something else?  There is that something else that I say is a spiritual pursuit or--so as not to be so romantic, art making is participation in the world of ideas.   The human animal is an animal of ideas.  Oh, you're being human--at a high pitch; it's a noble time honored pursuit.  It chews us out, some of us go into obscurity, some of us come in and out of it, but--as they tell us, and believe me, I don't have--I'm not free enough (laughter) from this, but I'm gonna say it anyways.  As they tell us, you've got to rise above the conversation.  Even the critics, their criticism can be good; you get a strong enough headwind, you work harder or you look for other ways.  Yeah, it still hurts.
Speaker 1: So, I--because sometimes it may feel like it--you--no matter how hard you work, you can't do enough.
Speaker 2: And you can't.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658670
Speaker 1: So, I wanna ask you about your--you--the, the, the piece with your mother [Estella Edwards Jones].
Speaker 2: Which one now?
Speaker 1: The one where she was--she's--did she sing--no, she--
Speaker 2: Well, we did that--we--it--we came from 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' ['Last Supper at Uncle Tom's Cabin/The Promised Land,' Bill T. Jones].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother did what was called the prayer section of the supper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, of the supper.
Speaker 2: In (unclear), yes.
Speaker 1: So, how did that--how did you--it come that you asked your mother to do that, you know, and that she--and we haven't spoken about your family's reaction, though you write about that in the book ['Last Night on Earth,' Bill T. Jones], you know, when you start having some success like--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --don't mess, you know, you could really be onto something (laughter), you know, here, don't mess it up (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right. Oh, that was--it was Arnie's family.
Speaker 1: Right--oh, oh, that was Arnie's, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edith [Edith Zane] and Lon [Lon Zane].
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they came to see 'Secret Pastures' [Bill T. Jones and Arnie Zane] and Andy Warhol was in the audience with Madonna, and they were so excited; they went to the party afterwards.  There was man wearing a skirt and a shaved head and earrings, and they suddenly got it, and they said, "You guys are--you know, if--you're, you're--don't--if--." How'd they say?  "You're doing really good.  You keep going and you'll make it to Broadway."  (Laughter) Funny, funny.  But what is your--what are you asking, though (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But what is--what is happening on your family's side, though?  What are they--'cause it--there's--
Speaker 2: Well, it's a big group, first of all.
Speaker 1: It's a big group.
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's a surprisingly small number that has actually seen the work, of course, which I--I think from what I hear from other people, they say, "Don't, don't, don't make anything of that."  I've had remarks from, for instance, my younger brother Gus [Augustus Jones, Jr.] once, when he was being candid with me, he said, "You know, I've seen it; it's just noise.  I don't see what you--it's just like noise."  Didn't--couldn't understand it.  My--or my niece Sondra [ph.] who comes to see 'We Set Out Early...Visibility Was Poor' [Bill T. Jones] that ends with this most searching violin sonata by Peteris Vasks, and at one point all the dancers, I told them to dance as if they were in a club, in a diagonal and, and they are like snapping their fingers and all; she--so excited, first of all, to get her in the theater, all right?  And she comes, and she said, "Uncle Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones], you know, I don't--usually don't get your work, but that I got; I could feel."  And I say in my latest book, 'Story/Time: The Life of an Idea' [Bill T. Jones] that's one of the most important criticism I'd ever gotten--or response I'd ever gotten.  Why?  Because of--yes, she was my family but she was also a black woman, working class woman, who had come to something I was doing and could be moved by it.  There are people who they don't--they have no entry point.  Me going all the way back to the, to the drama club in high school [Wayland Central School, Wayland, New York], most of them never--that never happened to them, never mind an Arnie Zane happening to them. So how would I expect them to even be able to partake of this, as I say, art making, this participation in a world of ideas.  They're not, they're not peop- they're not about ideas.  Television's done a lot of damage to people. I shouldn't say damage, but people--that, that part that used to make you wanna go out and expand, or going to read and look, you don't need to do that; there's this passive medium that takes up all that energy.  And then there's fundamentalist religion--big problem.
Speaker 1: It's happen--it's gotten, it's gotten more pronounced--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it's gotten more pronounced, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) over the last--um-hm, more pronounced, um-hm.
Story_ID: 658671
Speaker 1: I want--did Toni Morrison--I wanted to ask you about working with her and--
Speaker 2: And Max?
Speaker 1: --and Max, right.
Speaker 2: 'Degga' [Bill T. Jones]?
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Through Max, through Max.
Speaker 1: Max Roach is what we're talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Max Roach, he had--Max Roach, yes.  And I had already--Max Roach and Arnie [Arnie Zane] and I, with Connie Crothers, had done a piece called 'Intuitive Momentum' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music [Brooklyn, New York] on one of the first Next Waves [Next Wave Festival], so he and I had a, had a relationship, and he and I had also, I think, at that point, had done some solo concerts in, in Lisbon [Portugal] and in Seville [Spain], I believe--I, I--yeah, in Seville.  So we had a relationship, and then he--there was this opportunity through the Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]--Jane Moss, I believe, for us to do anything we wanted to do, and Max said, "We should get Toni involved."  And he told me that--well, and Toni, and Toni said, you know, "I'm not interested in dancing and, and reading--dancing and movement."  You know, she was very hu- tough like that, and Max tells me about the time that they were doing--and they flew across country to do something, an event, and she didn't speak the whole time; she was reading, and he said, "Toni, shouldn't we be talking about what we're gonna do?"  She said, "You're gonna play and I'm gonna read." (Makes sound) Back to her book, you know?  Now, he's bringing in this guy--I don't think she had ever even seen the work--probably, probably didn't care very much for contemporary dance, and he's bringing it in--bringing me in, and we met one afternoon in the studio; I think it was at Lincoln Center, I'm not quite sure, and she read beau- you know how she reads very quietly.  She read from 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison]--enchanting; and then I danced a capella--danced a capella, and I sang a folk song as I was improvising, and something in it moved her.  And then we went out to eat, and at the end of the book, I remember her say that--we were sharing, and she reached over and took a--something off my plate, and the bite, and I knew that we would be all right.  And we did enjoy, we did enjoy.  She, she said no, she isn't gonna dance.  She said, "You want Madonna, you don't want me," you know.  She had knee problems and all, and--but by the end of it--she was loose, you know, she, she enjoyed, you know.  I wish we could have done it more, but it was a--one of those things I'm very, very proud of.
Story_ID: 658672
Speaker 1: So let's talk about where you are now, and this--I hope I'm not--wait!  No, no, no, no.  We have to talk about your work with musical theater, I'm sorry, I could--that would be a total mistake not to do that, okay; sorry.  (Unclear).  Okay, so how did that come about, I mean because--how did, how did--because first it was--
Speaker 2: 'Spring Awakening' [Steven Sater] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spri- Spring, 'Spring Awakening.'
Speaker 2: I--how did I know Tom Hulce?  I think Tom Hulce was given my--Tom Hulce, who was a producer, must have spoken to Michael Mayer, the director, who had said that he had seen the work, my work, up at Aaron Davis Hall in Harlem [New York, New York], a work that used untrained dancers, well, me and men of my age, doing the same movement as little girls, and was--I think he really enjoyed what that was, that experiment, and these body types.  And he was trying--he was gonna do the 'Spring Awakening,' which is about youthful awakening, and he wanted the kind of choreographer that wasn't seen on Broadway.  So he must have put Tom onto it.  Tom was able to get my information, I think, through Joan Juliet Buck, the former Conde Nast editor, and he came to rehearsal and he started telling me about the show, and I met with Michael and we clicked, and Michael invited me in.  They had already been working on it for six years; they had already thrown away twenty-one songs (laughter) by the time I came in; this is serious work.  And, and I remember two things.  The day when--that Michael said, "Now this is gonna be your number," and I said, "What?  I don't do numbers."  You know, I come from the dance world.  And by the end of it, my education had been such that I, I do, do numbers because I'm supporting the director's vision and supporting the writers and the composer.  That's how that came along, and I think a lot of people were excited about--I'd had no--once again, all of--Arlene Croce or not, there were a lot of people who were very excited that I was going to be working in this form, so there must be--there's another narrative about what I was capable of doing, and Michael made me look good.  He left these room--these holes for me, and we, we, we got on well.
Speaker 1: But that--okay, so that was just a good collaboration because it's--in another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what a successful Broadway show is, a good collaboration.  I had to learn that.
Speaker 1: So how--what did you learn in the process?  That's why I'm saying--that made it possible because your--it--did it change the way you approached a, a--you know, a piece of work, or not?  I mean--or did you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like to say that the commitment that I show in anything I do, being--starting a new work with my company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company], in some ways that same commitment must be there even if you're just serving a number in a show.  The, the level of the investigation, the, the innovation, the, the sensitivity, the listening, the--finding the right moment--the right thing for this moment, that's one thing I learned.
Story_ID: 658673
Speaker 1: So while you're working on 'Spring Awakening' [Steven Sater], I mean what is the, the time period between the two pieces 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Between 'Fela!' ['Fela!: A New Musical,' Bill T. Jones and Jim Lewis]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Fela!'
Speaker 2: It's amazing isn't it?  Because--
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I know; I get confused sometimes.
Speaker 1: It's 2007, for 'Spring Awakening,' and 2008 for 'Fela!'
Speaker 2: And that--that means, in a way, that I think I had been approached by Steve Hendel or, at least it was in the air, at the same time as, as 'Spring Awakening.'  I remember going up to see a concert at Purchase [Purchase College, Purchase, New York] and already thinking about seeing a young black man there with a mane of hair and this long--I said, oh, there's gonna to be four Felas and he'll be the Fela that dances; then there'll be a Fela who acts, and then there'll be a young Fela and an old Fela, you know.  So I was obviously, around the time of 'Spring Awakening,' already thinking about 'Fela!' And that was the good luck of having my lawyer, Bob Levine, bless him, very important theater and publishing lawyer, who had seen a work that I had done--I directed Derek Waltutt's--Walcott's 'Dream on Monkey Mountain' at the Guthrie Theater [Tyrone Guthrie Theater, Minneapolis, Minnesota]; he loved the piece.  He said, "You gotta do something in New York [New York]."  And he proceeded to act almost like a de facto agent, funneling things toward me to try 'cause he wanted me to work in the legitimate theater.  And--so Steve Hendel, this wonderful man who he and his wife [Ruth Hendel] invest in many shows, and he had this burning love for the music of this firebrand--Nigerian firebrand, Fela Kuti, who I knew of, of course, from the '70s [1970s] at the dance asylum [American Dance Asylum]. We had been dancing to his music, improvising, and I heard from Bob.  He said, "Oh, you don't need--I don't quite like the music, but maybe you'll appreciate it.  And this guy, Steve Hendel, he's a real--he's really strange guy but he's a really nice man."  So, Steve Hendel paid me the greatest compliment; he same to see some work that a company was doing.  We were using kind of--I wanna call it death metal band?  You know, one of those--the clanging guitars and the screaming, and it was a piece about time and Noah's Ark, and my mother [Estella Edwards Jones], and all, and he said, "You're the one to direct this show" (laughter).  I thought, oh, really.  And what's more, he wanted me to hand him a treatment from the ground up--no writer; a just what do you wanna do?  And I brought in Jim Lewis, a man who had been my dramaturge--(pronunciation) dramaturge?  On Derek Walcott's very long 'Dream on Monkey Mountain;' he cut forty-five minutes out of it, and he--we liked each other, and he had put me on a crash course of finding my next project.  In the meantime, Steve came along, and I brought Jim on, and we began to work on a treatment that was going to be--take eight of Fela's songs and serve them almost as set pieces.  But as time went on (background noise), the workshops and people with the commentary--if this is gonna work at a commercial theater, it has to be more of a narrative, so things began to change.  Steve brought in the Antibalas, a very important step because they know this music very well, and that's how it happened.  And--oh!  While I was auditioning for yet another work, which was at the New York Theatre Workshop--this was Will Power's 'Seven' ['The Seven'], based on Aeschylus' 'Seven Against Thebes,' I was at an audition one day and this young guy Sahr Ngaujah, came in and I said, "Ah, he's Fela."  I pulled his picture out of the pile; you know, in an audition, I'm just the choreographer and I keep his picture, and when we started going into production on 'Fela!,' I produced it, we never had a better Fela come into the room than that one, and he was already there for this other--that, that didn't go as far; it, it was well received but it, it didn't make it to Broadway, 'Seven Against Thebes,' although I thought it should have.
Speaker 1: So--but you, you do well with those, those Broadway plays; you--Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know.
Speaker 1: I mean, that's--I'm just saying that that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, yeah, yeah.  Well, what is the mystery of it?  They think that the Broadway--the theater--they, they keep wanting something innovating, they keep wanting to change the, what's put out there, and things are changing, but it's a very, very difficult place to succeed in; expensive, and it's kind of a--they've created a monster in an audience that has been conditioned by television and big budget Hollywood movies.  How can you compete?  And the work shows; there's a lot of good work that gets done there.
Speaker 1: Well, it shows in--that it's, it can be very commercial and not very creative.
Speaker 2: (Gesture).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, sorry, I said that.
Story_ID: 658674
Speaker 1: But the th- you know, you had said, just a, a little while ago, that you were--that the last five years, I think you said the last five years have--was it difficult?  The last five years have been something.
Speaker 2: Oh, in our conversation today?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I said probably the last ten years.  The question was why make another work--for my own work.  I understood, you know, a venture that was about commercial theater work; that's about thinking about my retirement and what have you, and just another challenge, but why make another dance, a work for this field?  It's not about financial return.  Are you still trying to be part of the discourse?  There's ideas being talked about, there's a feeling here that the forum is actually moving somewhere. Do I believe that?  Well, do you wanna be part of that discussion about the forum moving?  You wanna support it somehow?  You wanna support other artists?  All those things have been happening in the last five years.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean there's that and I think that a lot--other things have been happening also, and I know you're on the creative side, but also dance, you know; the art- the support of the arts you know, that has--you know, there's been a lot of issues around that.  And I wanna ask (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's old, though, the fact that, that, that many foundations no longer want to support research, the fact that the, the dance audience now--you have to really compete with--on a Friday night with your latest stream from Netflix, you have to--there's a lot of competition out there for people's discretionary funds and their time--if that's what you mean.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah--right, but Netflix and those really have taken hold in the last five--five years--
Speaker 2: You're right, you're right.
Speaker 1: --okay.  I mean as a real--so, I want--so I wanna ask you about where you are now--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --because New--is it New York Live--New York Live--New (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New York Live Arts.
Speaker 1: New York Live Arts.
Speaker 2: The Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company and the historic Dance Theater Workshop reimagined, a merger that happened three years ago; we're now in our fourth season.
Speaker 1: And those kinds of mergers--I wanna ask you how it came into being, and--because those kinds of mergers are--they're often talked about, often never successful, and often never happen, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and there're not that many of them.
Speaker 1: There're not--
Speaker 2: Particularly a single choreographer company and, for lack of better words, a kind of a service art organization and a producing entity like Dance Theater Workshop.
Speaker 1: So, how did it happen?
Speaker 2: Well, it--I can't really answer it; it's interesting because it was an institutional development.  In some ways, from our end--for years I'd been looking for a permanent home and we wanted it in Harlem [New York, New York], and we got pretty close; we had about $18 million pledged from the city, but just as we were about to--we, we had a space, there was some politicking that made it--that made me an outsider in Harlem (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a revisit.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  (Unclear) an outsider; that he's not from the community, even though I'd been working there for six years at Aaron Davis Hall [New York, New York].  And then there was this economic downturn, thank god, because the building that we were--would have built would be--would have been 36 million, and we had 18 million, right?  We--now, this is where it gets vague; there was some word that this Lower Manhattan [New York, New York]--this spot, this historic theater, was undergoing some challenges, and that they might wanna talk about some alternatives.  I thought we were just--we--maybe we'd just come and buy the building, you know; it was a lot of money, but it would be worth it. Or could we in fact blend our DNA 'cause I did some of my first performances here, and I had great respect for what happens here.  So, how can we take that and my position, a MacArthur [MacArthur Fellowship] winner, Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], all those things which I had done by leaving this community, could I bring that back here and help my company to thrive, but also reinvent this place, keeping many of the things that it stands for--supporting artists at every stage of their career, being a place for experimentation, failure if you will. Could I do that?  And that's what the, the, the premise was.  So that's what was behind it.  We got some money from the Doris Duke charitable fund [Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, New York, New York] to investigate the feasibility of it, and everyone took a big breath and made some, some pledges to each other about what would happen with our boards, and how much--there was some outstanding debt that we paid, my organization did, what type (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Outstanding debt on behalf of the dance theater?
Speaker 2: Yes, Dance Theater Workshop. There was--you know, they built this building and, just at the time of the, the economic downturn, it was completed.  So they had gone through a lot of problems.  So we were coming in to try to benefit ourselves and also save an important institution reinvent it, and that's what we've been doing now for the last four years.
Speaker 1: So, how did that work?
Speaker 2: How does it work?  How is it working (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Oh, here we have to change.  Okay.
Story_ID: 658675
Speaker 1: How has it worked though? Because that--I mean the, the, the partnership?
Speaker 2: I really can't answer that very well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because you're not on the business side.
Speaker 2: I'd have to answer that with, I'd have to answer that with my executive director [Kim Cullen]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know?  Because that's what I'm saying, it's been an institutional move.  Here is where I have, I have no longer a single choreographer company, but I'm now trying to--actually, my role is artistic director, and that means no, I am not the curator of the programming, but I am trying to inflect it with my ideas about the questions that should be asked here, and it has everybody on the edge of their seats in the field (laughter). What's going to happen, who will be hired as a programmer; we have a person in mind.  The board--like always, we're developing the board, we need the right support.  We have a fabulous CEO who is--I hope this doesn't kill her; I call her Atlas because she's balancing so much.  It's kind of a exciting period.
Speaker 1: But see, this is what is really amazing about your journey--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I mean because your personality in and of itself, and with that, comes excitement, visibility publically--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but also, it can be burdensome and it can be lonely, too, at the sense.
Speaker 2: Well, once again, yeah, you're always alone in your head and maybe more destructively alone in your heart, but I'm not alone.  Look at this place, my companion Bjorn Amelan, who's now my husband, I--the team that came here with me from the, the company being a solo company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company]; some important players are here. Janet Wong, I can't praise too highly, who went from being dancer at the Berlin opera ballet to being a guest artist, to being a teacher, to being the associate artistic director--first one since Arnie Zane.  So, you know, hold the course--that's a big one, isn't it?  Hold the course.  Why?  If it doesn't feel good, why do you do it?  Well, I don't know, bef- I'll be damned, you know?  I have to try this thing, you know?  that's what's going on right now, and I'm making some--I finally have an--not finally, I, I've been able to make work that means something to me.
Story_ID: 658676
Speaker 1: So, talk ab- can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The work about the--'Story/Time' [Bill T. Jones]--
Speaker 1: Can we talk about 'Story/Time?'
Speaker 2: 'Story/Time' is actually, in a way, trying to understand where my intellectual home is, or originated.  I focused in on the great John Cage, who propo- the philosopher that proposed indeterminacy, or chance occurrence as a, a compositional device, primarily for music, but it's been of use to all sorts of people asking questions about how he was celebrated as being this kind of grinning mystic, and yet I am this engaged black man who is full of questions about history and power and sex and all those things, and yet all those things he stayed away from.  So, trying to step into a forum that he identified just to, in some ways, talk about what does and does not connect us--another way of saying, what is the intellectual home?  'Story/Time' is a written 170 stories; 170 plus, as he did.  He wrote his own stories, and I read--he read ninety in his historic performance in Berlin [Germany] in 1958; was it '56 [1956], '58 [1958]?  I read probably sixty in an evening; it's seventy minutes long, and there are moments when nobody's--nothing's happening except the dance, and sometimes everything stops.  It is not at all a lyrical progression; it's not a message piece, it's very much--it's very demanding of the public to make--to stay with it or not, you know?  It can make people angry, it can do all the things that I really loved about the, the avant-garde, when they first started as a young artist, and--to prove to myself that I can do something that's scary again.
Story_ID: 658677
Speaker 1: And then there's a new piece which is called 'Analogy' ['Analogy/Dora: Tramontane,' Bill T. Jones] working title which is--I told you I had done fifteen years ago for my companion [Bjorn Amelan] and his brother, an oral history of his mother [Dora Amelan], just to get her to talk through the war [World War II, WWII], you know.  She always tells these stories.  You know how people, as we get older, they talk more?  Well, I formalized it and we did about--oh, I don't know, five hours or something, and I'm now--with the help of Janet Wong, we have made that into like twenty-eight episodes that tell about her early life, the, the war, working in two camps--holding camps, Rivesaltes and Gurs in the Pyrenees; what it's like to have been a young Jewish woman and been able to negotiate that and not be deported; it's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 658678
Speaker 1: Now, I am turning my attention to a more familiar story, but maybe it was right there in front of me but I wasn't looking at it, and this is my nephew [Lance T. Briggs], who is--has lived--you know, he's a product of the '70s [1970s]; he should have been--we were all climbing out of poverty, the middle class; we should have had a solid middle class life.  Well, something went haywire, and I suppose you could lay it at drugs.  A lot of dysfunction there, but I've loved him all this time, and he was the one that, when he was eight years old, said to me as, as we were driving through the Castro District [San Francisco, California], the gay district, he said, "Uncle Bill [HistoryMaker Bill T. Jones], you see all these men?  They're gay."  I said, "How do you know?"  "Because they have beards."  I said, "Oh, really?"  I said, "I don't have a beard."  He said, "Well, you're not gay, are--?" I said, "Yes, I am."  "Oh, my god!  I thought--well, I want to be just like you."  He wanted to dance, and all. But I--now, I have to think about that.  Now, this is a man whose life was--took him in all sorts of dark places around sexuality and drugs, and now he is in, in a very dark, deep point in his life, so I've been doing--for the last three, four months, an oral history with him that will be treated just as Dora's [Dora Amelan] history is.  I say that there's many different kinds of wars being fought, and I don't know exactly what it means yet, but the two of them compared somehow, you know?  Well, that's where I'm at right now.  It's literary, it's about storytelling, it's about people that I love, it's about form, because the dancers, the way they tell the story is--they don't act it out, not really. It's very abstract.  It's almost like me in Central Park [New York, New York], back in 1977, gesticulating and singing and telling stories, but the idea being that the, the--it's greater than the sum of its parts; something else happens as it does in, in 'Story/Time' [Bill T. Jones] as well.  So a new direction; new direction for me and for my company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company].  I want to make an ensemble that sings and acts and dances.  So, they do it--they have to handle a lot of text in it.  They pass the microphone as they're doing these things.  And you talk about me improvising in dancing?  Well, they're not improvising, but they have to do pretty complicated things, and know lines that are--lines that are somehow not supported by what's being done, so there's a consistency, a line of, of thinking that's continued.
Speaker 2: In your company, there're nine members?
Speaker 1: There are nine, there are nine. There--we have apprentices--yeah, there about nine--
Speaker 2: Okay. I--
Speaker 1: --sometimes ten.
Story_ID: 658679
Speaker 1: I want to understand two things; one is, what haven't you done that you would still like to do?  You're talking about current projects, but in the--what have you--'cause I look at you now, and you're in great shape--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: I wanna do one more piece for this body as it is now--knee operation, lower back problems--just aging--the mind.  I can't use my body to seduce like I--I'm--everyone knows too much about me now (laughter); I'm a very famous--in this world--very famous; too famous, in some people's eye, but I still think there's something I want to make, and it has to do with a story of John Henry, and it also has to do with an old Grateful Dead song called 'Black Peter,' about a, a man who is lying on his bed and, and dying, and he--who--he says something like, "Sun's going up and sun's going down; seems like today is the only day that's ever been.  Who knows?  Tomorrow may be six feet under the ground."  Yes.  And that is the piece I wanna make for me.  I want to make a successful Broadway show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A good one.  I wanna make one.  I thought 'Fela!' ['Fela!: A New Musical,' Bill T. Jones and Jim Lewis] was a very good show. 'Spring Awakening' [Steven Sater] was a good show, but 'Fela!' was bold and influential in a way that--you will see how influential it is.  But I wanna make something else; I wanna do some--do that.  And wouldn't it be great if it made money?
Story_ID: 658680
Speaker 1: Okay, then I just have two questions.  What is your lega- what do you want your legacy to be?  Oh, my god!  Okay.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: The legacy was, he didn't lose faith.
Speaker 1: You need to look at me.
Speaker 2: The legacy is, he didn't lose faith in making and doing.  The legacy is that, he kept faith, and he looked--at crucial moments, he looked the world in the eye.
Story_ID: 658681
Speaker 1: And when all is said and done, what do you think people will say about [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones and his impact on--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Which people?  They will write (laughter) they will write books (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is at the--what will they--what do you want them to say, then, if--about Bill T. Jones and his, his impact on the world of dance?
Speaker 2: It was an honest effort, and the--he left the world differently than he found it.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: It was just lovely, thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
