Story_ID: 253717
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Tuesday, December 14th, 2004.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this interview is taking place in Alexandria, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, if you would, please, for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Ronald, R-O-N-A-L-D; Bruce, B-R-U-C-E; Jewell, J-E-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born December 30th, 1946, Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a businessman, entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I make the difference between those two, yeah.  You know, black people can be entrepreneurs, but I don't know when we become businessmen (laughter).
Story_ID: 253718
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I ask you to give me short answers to these questions.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: God is good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --all the time--
Story_ID: 253719
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --starting with your mother's name, and where your mother was born, and where she spent her childhood and grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother is Thelma Irene Jewell Freeman.  She got married again when she was seventy years old.  Praise the Lord.  She's still living and she's now eighty-three.  Yeah.  And she was born in Goochland County, Virginia, which is a suburb now of Richmond [Virginia].  And that home place, I own it, and I'm going to build houses on it in her honor and in my grandmother's honor.  Now--and she went to Van de Vyver [Institute, Richmond, Virginia], which was a private Catholic school and allowed for, you know, black people in the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s].  She was born in 1921.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about what life was like as a girl growing up in Goochland?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She shared that with us often, you know.
Speaker 1: What kinds of stories and things did she tell you?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, her mother changed the way that most people would tell the story.  And she was light, bright, and almost white; but she had a spirit unknown to very many people.  She was a midwife that delivered over two hundred children in the neighborhood over a period of forty years.  And so consequently we lived on a--they lived on a five-acre plot on the river road, which is very close to the most affluent people in the county.  And that was her own place, and they told me that she had set up on part of the acreage a teahouse where white people came to.  So she drove a car until she was about eighty years old or close to death.  And so she was a real spirit, you know.  She was one of those who was said to been born with a veil over her face; an angel among us.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Ida B. Taylor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so she had nine children.  The youngest of them was my mother.  And my mother, having gone to Van de Vyver and to Manakin School [Goochland County, Virginia]--Manakin School was a three-room school, separate by equal, if you remember, and subsequently I also went to that school, but that's another story.  She went on to go to college at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia], where she met my father [Fletcher Jewell].  And I don't think they studied much, because they got married early (laughter).  My oldest brother [Fletcher Jewell, Jr.] came and if you'll look at our ages, we came almost one year apart; from then on for--about five boys and then two girls.  And she raised those children and a very brilliant husband, who became an alcoholic, so I say she raised him, too, working as a day worker in houses.  So we didn't have a lot of money.  There were times when I could recall we went on relief, on welfare just to keep the lights on or to eat.  But through it all she had the faith and she kept it.  She taught it to us.  Now, you will have to remember, being born and partially raised in Newark [New Jersey], we were hoodlums (laughter).  Five boys.  Are you kidding me?  The fact that we all grew up and we're all living today is a miraculous achievement in itself.  But not only that, but we have attained a modicum of dignity and responsibility.  My oldest brother lives in Goochland County.  He runs his own business.  I tell people that we have five boys and we're all unemployed (laughter).  None of us have jobs. We all are in business for ourselves--
Story_ID: 253720
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman]?
Speaker 2: A tower of strength.  Even in her condition today, she is the matriarch.  She's the boss.  Okay.  Yeah.  We love her not because she was strong.  Because if you'll see the picture of her, she's really a very beautiful woman; not very big in stature, but she had the temperament to put up with and to raise and to train up five strong-willed men.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And you said that she went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  What did she--did she ever talk about, like, what she wanted to do with her life?  Like, you know, what she had planned for her life?
Speaker 2: Well, she, although being very beautiful, she never thought of herself as being beautiful.  Until even this past Sunday when I was talking with her and I told her how beautiful she was, and she says, "Yeah, I didn't think ya'll noticed."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she told me to look at those pictures, and she says, "You know, I could have been a model.  I just never thought of myself in that way."  And I said, "That was a mistake," because certainly she could have.  What she wanted to do, she never really shared.  I'm not sure if she really knew.  In those days, just being able to get an education in itself was a tremendous milestone.  So what she really wanted to do with her life I don't think ever became a choice.  It's kind of like my oldest daughter asked me, "Daddy, are you happy?"  And I said, "I never considered that an option.  That wasn't important."  And I think I took that from my mother--
Story_ID: 253721
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father, starting with your father's name, and where he was born, and where he grew up as a boy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  Fletcher Lee Jewell, born in a little town, southwest Georgia, called Blakely, Georgia.  It happens to be a cesspool of a lot of great people coming out of this one little dead one-horse town.  And even today it's too small to have a family reunion in it.  But the Drinkards came out of there.  The Hutchens [ph.] came out of there.  Those people became cess--the Houstons came out of there; [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick, Cissy Houston.  Cissy Houston, of course, you know her daughter [Whitney Houston], who married Bobby [Brown] down there, and they live in Atlanta [Georgia] now.  Those were all my cousins and far off cousins, yeah; in-laws.  And my aunt married Dionne's grandfather.  And, you know, it's just all--yeah.  And they pretty much moved out of Georgia because of a story that was told, and they were forced to leave.  My grandfather owned about 130 acres.  He was respected down there.  They called him Uncle, which gave Richmond [Virginia] the respect for black folk.  Okay.  If you became Uncle, then you just wasn't a nigger.  Okay.  So he kinda was the head of the slave--ex-slaves if you will.  He had the corn grist, where they processed the meal.  He had that and black and white came to him to have their things done.  So he was a pretty prominent guy, and I'm sure he made plenty of corn liquor down there in those days (laughter).  And when they wanted to go, they'd go to Uncle Jewell, and they would--he would take care of them.  But there was a guy named Grandison Goolsby, who was our cousin--and by the way, this was documented on HBO as well.  Grandison is told--the story is told--had a son.  And because he was my grandfather's nephew, he was pretty well-to-do in those standards of those days.  And it says that his oldest son had gotten a buggy to go back and forth to school.  And the white guy had a buggy, had come in the opposite way, and he called him a nigger and spit on him.  So the son hit him.  Thus started the Grandison Goolsby revolt.  And it's told that Grandison sent his family to New Jersey and as many other parts of the family that they could north; get out of town, because it's on.  And long story short:  Grandison barricaded himself in to his house, killed twenty-eight white people while they burned his house down and killed him.  And this, again, is documented on HBO, and you can research that.
Speaker 1: And he was your grandfather?
Speaker 2: He was my grandfather's cousin.
Speaker 1: Grandfather's cousin.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But because they were all very close, he might as well had been.  But they never bothered Hash Jewell.  Hash died on his property rather young--old age.  As a matter of fact, my grandmother was his first wife, but he had at least two other wives living on the property (laughter).  And so we have other cousins that are offsprings of Hash Jewell's plantation, if you will (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Hash Jewell, your grandfather, did he have several wives at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes (laughter).  It's not widely told, but as we are doing, I've interviewed my aunts who were the survivors, because my uncles died early.  But my aunts pretty much told me the truth and my cousins.  Yeah--
Story_ID: 253722
Speaker 1: Why don't we talk a little bit now about--actually, let me ask you this:  how would you describe your father [Fletcher Jewell]?
Speaker 2: My father was brilliant and he was the one who was--he was the youngest boy of the family.  He was sent to--north to go to school.  And he went to Lester Jackson, who was my grandmother's brother.  And Lester Jackson became the most prominent preacher of his time in Indianapolis, Indiana.  You can check that one.  His church was the largest black church back in the 1950s and early '60s [1960s].  He was a great preacher.  My father was raised by him.  And he graduated high school in a place called Lynchburg, Virginia.  And then he graduated from there and went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], where he met my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman].  She was a very beautiful woman.  Now I understand why he did it.  He became--he was very aggressive, so he was a mailman, which was one of the most prestigious jobs of that era for black people.  He also moved to Norfolk [Virginia] and owned a restaurant at the same time.  And he also was going to school to keep the promise to his family, who had financed him to go north to become a doctor.  In the process, I understand that the day that I was born in Newark [New Jersey], they moved from--after the war [World War II, WWII], you see, the war came and they took his restaurant for space in Norfolk.  And he had a nervous breakdown.  So understand that he was having alcoholic-related DTs [delirium tremens] at the same time while I was being born.  And now he was probably one of the well liked and thought of persons in the community until he drank.  And when he drank, he became an animal that nobody knew.  I would say that my whole family loved my father.  But I never judged him, so I was his pet they said, because I would clean him up when he was dirty.  I would wash his head when he was sick.  I would keep him warm when he was cold.  Not because I condoned at all what he did, but because he was my father.  (Pause)  It was tough.  Yeah.  He didn't treat my brothers very well.  They were rebellious too, you see.  And they have an effect on--as adult--child--children of alcoholic parents.  We all been affected by his actions.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But, nevertheless, we're still living, and we'll make it through.  So.  Yeah.  That was dad.  He didn't have a job either, but--I'll take that back.  He ran the school facilities at Virginia Union.  He worked as a janitor and taking care of Home Beneficial [Life Insurance, Richmond, Virginia].  So he had this really, rather large contract.  And then there was also--he started a gutter cleaning business, and I worked with him on it.  It was a very lucrative business.  He would go out and knock on doors and ask people if they wanted the gutters cleaned around the house.  And I've seen him back in those days make two or three hundred dollars a day.  And then he'd usually have to give it to me and call me his banker because (laughter), if he didn't he'd get something to drink, and he might not know where that money is by tomorrow (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he, like, travel around?  Did you all travel around with ladders on a truck?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, yeah.  He had his truck, and then he lost his driver's license and then he had to walk.  And so I had a smaller ladder and he had a longer ladder, and we actually walked through Henrico County [Virginia] knocking on doors cleaning gutters.  And I would do it with him.  Yeah.  And so I knew how much money he made because they paid me.  See (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I learned how to keep money.  So, yeah, I don't spend very much money.  I think I must have married my wife [Adrienne Jewell] so that we could buy things, 'cause otherwise I wouldn't buy anything (laughter).
Story_ID: 253723
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little now about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Oh-oh.
Speaker 1: And why don't we start with your, I believe, your paternal grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can tell you that I never met my paternal grandfather [Hash Jewell].  He died before I met him.  But my paternal grandmother was also another angel.  So I've been truly blessed.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Leola Jackson Jewell.  Yes.  And they say that she was an Indian [Native American].  And she was part Indian, and, no doubt.  High cheekbones, straight hair, but brown skin.  And she came out of Gainesville, Georgia, which is just a little north of Blakely [Georgia], okay.  They tell the story of how my grandfather would go on the--get his wagon and his mules and go about twenty-five miles north to Gainesville to go look for this girl (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: About once a month they would go up there to Gainesville even after they were married to go to church.  And so that's the connection.  And, again, Lester Jackson became one of the most prolific black preachers in--and orators in the country in those years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what about your mother's [Thelma Jewell Freeman] parents.  Did you spend much time with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Now, that's--that was the experience.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: John Taylor.  John Edward Taylor.  And--was the grandfather.  And Ida B. Taylor was the grandmother.  If there was anybody who had a profound effect on my life, it was my grandmother--maternal grandmother.  Few people know that.  But she was a diabetic.  And I was six when we came from Newark [New Jersey].  And had it--that would have been 1952.  She must have died in 1953 or '54 [1954].  So I didn't have much time with her.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But it didn't require a lot of time.  I would be early up with her and feeding the chickens.  And we had chickens and we had one cow.  And for a while we had a horse.  And I'll show you a picture of Mary [ph.] downstairs.  Remember my grandfather.  And we had some pigs and at least two dogs.  And we had apple trees and peach trees and plum trees and cherry trees.  We had pear trees.  We had wild strawberries.  We had two grape vineyards; one for red, one for green.  We lived in virtual, what I consider-especially coming out of Newark--Eden; a virtual Garden of Eden.  We had to work in the field, 'cause it must have been not a big field, 'cause only five acres went to me.  It was, like, oh, (singing) "Nobody...."  Okay (laughter).  Oh, we planted potatoes and put them in a brooder house, which is a cellar under an outhouse, storage area.  We learned all kinds of things.  We grew corn, potatoes, peas; everything necessary.  And then we had to, of course, pull them up.  Collard greens and carrots.  But we learned all about that.  And we lived only ten miles from the city limits, so we weren't really in the woods, but we were in the suburbs of the suburbs.  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother would say.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather.  Did you spend a lot of time with him?
Speaker 2: My grandfather liked the girls more, but I did.  He did encourage me and influence me greatly.  John Taylor was, by the way, for over fifty years the head deacon of the church [First Baptist Church Manakin, Manakin-Sabot, Virginia].  Not only was he the head deacon, but he actually had gone down with his wagon and mule and got bricks off of the railroad track and actually built that church.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 253724
Speaker 1: Why did the family move from Newark [New Jersey] back to--from Newark to Virginia?
Speaker 2: My father [Fletcher Jewell] was getting no better.  And my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] had just had my oldest sister.  And it was hard on her.  We lived in the projects in Newark.  Have you ever been to Newark?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't.
Speaker 2: Don't.  Okay (laughter).  But if you lived in--well, it's getting better now they say.  But the spirit of the people is so bad.  I mean, great people have come out of Newark, but they had to come out of Newark I think to become great, unfortunately.  And I've tried to get everyone of my relatives to leave Newark.  And so, yeah, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so your mother's support system was in Virginia?
Speaker 2: --and the only way that she was going to keep these rambunctious sons of hers alive, off of drugs, away from crime; the only way.  Because it was pervasive.  I mean, gangs were nothing--it's no new thing.  When I was a kid, there was--the notorious one was the Charleston Street Gang [ph.].  And they would just knock out windows and run down the street with bottles and just knock out windows just because they were the Charleston Street Gang.  And they weren't the only ones.  But I remember them particularly, because they were more aggressive, I think, than the rest of them.  So, yeah, we never really, to my knowledge, joined any gangs.  But we probably would have if we stayed in there--
Story_ID: 253725
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell, can you give us your siblings' names; their names and their birth order?  So whoever was born first, their name, and include yourself.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And where they live?  You want to know?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Because each one of them have their own story.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: My oldest one is Fletcher Lee Jewell, Jr.  He has three sons and he lives Goochland County [Virginia].  He moved up closer to the high school, and he still lives there.  He runs an insurance business out of Louisa County [Virginia].  The next one is Curtis [Jewell].  He was probably affected negatively more by my father [Fletcher Jewell].  He looks like my father, and my father treated him worse, and he treated my father worse.  And so he still suffered.  But he's the probably the most successful of the group.  He's a multimillionaire.  He lives in Columbus, Ohio, and in Miami, Florida.  He has two houses.  He's been named Columbus' most successful entrepreneur of the year maybe twice.  He's built a very successful business [Excel Management Systems, Inc., Columbus, Ohio] in Columbus.
Speaker 1: What kind of business?
Speaker 2: Basically it's--it started out a computer business, computer-related business.  And he laughs because he says he doesn't know how to turn it on (laughter).  But he had over, I think, maybe 150 rental units at one time.  Now, he went there from Richmond [Virginia].  He started something called Rubicon [Inc., Richmond, Virginia].  Rubicon in Richmond is a drug treatment plan back in the '60s [1960s].  And they wanted him to do come up and do the same thing in Columbus.  So he did that, and that became his home, Columbus, Ohio.  And then, of course, he went into real estate.  He went into the insurance business, and then he went into the computer business (unclear).
Speaker 1: And so after Curtis?
Speaker 2: Is Marty.  Martin Jewell--Errol Martin Jewell.  He is--just been--he is a city councilmen-elect in Richmond; he and Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], yeah, campaigned together (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's the new mayor.
Speaker 2: --he was the new mayor; campaigned together.  We, of course, go back with Doug when we were little children, so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and we have a long history.  Our families knew his family before we were born.  And so it goes we have an old Virginia family, if you know what I mean.  He's a--he runs his own janitorial business in Richmond; not very successful at that, because he has committed himself to poverty until he became elected, and then he would fight for the small people in the city.  And he's done that.  He's been courageous and consistent.  And now he is a city councilman.
Story_ID: 253726
Speaker 1: So after Marty [Errol Martin Jewell]?
Speaker 2: Me.  Next comes me.  I'm the middle child.  There's three older and three younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I came to--after three and a half years of Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I came to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Actually, we'll come back to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But--so who's after you, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell?
Speaker 2: Johnny [ph.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: John Edward Jewell, and he has a landscaping business, and he's the youngest boy of the group.  Johnny was probably pampered more than the rest of us.  He's a great horseman.  He knows--he rides horses better than a lot of rodeo guys.  But instead of going to work at the country club and caddying to make money, he would go work for free at the horse barn (laughter) so that he could have access to the horses.  And so, yeah.  But anyway, he has one son.
Speaker 1: And after Johnny?
Speaker 2: Is Debbie [ph.].  Debbie is a social worker, and she's just moved to Maryland.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: She's graduated college after about twelve years of matriculating.  She's a tough little thing.  She's like my grandmother [Ida Taylor].  I'm so proud of her.  She has a son and a daughter she raised alone.  And the father's never married her.  And now they have--she has one grandchild that's absolutely beautiful.
Speaker 1: And after Debbie?
Speaker 2: After Debbie is the smartest of all of us, and she's the youngest.  She's Frances Omega [Jewell (ph.)].  My father was a Que [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] (laughter).  And she's the last (laughter) Jewell.  Yeah.  Frances, although smart, brilliant, intelligent, is not the smartest of them.  Frances became addicted to heroin probably when she was 18, 19--even before graduating [John F.] Kennedy High School [Armstrong High School] in Richmond [Virginia] on the (unclear).  And she's been battling that addiction for all of her life.  She has now two sons, two beautiful sons and a daughter, who is the oldest of three.  Okay.  And, yeah.  She's--they're beautiful children.  God.  The youngest one is so brilliant, and he now lives with his sister in Newport News [Virginia].  And that's all of them.
Story_ID: 253727
Speaker 1: --What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: See, my grandmother [Ida Taylor] told me that I was born old.  And so, and then I would grow younger as I became older (laughter).  I remember Newark [New Jersey].  I remember Newark.  I remember growing up in Newark as if I were an adult almost, and I was six when I left.  So, yeah.  I remember my kids.  I remember their names.  They were Jewish, and Bannedano [ph.], and, you know, Lebowitz [ph.] and these guys slept on my floor, I slept on theirs.  We fought.  We were friends.  So the color of your skin and your race had very little to do in Newark with anything else.
Story_ID: 253728
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell, let's just talk a little bit about--you talked briefly about the early years in Newark [New Jersey].  What else do you remember about Newark?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Newark to be a very crazy time.  We were young and we were many.  And we lived in cramped spaces in the wrong side of the track, if you will.  I mean the track was right there on the next block (laughter).  So I'm not sure if it was the wrong side of town, but we were close to the track anyway.  I remember horses being pulled to carry vending wagons.  And some of them were housed right behind my aunt's house on Livingston Street, behind the barn bakery in Newark.  I remember bananas and cabbage and them vending on the street hollering, you know, "Produce," and that sort of thing.  It was really rather romantic I guess.  I remember my aunts living there, very loving and very caring and very wild women.  No, that's my Aunt Mae [ph.] (laughter).  She wasn't married, but she was a partying animal.  I remember that.  And my Aunt Mazie [ph.], who was my surrogate mother, owned a hair weaving--she made wigs.  And so she was--should have been--I thought, maybe on many standards she was successful.  She always had a Cadillac, and I thought that was the standard (laughter).  But when I look back on it, we were really struggling.  But the real thing was the danger, the lack of.  I saw a man kill a woman on the street and got blood on me from cutting her.  The conversation went like, "Oh, yeah."  "Yeah."  "Well, kill me then."  And he did.  Now that really stuck with me.  If somebody says they gonna do something to me, I believe them.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Five.  And I had a little sailor suit.  I don't know if you know those little ones with the flap on the back.  I really liked my flap, you know.  I had cute legs and, you know, the little shoes.  My mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] always kept us clean.  And we didn't have much, but what was such that we had, we honored it, you know.  And so, yeah, I remember that.  I think that probably more than anything else prompted my mother to get us out of Newark.  And that was downstairs under our window.  We were getting ready to go to church.  And because I finished faster than everybody else, 'cause I'm always competing (laughter), I went outside, and I probably shouldn't have been out there.  But, yeah, I was out there alone when that argument came to me.  And, I think the lady died.  I don't know.  The ambulance came and took her away, and I had to throw my suit away.  So.  Yeah.  I remember that.  So I don't like Newark.  The worst part of Newark--even I went back again when I was sixteen, and the one thing that I recognized about Newark is that people settle for less.  The corners didn't have to be square anymore, you know.  They just--they were around the corners, and there were--on every other block a church and a liquor store or a bar.  In those days, no liquor stores but bars.  And I saw Satan's battle, even then.  Remember, I was born old.  Okay.  So the questions that I would ask about God came when I was five, six, seven and eight.
Story_ID: 253729
Speaker 1: Did you feel like God had forgotten about the folks in Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: No.  There was a battle going on with Satan, and Satan was at least trying, because some of the same people, when they left the church, would go right straight to the bar (laughter).  There was a battle going on.  And there still is a battle between powers of darkness that we don't understand.  And I recognized them then.  And that's part of my blessing, my gifts.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what--how your life changed when you moved to Virginia when you were six years old.
Speaker 2: Great change.  We were bused then to school.  First of all, the tasks at home, because we moved in the summer, it was like, "Wow, this is great," you know.  My grandmother [Ida Taylor] had so many flowers.  And like I said, it was Eden.  And every time tulips would go down, daisies would come up.  I mean, you just had the whole aura of sweetness.  And, like I said, we had apples, pears, cherries, plums; you name it, we had it; grapes and strawberries.  You can--it just smelled like a different place.  Consequently when she died, it affected me so much whenever spring would come, that I would have to go back to Newark (laughter).   I would break out in hives, you see.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 253730
Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: They were great.  We would--you know, I tell people I must have been nine years old before I realized that you could eat more of a chicken than the feet (laughter).  Because we were many, and we lived with my grandparents and my father [Fletcher Jewell] and mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman], plus seven children in a house I thought was certainly adequately in size, but I slept in the bed with three boys, you know.  So when we had an opportunity to come together, certainly my aunts and uncles would come to their mother's and father's side.  And so we would have grand holidays.  I had one uncle who had an aunt, my mother's sister, whose husband had a new house, and we would go there.  And usually it means we would have all of our cousins and friends and, you know, the good parts about it were just great.  They would always drink too much, and somebody would say something to hurt somebody's feeling.  That's the grownups.  And, you know, and usually there's an argument upstairs, and we would run outside or we'd try to peep in and see what they were arguing about.  But, you know, through it all it was a great time.  My cousins would have goats, and they would put an apple on a string and make them ride around and pull us on our wagons.  Oh, no, we had--we didn't have much, but we made the best of what we had.  And we had fun.  We--I mean, we almost had a bas--we had a basketball team just in my house.  And so, we could play basketball with anybody, and we'd go out and play football or baseball and, you know, we did all of the things that anybody else could do.  I even had a miniature golf course out at my five acres in the golf course in the field across the street from--road from my house.  And we had to hit the ball across the road, but, that was part of the golf course.  So that made us really good golfers.  We became good golfers.  And so then when it was time for a holiday, the Fourth of July, they would come and have big picnics.  My father would--he would bury a pig.  He'd kill a pig and bury him in the ground with hickory wood and cook him for--overnight.  And it would just fall off the bone, and he would make Brunswick stew.  He was an accomplished chef.  Remember, I told you he had a restaurant.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So he actually worked as a chef as well as this other thing--at the country clubs.  So he taught me how to make these things.  And so I can cook.  I can cook.  I know I can.  My wife [Adrienne Jewell] doesn't let me, but I know I can (laughter).
Story_ID: 253731
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Most of my experience is in the country.  I was born a city boy, but I'm a country boy at heart.  I didn't need shoes during the summertime when I was growing up.  I had them.  They're worn out, but I didn't need them.  The smell of the flowers in the morning and the chickens making noise at the break of the day; and the cow needed milking at 5:00 o'clock in the morning; the smell of the barn and with having to clean out her stall.  All these--the grapes on the way down and the grapes on the way back; having to feed the hogs.  You have these dichotomies of smells, you know.  But the sights were always beautiful; always beautiful.  I mean, when the sun was on it, it was beautiful.  My grandfather [John Taylor] worked as a yardman, but he always had a shirt and tie.  He was the most dignified man I've ever met.  And he kept the place.  Grandma [Ida Taylor] kept the kitchen.  She was the church mother [for First Baptist Church Manakin, Manakin-Sabot, Virginia] for those fifty years, too, by the way.  She'd made communion and she would make the hot rolls that we had for communion on Saturday night.  I remember smelling those and she would always sneak me one (laughter), you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Cows.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The horses across the way and our mule; and chickens and laughter and tears.  Then I remember some of the fights.  We would fight.  Our boys would fight against each other.  But once it was over, it was over, you know.  But the worst fight, I think, would be when Curtis [Jewell] would fight with my dad [Fletcher Jewell].  That was the worst, I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not--just a lot of shouting and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  Saying bad things about a person and Daddy was really talking about himself, you know.  And that's what Dad would do.  But most of it was, you know, jokes on each other, and there was a lot of love and it was a lot of pain.  In love--by the way, there comes pain when you care about something so much, you know.  And so we had a lot of care.  And it wasn't demonstrated love as I would understand the subscription today.  But there was a lot of caring.  There was a lot of mixed-up things, you know; children of an alcoholic parent is--but my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman], she was a rock.  She stayed there.  Yeah.  She didn't become an alcoholic.  She didn't drink liquor, and she stayed there.  She went to work, and whatever we had was what we had, and we were grateful for it.  And usually it was it was in abundance.  And even when we would have our stockings and we get some hard candy and an apple and an orange, that was like, wow, man, you know, this is it.  It was good.
Story_ID: 253732
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Oh, Manakin Elementary School [Manakin School, Goochland County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Can you spell Manakin for me?
Speaker 2: M-A-N-A-K-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what--do you remember some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Miss Evelyn Christian [ph.].  Miss Evelyn Christian was a--also played the piano at our church [First Baptist Church Manakin, Manankin-Sabot, Virginia]; so, you know--Miss Redd [ph.].  Miss Redd came from Richmond [Virginia].  She was a dedicated teacher.  But she--I remember her expelling my brother, oldest brother [Fletcher Jewell, Jr.], for mispronouncing "speed oh meter."  He refused to tell her--to go with her on the idea that it was a speedometer.  She taught him speed oh meter.  So that's an example of the challenge that we had to, you know, to get educated, to become educated when the teachers couldn't read speedometer.  Okay.  But they cared.  And we went there.  By the way, it was a three-room school, and we could only use two rooms.  And we didn't have enough heat in the third one.  We cut the wood--the county would dump the wood; we would split it and stack it.  And we'd have to start the fire in the morning as soon as we got there.  The water was pumped from a well, then we would bring the water in.  And we would have to once a year coat the floors with creosote.  So, I mean, it was that kind of thing.  And we lived on--by the way, that building still exists.  It's a house now down in Manakin, Virginia, which is just in Goochland County [Virginia].
Story_ID: 253733
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school [Manakin School, Goochland County, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Probably the same kind I am now.  I was brilliant.  I'm just smarter than most people.  And consequently I talk a lot (laughter), 'cause I'm finished my work, and--but I remember one particular time, one weakness--I don't want to make it sound like I was a perfect student 'cause I was not.  My grades were good, but they had a contest.  Everybody left the school, and the teacher took a bottle cap and hid it.  And today, you know, I am the worst finder of anything (laughter).  If my wife [Adrienne Jewell] couldn't find things, I'm just, forget about it.  So the whole--when you found it, you go sit down.  Now, I think most of those kids were smarter than me.  I think they just went and sat down.  I don't think they found it.  Okay.  But I was not made like that.  If I'm gonna look for it, I'm gonna look for it.  So the last two people there was a girl named Julia Carter [ph.], who if you stood next to her you would probably look like sisters, and me.  We're the only two dummies running around looking for this bottle cap (laughter).  When she found it--I didn't, I still hadn't found it--she said, "Darn it."  (Laughter)  So I remember this clearly coming from Newark [New Jersey].  That was really funny to me.  "Darn it."  But that--yeah, she hates me to tell it now, so when she sees this she's going to kill me, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I remember.  I was a good kid in school, and they wanted to skip me and because certainly I did read, you know, two classes above my limit.  But we all sat in--because there was only two rooms, they were separated by rows.  And so I could--when I finished my work, I just moved to the next row, and I move to the next row until time ran out.  So that's kind of how we measured.  Yeah.  So I was in two classes above my ability.  That was because I could read well I think.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 253734
Speaker 1: What type of child were you at this particular time, during the elementary school years [at Manakin School, Goochland County, Virginia]?  Were you well-mannered, a little mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: All of that.  Yeah.  All of that.  But, one of the things that happens as being a child of an alcoholic parent, and I did this through counseling is how I found out about it later, I took on early age the responsibility that I thought the father should do.  Or even the fear that he wouldn't do.  And so at six years old, I recall I was too young to caddy at the country club, but I would go hunt golf balls religiously.  I did my homework, and I would hunt golf balls and sell them, and so I could, in turn, buy my milk and graham crackers from my own intake.  And that's all I would do with it.  I would save it.  I would hide it in--I would horde that money in quarters mostly under boards or behind bricks in the house, yeah, to the extent that when--by the time I was in the ninth grade [at Central High School, Goochland County, Virginia], my oldest brother [Fletcher Jewell, Jr.] went to college, and my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] took it all and sent him to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  Yeah.  And so I was always very industrious, and I figured the way to--how to make money and to keep money.  And so by the time I was fifteen years old, I bought my first car through the bank.  I actually got it--yeah, got it through the bank.  And I had an installment plan.  My mother cosigned for me, and I bought a '56 [1956] Chevrolet so that I could drive back and forth to school.
Story_ID: 253735
Speaker 1: I wanted to also ask you, so you said you would hunt golf balls.  Did you all live near a country club?
Speaker 2: Richmond Country Club [Richmond, Virginia].  At the beginning it was Manakin Hills Country Club [ph.].  And so we could walk from our house to the club.  That was our really saving grace.  I played it this summer with my best friend and my son, and it was like, wow.  I mean, I've played great golf courses around the world, but this one was really special to me.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--but blacks weren't allowed to be members there.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You could only work there.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so--but I became an assistant pro down there when I was 17, 18 years old.  I worked for the--I mean, you know, run the pro shop and ring the cash register, and, you know, fix clubs grips.  And I would take care of the carts and sweep up the place, you know, keep it clean.
Speaker 1: When did you start learning the game of golf?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Six years old.
Speaker 1: Six years old.  So you would just watch the golfers play?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would watch them play at first.  My brothers, of course, are older, had already started going there and they could caddy 'cause they were bigger than I was.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they might have a golf stick or something like that, so.
Story_ID: 253736
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years [at Manakin School, Goochland County, Virginia], did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: What were some of your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Never to be poor.  Never to be subjected to--you see, when you are around these guys at the country club and they take their clothes off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --I mean, not physically necessarily that too, but they undress all of their thoughts and all of their--and I said I never wanted to be one of those heathens (laughter).  I mean, I've had them to take my hat off and throw their keys in there and swap wives at the golf course.  I mean, actually that never--I wanted to have some kind of dignity that was--that didn't mean that.  And so that did help me become close to God and be responsible to my church [First Baptist Church Manakin, Manakin-Sabot, Virginia] at an early age.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I fought it, but yeah.
Story_ID: 253737
Speaker 1: What were your family's experiences like at church?  What was the name of the church you all attended?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church [Manakin] of Manakin-[Sabot], Virginia.  It's still there.  And, again, my grandfather [John Taylor] and grandmother [Ida Taylor] were the head officers of the church.  So we had to be there whether we wanted to or not (laughter).  And many times we didn't wanna be, especially when Sunday school interfered with going to caddy, you know.  On Sunday, that's--that was a real compromiser.  "I might have to bag that day, Grandpa," you know.  He didn't care, you know.  You went.  And it was a mile and a half, two miles from the house.  And so, some days we had to walk.  And a few times my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] actually walked with us to go to church.  So.
Story_ID: 253738
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about junior high school.  Did you attend a junior high school or were you still at Manakin School [Goochland County, Virginia] for the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, Jim Crow was taking a big hit.  And the three-room school was no longer acceptable.  So they built another elementary school, and they included--and called it then Randolph Elementary School [Crozier, Virginia].  Elementary school went until ninth grade.  Okay.  And then there wasn't the divide.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, like, during the junior high school years, even though you were still in elementary school, but during those, like, preteen, 'tween years, what were some of your--who was influencing you?  Who were you being most influenced by?
Speaker 2: [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I would think that Bill Russell on the basketball court; and Jim Brown playing football; and Muhammad Ali, with not so much their athletic prowess, but the stands they took.
Story_ID: 253739
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about what you wanted to be when you grew up or what you wanted to do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a lawyer.  All the way up through--until I came here, and I still wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Why did you want to be a lawyer?
Speaker 2: I wanted to fight the injustice.  See, most people who lived in a condition don't know that it's necessarily a bad condition, it's just a condition.  I came from Newark [New Jersey].  I knew it was a different and bad condition.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Consequently, I knew that I could never conform to the point that my mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] sent me back to Newark, because she knew I wasn't going to take it (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so is this when you were sixteen you went back to Newark?
Speaker 2: Actually fourteen.
Story_ID: 253740
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you during the junior high school years [at Randolph Elementary School, Crozier, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I always was at least a B-average.  There were many in the class I'm in, about three or four who would always be better than me.  They were just gifted in that way.  Me, I kind of had to work.  But I was smarter than most people.  I was really smarter than most of them, but they--book learning, they could blow me away, you know.  But I was always impressed by them.  I never put them down.  I always thought that that was really truly a gift.  But, yeah.  But a B-average I could get.  I always made the honor roll.  It's not a--that wasn't a problem.
Story_ID: 253741
Speaker 1: And what type of young man were you starting to become?
Speaker 2: Well, too deep.  I'm an old man by birth.  And you have to understand that I'm being inverted now.  By the time I'm that age--by time I'm twelve years old, I'm rebelling against all that they're telling me, that Jesus Christ is the answer.  And Jesus Christ is the answer.  That couldn't be.  Jesus Christ is the answer for white people.  Satan must be the answer for black people.  Having the mind, I studied and practiced hate.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: I would close my eyes and actually have mental contact with Satan and the evil.  I would get headaches, but I was able to garner enough strength--I don't know, I can't call it power--I found that Jesus Christ had all the power--but I could cause bad things to happen to people through my mind.  I actually had gotten that deep, if you understand.  I'm not an ordinary child.  I'm not an ordinary child.  And so, and--
Speaker 1: Like, what kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Pictures--I could make a picture fall off the wall.  I could make you hurt your elbow walking pass or--yeah.  Telekinesis, if you will.  Yeah.  I could do that.  And it was such a weak hate, and it took so much effort to try to get it up.  But I felt like the world was against me.  And so, consequently, I fought back in that way.  I just used my rationale that it could not be for black people, and they have to suffer the way that we have to.  We have to be denigrated.  We have to be put down.  I know that this has happened because I know I grew up with Bannedano [ph.] and LeRoy [ph.], so.  Okay.  So, I mean, I know that now you're treating me different because I'm black here.  The kids, other kids, they don't even know that.
Speaker 1: Did other people believe in your ability?
Speaker 2: They knew that I was different and was acting different, because I had become--I would pray three times a day.  I was never taught any formal Satanism.  I just decided that I would utilize the same energy that I had to look for Jesus to look for Satan.  I needed a hero that worked for me.  Okay.  (Laughter)  Jesus wasn't doing it.  All right.  In the church, they--all the churches had this white Jesus Christ picture sitting on the pulpit.  You know what I'm talking about.  Blue eyes and blond hair.  Oh, heck no.  I know that is not my God, all right.  Excuse me.  It ain't happening.  All right.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did people kind of shy away from you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Dogs would bark at me and growl.  Babies would not come to me.  And my parents [Thelma Jewell Freeman and Fletcher Jewell] knew--it's one day--I tell you what scared me.  My mother--I came downstairs, my mother said, "What's wrong with your ears?"  (Laughter)  "Your eyes look different."  That scared the devil out of me (laughter).  I mean, actually it scared the devil out of me.
Speaker 1: And how long did you practice this?
Speaker 2: About a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: About a year and a half.  I had gotten pretty good at it.  And the headaches wouldn't come and I could garner that evil, you know, control it a lot better, and I could make it what I wanted it to be.
Speaker 1: What was the turning point for you?
Speaker 2: My mother telling me that something was wrong with my ear.  I'd just come down from praying at 12:00 o'clock in the day, and my ears and eyes, she asked me what's wrong with me, and "It looks like--you look different.  Your ears and your eyes are different."  And I said, "Am I becoming a demon?"  (Laughter)  And so, yeah.  And then not long after that, we committed to Jesus Christ, and I've been there ever since.  So.
Speaker 1: And were you able to use your ability for good things or positive things or did they just go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --away altogether?
Speaker 2: Those things were only meant for destruction.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Revenge.  You understand.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was never designed for good.  Wasn't intended to be good.  Nah.
Speaker 1: Did you have friends or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever teach them how to do it or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or share it with them?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  This was very intimate.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Very secretive.  And I didn't share it with anybody.  No.  No.
Story_ID: 253742
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended growing up?
Speaker 2: Central High School [Goochland County, Virginia].  It was all black.  We went in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And was Central in Richmond, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Goochland County [Virginia].
Speaker 1: In Goochland.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Central High had no--the library had outdated encyclopedias, the Jet and Ebony.  It had a slide--well, not slideshow, but the--excuse me--the reel-to-reel and some nice tables.  That was our library.  And, you have to understand, I knew that that was our library, and that--excuse me--that it was inadequate.
Story_ID: 253743
Speaker 1: So what were your experiences like at Central High School [Goochland County, Virginia]?  Did you participate in any sports or activities?
Speaker 2: You had one sport that you could participate in, well, baseball and then basketball.  I wasn't a very good baseball player, but I was a good golfer, so I could hit the ball a long way with the baseball.  But catching and running, I didn't--there was some--some of the guys were so much better.  But basketball, I was a good basketball player.  The problem with it was that we didn't have any gym.  But we had a basketball court, but it was clay.  And red clay.  Dusty red clay.  They didn't even put blacktop on the basketball court.  And so the facilities, if you can imagine, were like the library.  For me the library was just a terrible thing, and so was the basketball court.
Speaker 1: And so did you all practice in the wintertime outside?
Speaker 2: Our basketball season must have ended November.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The other schools in Louisa [County, Virginia], Powhatan [Virginia]; they had gyms.  We just didn't have gyms.
Speaker 1: Who did you play against?
Speaker 2: A.G. Richardson [High School, Louisa County, Virginia], Fluvanna [County High School, Carysbrook, Virginia], Powhatan; every once in a while somebody from Henrico [County, Virginia] would come up.  It would be outside of our league.  Yeah.  Louisa, Powhatan, Ashland [High School; Patrick Henry High School, Ashland, Virginia], Amelia [County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Those--that's who we played against.
Speaker 1: And were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All other black schools.
Speaker 1: --were you involved in any, like, yearbook committee or student government?  Anything like that?
Speaker 2: Probably everything.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I didn't run anything, but I participated in many other things.
Story_ID: 253744
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was, when I turned fifteen, I got the newest bus.  I drove the bus, because I realized that if I had to go to school I might as well get paid (laughter).  And so I got the bus route.  And it just so happened that it was their turn to get the new bus.  And so, here this little fifteen-year-old kid has got the newest bus in the county [Goochland County, Virginia].  I didn't want them--that wasn't--that was kind of--well, when you drove a school bus and you were a student, you became kind of one of the upper crust (laughter).  I'm trying to blend this in to let you see that that was a dynamic that was going on there.  And then I had the newest bus, and then I became king.  I also became the enemy.  The very fact that you have friends means you have enemies automatically.  The white schools' buses--bus drivers resented the fact that we had a new bus.  We only got one new bus a year, I think.  It was just the turn for me to have it.
Speaker 2: So how--who taught you how to drive a bus?
Speaker 1: My--Milton Robinson [ph.].  He was the current bus driver.  He was going to go out.  And so he painstakingly taught me how to drive this huge monstrosity.  And then he took me to a test in a circle where cars were.  And the bus was too big to go in there.  But I worked that thing around there.  When I came out, he says, "Hey, you are ready.  You are the man."  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And fifteen years old you were old enough to get a driver's license then?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so I drove it for two years.  And then I got set up.  What happened was the sheriff's grandson was driving and he--we would face each other every morning.  He'd be coming and I'd be going.  And this particular day he was driving a little faster and he caused me to go off the edge of the road.  Well, the riders reported to the teacher.  I didn't report it.  It wasn't that big a deal, you know what I mean?  Come on.  People do that in pickup trucks and everything else to (unclear).  But it was another school bus, so they reported it; called him up on charges evidently, because my principal made me give a statement.  So the next morning we waved passing.  On the way back, he's pulled off on the side of the road.  So I pull off on the side of the road, put my lights on and asked him was anything wrong.  He said, "Nah, nothing was wrong," to go ahead.  He'd already called for help.  So he waved me around.  I go around.  'Bout time I get around him, the sheriff's deputies pulling out there and want to give me a ticket for passing on a no-passing road.  So I told him to take his bus and shove it.  I went to the superintendant's office.  I went to the superintendant's office and I heard this thing, and they just wanted to let me know that, "Boy, you need to keep your place."  And I told them, "Boy, take your bus and drive it yourself."  I quit right then.  I didn't drive it to the--I didn't even finish driving it that day.  So I've been the way that I am now all my life.  I'm trying to get better.  Please pray for me (laughter).  But, I stand for what I stand for, and I'm ready to die for it if it's right.  And that kind of ingratiates me to--it really grates people, I think--
Story_ID: 253745
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: And what kinds of civil rights activities were taking place in Goochland County [Virginia]?  Were there any?
Speaker 2: No.  Goochland County?  I don't think any civil rights is happening today in Goochland County.  In 1965 though, they--the court required that you will integrate in '66 [1966].  So maybe that was happening.  But in '65 [1965] we had an option: volunteer to go and integrate the schools.  And not a mandate but a volunteer.  And so twelve of us said that we would go and volunteer.  The other eleven backed out.  But again, true to my word, if I tell you I'm gonna to do something, I'm gonna do it.  You can count that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what school did you integrate?
Speaker 2: Goochland High School [Goochland, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I was the only black in the senior class at Goochland High School.
Speaker 1: So did you graduate from Central High [School, Goochland County, Virginia] or Goochland High?
Speaker 2: Goochland High.
Speaker 1: And so what was that like when you arrive at Goochland High?
Speaker 2: I was apprehensive.  I wanted to know what I was going to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you the only African American student there?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I was the only African American student in the senior class.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But there were some younger ones.  And they caused me to be like a father or big brother to them.  I was more concerned about them than for myself.  And consequently, the students--because, again, I told you I was a good basketball player, but I was even a better basketball player against the white kids (laughter).  No, I was good, but I was really good then, okay.  And so they took me under their wings, and I became their good friend and everybody wanted me on their team.  And so I got along good with the kids, black--I mean, white kids, girls and boys.  They all were my friends.  And I consider them even my friends today any ones that we see.
Speaker 1: Did you meet any resistance?  Was there any resistance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The teachers.
Speaker 1: --when you arrived?
Speaker 2: The teachers were the resistance.  The teachers were racists, ignorant, provocateurs of segregation.  And the world was changing.  Watts [California] had burned.  And so I remember having my history teacher ask me to stand up and explain to them why the Negroes were burning their houses in Watts.  I told them, "'Cause it ain't their house.  They renting."  (Laughter)  "It's so dilapidated they'd rather sleep outdoors than to keep living in that mess."  And so the kids stood up and she just ran out, and I don't think she was ever the same again (laughter).  How do I know?  I've never been to Watts (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I just gave them that one--
Story_ID: 253746
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Central High School and Goochland County High School, Goochland County, Virginia], what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was gonna go to college and become a lawyer.  I was very focused.  And I am very focused about whatever it is I'm gonna do in this life.  And, of course, life does have some changes for you.  But I did have a focus, and I was gonna be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: And where were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I graduated--no.  By the time I finished my eleventh grade, I got married.
Speaker 1: Oh.  You got married?  While you were still in high school?
Speaker 2: In August of my eleventh grade.  And my oldest daughter was at my wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was about two months old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And but that's how early life started for me.
Story_ID: 253747
Speaker 1: So when I went to college, it was specifically to become a lawyer, to get my degree so that I could become a good provider for my family.
Speaker 2: And so were you thinking you weren't going to go far away to college because you still--you had a family?
Speaker 1: I didn't have much money.  And with a family.  And, again, my family had all gone to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  My oldest brother [Fletcher Jewell, Jr.] went to Virginia Union.  The next one [Curtis Jewell] went away to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], but then the next one [Errol Martin Jewell] went to Virginia Union.  And he had gone on a scholarship.  And I was better than he was. So, I came behind him.
Speaker 2: And did you get a golf scholarship to Virginia Union?
Speaker 1: I got a golf scholarship from Tricky Tom Harris.  He's probably one of the most famous coaches in the history of sports in this country.  That's him giving me that plaque on the news clipping.  They spelled my name wrong, but it must have been the [Baltimore] Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers].  I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: And so you attended Virginia Union.  You enrolled in 1966.
Speaker 1: Yes--
Story_ID: 253748
Speaker 1: And what was the climate like on the campus?  This is, like, the height of the Civil Rights Movement.  So what was the climate like at Virginia Union [University] in Richmond [Virginia]?  'Cause there were a lot of civil rights activities taking place, especially on the legal front in Richmond.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Yes.  By all means, don't get me wrong.  [HistoryMaker] Henry [L.] Marsh [III] had just become mayor of Richmond, who was my hero.  We had, you know, black power on the campus.  We had bush--afros this big, and the bigger the afro, the more black you must have been, you know.  You know, I mean, it was that kind of thing.  And we were--you have to understand that when you ask me that in '66 [1966], you would have had to go to '67 [1967] before I really got involved in it, because I lived in--I didn't go on campus the first year.  I lived in a house full of preachers.  And, of course, my more concentration then was on Jesus Christ and not the politics of integration and segregation.  And so I did move on campus with my roommate, who we still call Sack today, Al Bowers [ph.].  Al Bowers should go down in history, and certainly should have his name counted among the important in this life.  Al became student government and president.  And he was the one who took over the administration building and kept it for three days.  Yeah.  I mean, we planned it, he did it.  Okay.  That's of kind of what we do even today.  All right.  He's that kind of guy.  And so I will share with you later on about that.  But in those days, we were demanding rights.  We were demanding, you know, an affront to South Africa.  We were demanding rights to access to public venues; you know, that we would be able to ride on the bus.  Even in Richmond, even after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], we still had to ride on the back of the bus here in Richmond--or there in Richmond.  And so the changes hadn't fully come.  And Martin Luther King hadn't died yet in 1968.  We're in 1967.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So whatever Martin was saying for us to do, we were trying to do it.  And whatever Malcolm [X] said, we were trying to do it.  And we were learning in between those things.  And it was a tumultuous time.  It was a growing time.  It was a good time, but it was a terrible time, which prompted me to preach togetherness among ourselves, because we weren't enough to divide, and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 253749
Speaker 1: And what was college life like for you as a married man with a child?  Were you able to really immerse yourself in college life [at Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I remember my freshman year, I said, "Now, here I am a grown married man walking around with another guy riding my back like a horse."  (Laughter)  So, yeah, I think that what happened was, I didn't have to experience it for long terms.  I just need to experience it and then I could understand and take it with me for the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so that back riding might have only lasted for a month, and then I became a serious student, because, of course, I had to work all the time.  I worked on campus.  I was the school statistician.  But I also--I always had another job.  So I took up the cleaning--dry cleaning.  I made a contract with the dry cleaners that he would give me discounts for bringing the clothes in.  And I would collect the clothes from around the campus.  I was their dry cleaner.  And I made money doing that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I did--drop that off on the way to the boys club, where I taught the medium grades and counseled them.  And so, yeah, I think I did.  And when I wasn't doing that and I wasn't studying, I would get involved, and I said, "Listen, guys, our consciousness is this:  we're no longer children.  And now you're talking about becoming a Que [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] or you're becoming this one, [Phi Beta] Sigma [Fraternity] or Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  And we were tight.  Now, you've divided yourselves again, and this is what Satan and the system wants, as much as we can to divide one to another.  We need to stay close."
Speaker 1: And so is that how the Esquire--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  That's how we formed the Esquire Club, because I refused to join any of them.  I only would join them all together.  And so we formed the Esquire Club.
Speaker 1: And what is the Esquire Club?
Speaker 2: Well, the Esquire Club is a fraternity.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It is a fraternity that was not separated out by race or--of course, we were all black at the time, 'cause we was an all-black school, but we didn't have any charter against race.  But that we would--it didn't matter whether you were a Greek lettered person; anybody who wanted to do good in the community, who--that was our charter.
Speaker 1: And what year did you form the group?
Speaker 2: That was--that must have been 1967.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And what was your wife doing back at home?
Speaker 1: She was in high school finishing her last year in high school after my first year.  And then she came and got a job in computer school.  That was keypunch.  You wouldn't know anything about that (laughter).  That was keypunch school, and I sent her to keypunch school, and we had our little girl, and we got an apartment finally.  And it didn't work out very well.  She didn't like the idea of--well, she couldn't deal with the idea that I was going to school, she figured that I would leave her because she was--and I'm college-educated and she's not.  She really had a serious problem about that.  Yeah.  So.  Yeah.  It was tough growing up during that, but I always kept my head down, and I kept working and making money to feed the family and to make available some other things--
Story_ID: 253750
Speaker 1: So you attended Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] from 1966 to 1969?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what were you studying?  Prelaw or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prelaw.  And by the way, at Virginia Union, prelaw was history.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, did you graduate from Virginia Union?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't.
Speaker 1: Why did you leave?
Speaker 2: I came back from the summer and my wife got pregnant again.  She had my son, Andre [Jewell].  And in the meantime--I mean, again, a very serious person, thinking that I have to feed them and house them, 'cause she stopped work.  I mean, that was the only income that we had.  I went to work for the Urban League in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: What did you do for the Urban League?
Speaker 2: I was sent to Alexandria [Virginia] to become a marketing manager for a new project that they had, one that I felt that was close to my heart.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was a project called SURGE; Services United for Responsible and Gainful Employment.  Beautiful little acronym and a nice, nice idea.  The outcome changed my life as much as anything that I've--that I can say that has happened.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] was preaching, you know, "I am somebody."  And I was teaching these people that they were somebody.  These were people like me when I was a kid living in the public housing [in Newark, New Jersey].  You're cleaning people's houses.  This was the last vestige of slavery.  My mother [Thelma Jewell Freeman] had done it.  So I knew.  As a matter of fact, I probably had had on a guy named Gary underwear.  I know it 'cause his name was sewn in my (laughter).  We had hand-me-down underwear, and I wore'em 'til I couldn't wear them anymore, you know (laughter).  That was one of the people that my mother worked for, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The families.  And so, you know, day workers were not included in the social security.  They weren't included in the domestic--gross domestic product.  Their minimum wage was not afforded them.  This was a group of people who had no rights.  And so they would pay them and tell them not to take too much food out of the refrigerator.  That was their pay.  So here's an opportunity to train these people to become professional house cleaners.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now remember, when I was in high school [Central High School and Goochland High School, Goochland County, Virginia] I had to feed my family.  So I drove Henrico County [Virginia] every day, five days a week, thirty-five miles, and cleaned schools.  I became very proficient at it.  I knew it.  I mean, I knew whenever you gave me a job, I'm going to learn how to do it, and I'm going to learn how to do it better.  Okay.  All right.  So in the meantime, I started a company.  During that thirty-five miles I had three riders.  I had service stations that paid me a dollar a bathroom a night to clean it on the way back.  And then, of course, gas then was about thirty-six cents.  And so, you know, a dollar a night was lot of money.  It probably was more money than I made being a janitor at the school, by the way.  Yeah, 'cause I had twelve bathrooms every night that I did.  So I made twelve dollars a night, and I was probably making three dollars an hour over at the school for four hours.  So it was about the same.  And, of course, I probably stole the toilet paper and stuff to put in there for the school (laughter).  Yeah.  I'm fine.  I'll pay it back (laughter).  I'm sure I've done it enough in taxes by now.  But it's the truth.  And we built that business--
Story_ID: 253751
Speaker 1: So you started your business, your cleaning business, in 1972.
Speaker 2: I started a cleaning business.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I knew how to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I didn't continue to do it after I went to school, to college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: But in 1972, you did start Jewell Industries.
Speaker 2: Industries.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was a professional cleaning service?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But let me tie that in.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because, remember, I'm going to be a lawyer.  I'm not trying to be a janitorial company.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.  Right.  And so (laughter)--you'll find me to be a very sick person.  Okay.  Yeah, 'cause I am very tenacious, I guess, is what the word is.  All right.  What happened was, I took these people and trained them.  The project trained them.  I brought them in.  I taught them the dream.  I went to Atlanta [Georgia] against the will of the Urban League.  I found that out very closely getting ready to leave.  But I studied co-op law, and I came back and formed a co-op so that the people who did the cleaning owned the business.  I had no design on the business.  That wasn't--I'm going to be a lawyer.  So I don't need to be this.  Okay.  So learned co-op law.  I set up the co-op.  They became a co-op.  We were very successful.  We made $1.2 million in gross sales.  The project picked up the expenses.  They had $419,000 for that.  The Urban League did.  So we went away to Airlie House [Warrenton, Virginia] for a retreat.  And my boss is, at that time--I won't call his name--told me, "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Jewell], your project was a design to fail, and you're screwing up."  I said, "You can't do that.  You told me to tell these people that they could dream.  And you're gonna tell me that I'm--you want to use me to double-cross them to play this game?  You got the wrong guy."  After they grabbed me by my feet to keep me from hitting him (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 1: And so when did you decided to start your own business?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I'll tell you how it--how much time do we have (laughter)?  No I really didn't.
Speaker 1: But in 1972, you did start some type of business?
Speaker 2: I did start a business, but it wasn't--it was--okay.  I loaned the project $500,000 of my life savings, all of the money I had, out of a promise from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] to loan the project twenty-five thousand [dollars].  I'll get my money back.  Ford Foundation set up something called the National Committee on Household Employment.  By the way, in the interim, the National Committee and this project got the law changed through Shirley Chisholm and [HistoryMaker] Walter Fauntroy to make domestics part of the GNP [gross national product] and part of the social security.  That's the reason that this new [U.S. Department of] Homeland Security guy couldn't pass, 'cause he broke that law.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Yeah.  And that's the reason.  Yeah.  That's the law.  Okay.
Story_ID: 253752
Speaker 1: So what business did you start in 1972?
Speaker 2: Jewell Industries.
Speaker 1: And what did Jewell Industries do?
Speaker 2: We did housecleaning and we did construction cleaning.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The same thing that Project SURGE [Services United for Responsible and Gainful Employment] was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you started out with just you and your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But that was because SURGE fired me.  I need to tell you that.  That's the part that I'm missing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  After I got the commitment from the National Committee [on Household Employment], they told me, says, "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald Jewell], you know, you go ahead and put the contracts in your name, because this--SURGE might go under."  So we continued to do it under my name, but all the funds still went to SURGE.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The National Committee, once it got the money, told me--here you go:  "I'm going to sue you for breach of fiduciary relationship," which canceled me--they fired me and then sued me.  'Course they lost.  But they gave the project to the people, they lasted for thirty days.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They went out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in the meantime, you started your own company.
Speaker 2: I'm unemployed and it is now September, October, and I need a job.  So my wife and I started the company, vacuuming some houses alone.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And what happened to your dreams of becoming a lawyer?  Did you find that you were actually starting to become successful with your own business?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Not--because I still want to become a lawyer (laughter).  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the good that I was doing, the people who were in the project, I hired them.  They were trained.  They were good and they were unemployed.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they were my friends, and they were the ones who I told that I would.  So, yeah, I kept them alive.  I kept them alive and then I became success--start becoming successful in my own right, because I decided--I mean, I designed something for AIA, the Agricul--Architect Institute of America [sic. American Institute of Architects].  If you look at their specs for cleaning an office building, that's mine.  I wrote that.  They haven't changed it in 25, 30 years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the reason for that is because they would clean--sweep, broom sweeping the buildings, the builders were and turning it over to the owner.  The owners were ripping them off, because they were, you know, had cleaning the building and claiming breakage that they may have broken.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the builders started buying from me, and we started cleaning buildings.
Speaker 1: And so, what year is that when you moved into commercial cleaning?
Speaker 2: That must have been '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 253753
Speaker 1: Were you finding that the, of course, the commercial cleaning was a little more lucrative than residential?  Because back in the '70s [1970s] were there a lot of opportunities for residential cleaning?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were becoming.  Yeah.  It was becoming more and more difficult for them to find--I mean, black people would say, "I'd rather die on my knees than to clean your house."  So, okay.  Yeah.  You know.  It was that kind of thing.  "I'm not going to be denigrated this way anymore.  I deserve to be a human being and to be treated as such."  And so, yeah, professional housecleaning then took off.  We are the genesis of the Molly Maids and the Maid in Americas.  No doubt about that.
Speaker 1: Because that's when the whole domestic was moving out of the way, and then you all just came in with residential cleaning.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, we--yeah.  Poor black people said, "I'm not going to clean your house, Miss Ann, anymore."  She became Miss Ann by the way.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it was the denigration, the relationships were exposed as fraud, and pretty much you were just a glorified "Well, you're a part of my family."  "No, I'm not.  Don't do that."  You know.  "Pay me and let me have my dignity, 'cause I have my own family."  You know.  "Give me enough and don't give me your food out of your refrigerator.  I can buy my own food if you give me my respect.  If I give you a good service, pay me for it."  And so, you know, in fairness now, a lot of the day workers watch TV half the day.
Story_ID: 253754
Speaker 1: So what was the commercial cleaning industry like in the 1970s?
Speaker 2: Well, because they weren't used to having a commercial company, it was very lucrative for us [Jewell Industries].  All of the major builders in this region are my customers for the last 25 to 30 years.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were able to maintain those relationships.
Speaker 2: If you do a good job and if you're honest to word, most people will respect you even if they don't like you.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that first year when you all started the business in 1972, you made ten thousand dollars.
Speaker 2: Ten thousand dollars.  That's cute (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the children ate and, you know, we paid bills.  It was a struggle and--but we had actually gotten up by 1995 to well over 350 houses that we took care of on an everyday basis.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And let's talk about the year before that in 1994 when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can we go back to '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Sure.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: In 1974, we had what was called a recession, and I called it the depression, because, you know, starting out I had no banking loans or anything.  And so my early years of saving money was able to help me to live through that.  And that lasted eighteen years, the first eighteen years.  No loans.  No banking.  Loans or anything.  So we were able to build off of profits.  Now, '74 [1974], I had close to $100,000 in completed work with one company called Yonus  Construction [ph.], who went bankrupt that year.  One hundred thousand dollars is worth about a million dollars today.  And that took me back at least ten years in my development.
Speaker 1: 'Cause were you able to recoup any of that money?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: All gone.
Story_ID: 253755
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what happened with the company [Jewell Industries] that year in 1974?
Speaker 2: Well, we got behind on our taxes.  We struggled.  We struggled real hard.  We struggled.  And we kept working.  And then I opened up a store on Mount Vernon Avenue [Alexandria, Virginia].
Speaker 1: What kind of store?
Speaker 2: I sold TVs and stereos.  Well, what happened was, I moved in and I co-rented the building.  And the guy who had the TV repair shop couldn't pay his part of the rent.  So I had this big store in there that I was paying rent on and after I had to throw him out of there.  And so I said, okay.  I went and got a floor plan from Motorola, and I bought some reels, you know, nice stereos and big boxes, shiny; we had strobe lights, you know, and I kept that store and it made me profitable.  I was able to buy my house while I had that store (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --and maintain the cleaning service at the same time.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so funnel some money back into the cleaning service.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 253756
Speaker 1: And what was happening with the cleaning service [Jewell Industries] in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was doing well.  The houses were up to about three hundred houses.  We had routes and crews going out, color-coded teams, and I think maybe about ten cars going out.  We employed about sixty people, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were most of your clientele for the residential cleaning, were they white?
Speaker 2: All.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 253757
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this:  was it difficult to recruit workers for a cleaning service [Jewell Industries] where, you know, they'd go in and clean white people's houses?  Was that difficult?
Speaker 2: No.  We gave them a job with vacation and dignity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it wasn't the--
Speaker 2: --and a paycheck.
Speaker 1: --domestic any more.  It was you were--
Speaker 2: Professional house--
Speaker 1: --you were a professional housecleaner.
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.  And we had a service that would also go in and do what ServiceMaster was herein before the maid service.  And they occasionally would go in and do a maid job, but mostly they would go in and do the heavy cleaning; you know, wash the windows, scrub the floors, clean the carpets; you know, those kinds of services that the maid service wouldn't do.  So we had that service, and we would basically do an initial when we go in, 'cause I tell them it's harder to keep a--it's easier to keep a clean house clean than try to clean a dirty house.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so we required that they had those initial things done in order for us to maintain them; the bathrooms to be stripped and the soap scum, and re-caulked and that sort of thing.  And so we had that service available to them as well.
Story_ID: 253758
Speaker 1: And what was happening with the business [Jewell Industries] in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: It started growing very well.
Speaker 1: Commercial or residential or both?
Speaker 2: Commercial.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Commercial started growing.  And we did--if you can--if you go to Washington [D.C.], everything from 3rd Street to 14th Street, we cleaned every one of those buildings out, either construction or remodeling.
Speaker 1: So government buildings.
Speaker 2: No.  They were government, but mostly not government.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And 3rd Street is the Canadian Chancery [Embassy of Canada in Washington, D.C.].  That one and all the way down to the Marriot [Hotel] on 14th, and including the Willard [InterContinental Washington] across the street.  Yeah.  I mean, we cleaned those out of construction.  Hospitals and hotels were our specialty.  We made more money with those.  But apartment buildings, we run through them so.  We are the--from Gaithersburg [Maryland] down to Mount Vernon [Virginia], and through the north to south; everything in between there we did it.  Yeah.  I mean, if there was anything important to do, we did it.  If it was going to be an occupied building, we did it.  I mean, we were--we are the best at what we were doing.  But in 1993, we got certified under the 8(a) program.  And in '94 [1994] we got our first job.  And our first job was under the 8(a) program under the government's set-aside for minority program.  And we got a job installing carpet, and I didn't have any carpet experience at all (laughter).  It was terrible.  But anyway, I hired a carpet guy, and then I got some subs to go in, and then I trained my people.  And now we are probably the largest carpet--minority carpet company in the Mid-Atlantic.  Yeah.  But it was a rocky start.  After that, we got a contract with Walter Reed Army Hospital [Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland] to take care of their buildings, twelve--I mean--I'm sorry, all of the buildings except the main hospital at Walter Reed.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I think there were something like fifty-six buildings.
Story_ID: 253759
Speaker 1: In 1996 you decided to do something international in Africa.  Tell us a little bit about it.
Speaker 2: Actually that was '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No.  That's all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't in 1996 that you established the African American Trading Company [Inc. (AATCI)]?
Speaker 2: We actually formed the company in '96 [1996], probably.
Speaker 1: But the idea?
Speaker 2: The actual function of actually doing it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --started in '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: In Ghana.
Speaker 2: In Ghana.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what the African American Trading Company was doing in Ghana.
Speaker 2: Okay.  First of all, let's go back just a little bit.  When I had my TV thing in '76 [1976], a guy came out of South Africa named Hugh Masekela.  Hugh and Miriam Makeba was his wife, and they escaped and went to Ghana.  A mutual friend sent them to--from Ghana to America.  They landed in a place called Alexandria [Virginia].  And they brought--and he brought his band with him.  So they all bought stereos and TVs from me at my store.  Okay.  And would become friends and we're still friends since then.  Okay.  I kinda keep my friends a long time (laughter).  I don't know why they put up with me.  But, at any rate, the lead guitar player's cousin was here, and he wanted a job.  So I gave him a job on Friday to come to work on Monday.  Saturday he got locked up for drunk driving.  Found out his card--his passport was expired for over a year, he was being deported.  When he got out of jail--making a long story short, okay--when he got out of jail, the band was on the road, he was homeless, and so I gave him a place to stay at my house.  He only had thirty days to stay before he was deported.  So he didn't have any money, so I gave him some money.  He had no transportation, so I loaned him a car.  And so for thirty days he lived in my house, and my kids got to know an African.  And they say an African named Joe (laughter).  His name was Joe.  Anyway, we say, "Good-bye, Joe, and we'll never see you again," you know.  And we are greater for the experience.  His father was a rich industrialist, sent me a free ticket to go to Ghana.  I went to Ghana and I found a place that is worthy of mention.  Beautiful in every dimension:  the people, the palm trees--it's just a place.  But then I saw tomatoes growing on the vine rotting.  And I asked him, "Why is that?"  He said, "Because we don't have boxes."  I found out they were the largest exporter of timber in the world.  So I started two sawmills.  That didn't work.  The reasons why I'll share later.  Okay (laughter).  If you're not there, it doesn't work.  Okay.  So after some machination and investigation, we found that what they really needed was processing the food.  They had food.  They didn't process it.  And they lose 30 to 60 percent of after-harvest crop today.  Thirty to sixty percent.  Think about it.  What business can operate losing 30 to 60 percent of their profits?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You can't do it.  And so consequently the whole Sub-Saharan Africa is straining under those conditions.  That's why they are enslaved economically.  That's the game that is being played on them--
Speaker 1: Um-hm--
Story_ID: 253760
Speaker 1: I figured that one of the ways to do it is to get involved in processing the food.  I also found out that one of the worst things that could happen is that we, ourselves, are our worst enemies.  If we were go in and sell them pineapples, which I did, you know, then every pineapple exporter and provocateur would find a way to (unclear) the deal.  They would undercount.  They would give you bad substandard--I mean, all of the things that will, you know, cause the customer to not want to buy more.  So I said, "Okay.  What I'll do is, I'll find something here that I can help with, but they don't know anything about."  So that's why I selected spices.  I didn't just select spices.  I selected red pepper.  And the reason I selected red pepper, because red pepper is the least profitable of all the spices in the country.  I'm tell you that now because, and even on camera, because I've kept it--it was a secret even from the people who work for me over there.  They call it the Pepper Project.  It never was the Pepper Project, but I always had to camouflage it because I didn't trust the people to do a good job and not clear the deal.
Speaker 2: So was it successful for you?
Speaker 1: No.  Not at all.  It's cost me over a million dollars today.  But--and I haven't made any money.  But, yes.  The concept is very successful.  The concept is doable.
Speaker 2: Of importing spices--exporting spices.
Speaker 1: From Africa.
Speaker 2: From Africa.
Speaker 1: To the world.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Not to America either.  Okay.  And the people think that I'm trying to get it here--no.  I'm not trying to get it here.  This is just one port in the storm.  And--naw.  If everything--everywhere from Cape Town [South Africa] to Spain and to Europe and America, certainly even Walmart--Walmart-Europe and Walmart China are interested in us putting them in containers and exporting them.  But right now what I'm most interested in is being able to create the volume that is required.  The biggest problem, after you look at the effect of the problem, is that you don't have logistics and you don't have the markets to sell to, because you haven't figured out how to do QC [quality control].  And you don't have the collective ability to do it.  That's what we're taking to Ghana, to Africa.  And President [Yoweri] Museveni has asked me to come to Uganda to do the same thing.  The World Bank has asked us to go to Tanzania and Mauritius and Zanzibar.  We're prepared to do these things.  If God says that we should do these things, I will do them.  And I will do them but I do them quickly.
Speaker 2: And does your son [Andre Jewell] still run the business [Jewell Spice Company] in Ghana?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He's there nine and a half years.  And this is the year--this is the week--this is the--yesterday was the day that I told him that we would make a very strong decision.  We'll either get the money from OPEC [Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries] or we'll get it from the World Bank, but we will get this money, and we will do this business.
Speaker 2: What do you think it's going to take to make it profitable and successful?
Speaker 1: About one million four hundred thousand dollars.  That's it.  That's it.  That's it.  You give me one million four hundred thousand dollars, and I'll--and by June, I'll make it profitable.
Speaker 2: But you've already spent a million.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that was to get the logistics.  I had to find out what products were available.  I had to find out who had them.  I had to find out what regions could grow them.  I had to find out whether or not it even existed.  I had to find out whether or not we could get the food clean enough.  We paid for that now.  That was all the required things.  You could've given me a million four [$1,400,000], you know, ten years ago, and I still would have had to do all of that work--
Story_ID: 253761
Speaker 1: And why would people in the U.S. or from around the world want spices from Africa?
Speaker 2: You don't know where your spices come from.  I'm telling you that now.  I didn't ask you--you don't know and you don't have a clue.  You put some oregano, you put anise (laughter)--yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You don't have a clue where it came from.  As a matter of fact, you don't have a clue about what is--what it has gone through before it got to your table.  That's the truth.  And so it is a conglomeration.  I understand the spice business enough to know that it is a cartel.  It is not one that is open to everybody.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I have paid my dues to get in to the door.  Then they have promised they will accept me when I'm ready to come in.
Story_ID: 253762
Speaker 1: And your son [Andrew Jewell], did he--did you ask him to go to Ghana and run the business [Jewell Spice Company]?
Speaker 2: God is in charge of everything.  My son decided early on that he wasn't going to do any normal work like his father.  One thing he didn't want to do is work like his father did.  He saw me, you know, late nights and early mornings; and I got married on January the 30th, and on the 1st I was out cleaning apartments, you know, the turnover for my customers, you know.  And no honeymoon.  "Dad, you know, I don't want to do that."  So he got in touch with a guy named Teddy Riley in Guy, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The music.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And he helped arrange and sample and get music for them early on.  I'm out there putting carpet in at EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency], and he drives up with--in a limousine with all of these rock stars, you know.  That's the kind of guy that he was.  So he decided that he wanted to go off on his own.  The virtual prodigal son story.  "Dad, give me my inheritance now."  "Son, I'm not dead.  You don't have none."  (Laughter)  But he says, "Oh, well."  "But if you wanted some money, how much did you want?"  So I gave him money and told him go ahead and be gone and good luck in life.  And he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he says--call me up one day and says, "Dad, everybody on West Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] have a porch and a chair.  And every morning, they pull it out and sit in it.  And every evening, they pull it back in the house and go in the house."  I said, "Uh-huh.  Why?"  He says, "'Cause I'm scared I'm gonna get a chair.  Come get me, Dad.  Give me some work."  (Laughter)  You know, I said, "Well, the only thing I have right now is in West Africa.  I had put $250,000 over there, and I found out that my partner was stealing the money.  And I have a whole bumper crop of spices that need to be processed, and I have nobody I can trust."  So he went.  And his uncle, my brother [Errol Martin Jewell], the one that was a city councilman in Richmond [Virginia], went with him; and they processed the food and brought it back.  And we found out what it took--that we could sell our wares, what it cost us to do it.  All of these things had to be done before we would put--before I could tell you yes, I can be successful.  So, yeah.  It's the first time it's gonna be done, by the way, this major food processing in sub-Saharan Africa.  It is major.  But there's even more that I'll share with you later.
Story_ID: 253763
Speaker 1: What happened to the dreams of becoming a lawyer?  Are they gone now?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have six lawyers that I pay (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I don't want to be a lawyer now.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: I have to finish teaching these people in Africa that they must prepare for the inevitable drought that's gonna come to them.  We lost fifteen million black people on the Horn of Africa this year to starvation and to crime that nobody's talking about.  And the reason isn't that they don't have food, it's that they didn't process it when they had it.
Speaker 1: Because they didn't know how nor have the facilities.  Is that true or what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I don't have the answer to all of it.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) War.  No farming for years because of war and drastic changes in rain patterns.  We call it El Nino here.  Ignorance.  Lack of resources.
Story_ID: 253764
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: My children.  I told them, I didn't have Planned Parenthood.  I didn't ask for none of y'all (laughter).  I'm terrible.  But I love them, every one, every day.
Speaker 1: And you have four children?
Speaker 2: I have four.  I have four.  Two girls, two boys.  And they are my purpose in life.  Yeah.  And they have now given me--this week or next week, I will have eight grandchildren.  And they are the most important in my life.  Okay.  My purpose.  Yeah.  For keep going on.  I got married again after the first wife, and she's--we've been now for thirty-some years.  Excuse me, I don't remember--1969--to now thirty-five years it's been like that.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Call your wife [Adrienne Jewell] on the cell phone.
Speaker 2: I'm not.  I'm just---she knows it when I cry again.  Okay.  Hope she doesn't see this part (laughter).  But anyway, a long time.  And she is dear to me as well.  She has been with me through hell and high water.  Yeah.  And for that I'm most grateful.  Okay.  But the children were not a choice.  And so they never are and have been a choice.  They are my special gifts from God.  And, yeah.  So what I'm gonna do now is to turn it over to them whatever it is that they want or not.  I'm okay with it if they don't want to take it on.
Speaker 1: Do you just have one child who works in the business [African American Trading Company, Inc. (AATCI)]?
Speaker 2: In the spice business [Jewell Spice Company].  My oldest son runs the operations for the janitorial and the carpet business [Jewell Industries].  Yeah.  We have a manager who runs the carpet business--division; but he's been the vice president.  He's a professional golfer who decided later in the game, "Don't sell the business, Dad.  I'm coming to take it."  And now he's running me behind my schedule in life, because I was supposed to retire at fifty-five.
Speaker 1: And what about your girls?  Are they involved in the business at all?
Speaker 2: My oldest daughter bought the maid service.  So she's running that.  The youngest one, who was--graduated from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], is having the babies now.  And she has another one coming today or this week, next week.  I hope she holds out 'til the 30th, my birthday; but--she has the little boy coming in December.  And my oldest daughter just had, a month ago, a little girl.  And so they were making me grandchildren, and that's good.  So.  Yeah.  But they are--I think they are probably most educated about business.  My sons know how to operate a business, but they don't know how to run a business.  And that's their next step, is to learn how to run a business.  We can be the best artist or bricklayer, janitor, carpet--but unless you know how to run the business, the numbers and the cash flows and the ratios, you can't stay in business--
Story_ID: 253765
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you've already done that you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I wish I had run away from every woman until I got my law degree (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But since I didn't, I'm glad that life turned out to be what it is.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 253766
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I hate to steal a cliche from [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], but somebody who tried to help somebody, who was a giver, not a taker.  I think so.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 253767
Speaker 1: What do you believe is your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, my children.  That's about it.  I don't know.  You know, I start assessing the value that I've touched in other people's lives, it becomes rather negligible.  It's when your or the city or someone gives me an accolade and says, "Hey, by the way, what you've done is unusual," that I recognize that it's unusual.  It's just what I do every day, and I think it's pretty standard.  Why hasn't every--you mean everybody else hasn't done that?  Okay.  Certainly I don't have any valid judgments against people who do less than I do, because they may be doing more in some other areas.  Maybe they are saving somebody's soul better than I am, you know.  So I don't--I say my job is to show how to economically become worthy of God's grace.  And, you see, I contend that Jesus Christ didn't find a poor person or a beggar to become his disciple. He went and got doctors and businessmen and tax collectors and lawyers to work with him so that he could move and advance his program.  And I'm contending that we need--especially as a people, all--because, Jesus, when I go outside in Kansas and I see that white people are just as bad off as we are, but we're started--if [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] said people who start a race late, must run faster or forever remain--we got to run faster now as a people.  We owe this.  I can't save everybody, but I can encourage every black person to run faster.
Story_ID: 253768
Speaker 1: What do you think will be next for Jewell Industries?  You've expanded into spices [through the Jewell Spice Company].  And what do you think will be next?  Or do you think that this is enough?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of diversification, this is enough.  This is awesome.  This is a legacy that it--when it becomes a reality, it will say that not only did we give encouragement and guidance and a wherewithal and--this thing is so potentially profitable, that we'll be able to come and effect, you know, scholarships from kindergarten to Ph.D.s.  We will be able to set in motion almost cataclysmic--I wish I could tell you really what this is, but if I showed you the multipliers--well, incredible.
Speaker 1: And what do you think of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Over fifteen thousand farmers in the first year will be affected.  Not even talking about what happens over here.  But over fifteen thousand farmers will be affected the first year, and every year after that it will grow exponentially.  And then we'll export this same model into five other countries with the World Bank's help.  When that happens, my legacy then will be written, whether or not I did a good job or not; but God is my judge.  He's the only one that really counts anyway.
Story_ID: 253769
Speaker 1: And when you think back and you look at your life, and you think of how you kind of started your business empowering people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --who--
Speaker 2: Had no power, no part of power.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, you know, you look at it, you know, almost thirty years later, here you are again empowering other people in Africa.  What do you think about that?
Speaker 2: I think it's my requirement from God.  I'm asking Him because, you see, I'm am wealthy enough now that I don't have to go to Africa to do what I'm gonna do.  And so, I'm looking for Him to tell me--"Lord?"  "Yeah?"  "You really want me to go to Africa?  I could just give this idea to somebody younger, because I really--I'm getting tired of this idea.  But, you know--and, you know, Moses didn't make it to the Promised Land, Lord.  I don't have to go."  (Laughter)  But he's still driving and empowering me to do this.  And with the help of God and people who care, we will be able to provide not just food--not just food, but clean food from Africa, a market to the world.  It has to change, you see.  We are now just a beggar, Pacho [ph.], and "Please give me," where we could become an exporter of things other than diamonds, gold, timber and raw material; where we can start processing and delivering worthy quality products.  So.  That's going to be awesome, you know, bury me in a hole someplace and forget about me, but don't stop doing God's will.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Matthew [Hickey].
Story_ID: 253770
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken about 1995 in Maryland.  The eagle guy in the front is Harold Suggs.  And he's one of my best friends (laughter).  They all are really.  And he hosted that one.
Speaker 2: And it's the Black President (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Black Presidents' Roundtable Association.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this is you (unclear)?
Speaker 1: That's me.  Yeah.  And Julia Holmes [ph.] and Denise Lloyd [ph.], and if you'll go back to the left.
Speaker 2: We're just gonna get a (unclear) shot of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Got it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  If you want to name people, could you do it from left to right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  Vernon Stansbury [ph.]; Denise Lloyd; in the back, Skip Greene [ph.], deceased, the former profession golfer; the next two are new members that I don't remember; Julia Holmes; myself in the back; Harold Suggs; Paul Williams [ph.], my first cousin; and then the gentleman on the front there is deceased Carl Brown, Sr. [ph.]; in the back, Jerry Valerie [ph.]; in the back, Carl Brown, Jr. [ph.]; and the far right is my sensei [HistoryMaker] Emmit [J.] McHenry; and the guy next to him is Jim McHenry [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can tilt it again if you want me.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: This one doesn't have the glare that the other did.  This is the Esquire Club, the first official board meeting, and new fraternity in 1967.
Speaker 1: And where are you, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ronald] Jewell?
Speaker 2: The second on the right.
Speaker 1: Right here?
Speaker 2: On the right.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Right here.
Speaker 2: The other right (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Check you out.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)  And the first one on the left is Al Bowers [ph.].  He was my roommate in college and also still my best friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear)  great.
Speaker 2: During our--this one was taken probably in 1989, about there.  No, 1999.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I got my decades mixed up.  That's how fast my life is going (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: About 1999.  It is the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture award for the best contractor of year award.
Speaker 1: Tell us who is in the photograph.
Speaker 2: That's my sweet darling wife, Adrienne Jewell, the vice president of Jewell Industries for administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And myself.
Speaker 1: Yep.  Got it.
Speaker 2: I always look at that.  She's now twenty.  I need to take about twenty-two years away from today, and that would give us what?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  You mean, oh--in terms of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Take away from 2004 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  That's--
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982].  Is it--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is 1982, and that is my little family; my four knuckleheads.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you tell us their names and go from left to right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The first one is--the first one, my first born, that's Angela [ph.].  Standing above her is Andre [Jewell].  He's my third born.  And then in the middle is Brian [ph.].  He is my adopted son from his mother.  I raised him since he was eighteen months, so he's my son, but his last name is Johnson.  And that's Ayesha [ph.].  She's the only one that Adrienne and I had as--together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: That's Congressman [HistoryMaker Charles B.] Rangel and myself.
Speaker 1: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 2: That one's in the year 2000 and--well--and [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton was still president; he spoke that night.  So then 2000--maybe 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should label these pictures.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 2: This one, it was done in 1969 and it represented the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] championship certificate being handed by one of the most famous black coaches or coaches period in the country.  His name was Tricky Tom Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From left is the Reverend--current Reverend Fern Pettis [ph.]; the next one, an insurance agent and my good friend Alvin Hunter [ph.]; the third one is myself; and the fourth one is my roommate, Al Bowers.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Tricky Tom Harris.  Yes.  I could never name us before him.
Story_ID: 253771
Speaker 1: This was my son's first wedding day.  The guy on the left is Brian [ph.]; and behind him is Angela [ph.]; in front with the red is Adrienne [Jewell], my wife; behind her is myself; next is my youngest, Ayesha [ph.]; and on the far right is Andre [Jewell].  He's the one who lives in Africa.
Speaker 2: Did you already give the date?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to give it there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That was in 301.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2003.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  This is one of the many first place awards for nonprofit golf tournaments that we attend and support.  This particular one is the Urban League, and it was done in 19--2003.
Speaker 2: Can you name who's in the photograph?
Speaker 1: Actually I can.  In the middle is myself; to the right is Bell, Gus Bell; and to the far right is my son. The guy on the left, he was a straggler.  And we won the tournament (laughter).  He just rolled with us, and he won first place (laughter).
Speaker 2: And your son's name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brian.  I'm sorry.  That's Brian.  Say, look, I don't know his name.  I didn't know his name--Ron Brown Golf Tournament [Ronald H. Brown Memorial Golf Tournament] in 1997.  This is the second of two that I attended.  That's me, who would be in the striped shirt, fourth from the left.
Speaker 2: You don't have to name everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, that's (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) President [William Jefferson] Bill Clinton in the black shirt, and Michael Brown in the middle.
Speaker 2: Got it?
Speaker 1: It's okay now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Got a minute?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah.  That's fine.  Yeah.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This one is probably one of the most precious pictures I have nostalgically speaking.  This was taken in about 1955, '54 [1954].  It represents the fiftieth wedding anniversary of my grandparents on my mother's [Thelma Jewell Freeman] side.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Can you name everyone in the photograph?
Speaker 2: I sure can.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Starting from the left, the youngest boy in my mother's--grandmother's family is Francis Taylor.  The one furthest in the back, Edward, John Edward Taylor, Jr.; the one in front is Marie Taylor Pryor.  Then comes the angel, Ida B. Taylor, grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Next to her, John Edward Taylor, the matriarch [sic. patriarch].  In front of him, my favorite Aunt Helena [ph.] from Newark, New Jersey.  Behind her, Wilbert Taylor.  Next to her--next to him on the front row, the elegant Doris Taylor.  Next to her is the first to die, James Taylor.  And furthest to the right is Uncle Melvin Taylor.
Speaker 1: Is that everybody?
Speaker 2: Except my mother, conspicuously speaking.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: She was having my oldest sister that day.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  So June the 4th, 19--oh, boy.  I don't know how old she is.  She just turned fifty.  So it would have been 1940.  In 1950.
Speaker 1: You gave it--I think it's in 1953.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  Okay.  That's right.  That's probably right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this next one?
Speaker 2: This one is a Christmas party, and it's myself and my wife.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: That one is about seven years ago.  So 1997.  Too many things.  I wonder how close I am really.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I was just wondering how close I am really, 'cause time goes by so fast.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Oh, look. That's Frances Adriana Ortiz [ph.].  That one is in 2004, like last week.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: She was eighteen months.
Speaker 1: Is this is your granddaughter.
Speaker 2: That's my granddaughter.  Yeah.  Next to the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Got it, Matthew [Hickey]?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear.)  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Get that swing.  I may never get it again.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  What was the occasion here?
Speaker 2: Another golf tournament and, let me see who was on there.  Matt, are you finished?  Let me see who's on there.  Maybe I can see what year.  Oh, Joe.  Okay.  That would have been about 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1997?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got it out of the tournament.  That shirt came out around Ralph's tournament.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just tell us what date (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm going to say about 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is Ebenezer Baptist Church [Alexandria, Virginia] prayer breakfast for the men--male; and this was 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who's in the picture?
Speaker 2: Oh, who's in the picture?  On the left is Brian Jr.; my grandson and his little brother Joshua [ph.].  Now in the back is Trustee Jennings [ph.]; and to the right, we got another member of the church.  That one's my hero, Congressman Perry Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III].  We were in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands on a junket, free and paid for--no, I'm just kidding (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This was for the Black Presidents' Roundtable Association.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: And that would have been about ten years ago, about '94 [1994].
