Story_ID: 289783
Speaker 1: Let me introduce myself.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I am interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Mr. Ed Anderson.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Louis Jackson, J-A-M-E-S, L-O-U-I-S, J-A-C-K-S-O-N [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and--date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 18, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, where, where were you born?
Speaker 2: In Spalding County, Griffin, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Griffin, Georgia, okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Civil service, retired.
Speaker 1: Retired from United States civil service.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you--and you're most noted for being in--a community volunteer, right?
Speaker 2: Activist or whatever you call 'em, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 2, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: 1229 Calhoun Avenue, East Point, Georgia.
Story_ID: 289784
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that I'm required to ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  Fried foods are my favorite and corn and okra is my favorite fried foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Mid-summer toward fall, fishing season.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not now.  I had one place I wanted to go in my life and that was Las Vegas [Nevada] and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I managed to make that.  I don't have any place in particular to go now.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or, or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, be the best at what you can be where you are and give it all you got.
Story_ID: 289785
Speaker 1: Now what I'm gonna do now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [R.V. Jackson] side.  I'm gonna start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ola Mae Meadows, O-L-A, M-A-E, M-E-A-D-O-W-S, Meadows.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth I don't, I don't have.
Speaker 1: Could you give a, a guess, render a guess?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o' nine [1909], 'cause my aunt was born in 1907, was born in September--she--my mother was born in September and my aunt was born in August.  Yeah, it was September 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, sir, could you--maybe we should--can we pause a second?
Speaker 2: You may not need the dollar but you know you got it.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: That's all this thing is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're cool.  So--all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  Now tell me, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back in history can you trace them?
Speaker 2: To a little place called Satilla [Georgia] out from Griffin [Georgia], and that was the Meadows' plantation.  They came off of that place.  And I would assume that that's where that name came from, from the Meadows.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, so they were--they were slaves on that plantation before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Their, their--
Speaker 1: --the Civil War?
Speaker 2: --their parents were.
Speaker 1: Their parents were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, of course.  Their--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Their parents or grandparents?
Speaker 2: Their, their, their grandparents but they, they were not--they were not slaves.  My grandfather worked on the railroad--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he--
Speaker 1: But so, so it'd be your--it'd be your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, they--I was assuming that the name, Meadows, I know that that's where it come from, my, my grandfather said that's where it come from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are, are there any stories from those days, from those plantation days or anything that, that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Not, not particularly with the exception that my grandmother was--her grandmother was Cherokee Indian [Native American].  Then they--when they moved to Griffin, the family, she met my grandfather and they married, and then they started moving toward Atlanta [Georgia].  They moved to Atlanta first, then they moved out to East Point [Georgia].  And I, I never--I never, never, never tried to trace that any farther than the plantation name, the Meadows, and, and once, once I saw that--where it led to, I didn't try to trace it any farther.  But, they came to Atlanta, he's workin' on the railroad.  Then, he got a job with the company that's still over here, Hercules Powder Company [Hercules, Inc.], chemical company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--I lived with them.  They raised me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your, your, your grandfather and your grandmother raised you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They raised--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They raised--oddly enough, they raised two of us, a cousin, his name was James also.
Speaker 1: Now what was your father--your grandfather's full, full name?
Speaker 2: James Meadows.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Mattie Meadows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was Atkins before she was Meadows, Mattie Atkins Meadows.
Story_ID: 289786
Speaker 1: Was your mother [Ola Mae Meadows] still alive when your--when you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --coming up?  Okay.
Speaker 2: What happened, my mother and my father [R.V. Jackson] were married in Griffin [Georgia] and after a year, they were divorced and my aunt and her husband, they were divorced also, so they both left.  One went to Detroit [Michigan] and one went to Connecticut.  They worked to support us by my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows] and my grandmother [Mattie Atkins Meadows] raised us, but they would come home every year, and that, that was--that was the thing that we looked forward to all of my early life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother coming home and we'd have a family-like reunion.  That's--not a great big family, just my mother and my aunt [Ruby Meadows] and my grandfather and my grandmother.  In fact, that picture is the whole family that I know of in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it has my uncle and my aunt, my mother, my grandfather and grandmother, and my cousin on it.  And that's the way we were, with my grandmother holding my cousin and my grandfather holding me.  That was the love of our lives.  She seemingly loved him more and my grandfather seemingly loved me more.  But from both of them, I got the consolation of knowin' I was bein' raised conservatively.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 289787
Speaker 1: Now do you know anything about how your mother [Ola Mae Meadows] was raised and--now, she was raised in East Point [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: She was raised in Griffin [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Griffin, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she met my father [R.V. Jackson]--I do know that she met my father in high school, and she and my father was one of the few people in that community that did go to high school.  And that's where they met and I guess they--that's where they got married.  But they were both two of the same kind of people, very headstrong, both wanted to be in charge, and I think they loved each other until they died but they never could stand each other.
Speaker 1: They loved each other but they couldn't stand each other (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I heard him tell his second wife, his third wife really, that that was the only woman he had ever loved.  And I was kind of ashamed 'cause I--you know, I felt embarrassed standing there as her child and he was telling this woman that--but they just--they were the same kind of people and they just--two people can't be the boss.  So it--they, they left on mutual terms and they--I never met my father until I was about twelve years old.  And I had a cousin that took me down to meet him and I really fell in love with him after I come out of the service [U.S. civil service].  We started to hunt together and fish together.  We got to know each other.  He's a great church man too.
Story_ID: 289788
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is R.V. Jackson and that was all I knew until my grandson was born, and he's named for my grandfather--for my father, so his name is Raven Vincent Jackson, R-A-V-E-N, V-I-N-C-E-N-T, I believe, Vincent Jackson.  And that's the first time that I knew what my father's name was.  He never told me but he told Raven.
Speaker 1: And do you know your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: No, but he was born in the same year [1909] as my mother [Ola Mae Meadows], but he was born at--somewhere near Milner [Georgia], between Griffin [Georgia] and Milner, and--
Speaker 1: Near Milner?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's on the outer edge of Spalding County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father talk about how he was raised up and, and what he--
Speaker 2: Well, he was one of the--at that time, he was one of the sophisticates supposedly.  He, he, he was a high school attendant and, and didn't many of 'em go to high school in that day, and he played baseball.  They tell me he was an excellent pitcher, and so he was very popular.  I kidded my mother 'cause I thought maybe that's why they met.  But other than that, he worked at--for a man named Newton [ph.] and he became his, not a handyman, but he worked for a lumber company.  He made screen doors and specialty things around the lumber company for years.  He, he was good with his hands.
Story_ID: 289789
Speaker 1: When you look back at your mother's [Ola Mae Meadows] personality and your father's [R.V. Jackson] personality and your [maternal] grandparents [Mattie Atkins Meadows and James Meadows], who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think my grandfather guided my destiny toward--'cause within me sometime the thing of my mother temperamentally flares up, but it's being suppressed by the spirit that my grandfather put into me.  I think my grandfather influenced me more than anybody else.  'Cause I tell you, for instance, he died in 1941 and still today I can talk with him and I, I can--I can--I can reason the way he reasoned.  He, he was my favorite person.  My grandmother I thought was the meanest person that ever lived.  She--and in the story that I wrote for my grandson, I said, she'd shout on Sunday and raise hell Monday through Friday, not at nobody else, but at us.  And now I realize what she was doin'.  She was keepin' me in tow and she, she believed in domestic violence.  She whipped (laughter), my grandfather didn't.  My grandfather, he just--but I'd rather got a whippin' from my grandmother than got a lashin'--tongue lashin' from my grandfather.  I could take the whippin' but to have him be angry with me, I couldn't stand it.  Yeah, he, he was the most influential person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she made sure that I stayed within a certain parameter of living.  The time was by dusk and I never let time catch me away from home 'cause she didn't tolerate that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: But, but my grandfather--my mother was temperamental.  My father was stern and strict, but by time I got to know him good, he was like me and we were so glad to get to--get together with each other.  We, we, we pleased each other.  And, and the harshest thing I believe he ever said to me was, "Boy, I thought you said you could shoot."  I missed a rabbit or something.  He--but he, he was--he was a Christian man and that's why he had that third--that third wife.  We were--out here, he had a daughter that was livin' in Atlanta [Georgia], he got sick and this girl was homeless, and she moved in and took care of him, lived there for a year, no relationship, no nothin'.  And he told her it didn't look good, him bein' a deacon in a church and he married her, and they stayed together I don't know how many years, a long time, longer than he stayed with anybody else.  She still lives and I still go visit with her.  I like her.  But he was--he was an influential man.  He could influence you just at--just at a moment's notice.  You could just meet him and talk to him and, and he could influence you.  He had a sound philosophy on life, and especially concerning church.  He--I used to get angry with him.  He, he quit going to church one time and I, I asked him why, being such a dedicated person.  He was in the Masonic Order, he was the secretary of his lodge, he was--he was everything, and then all of a sudden he quit going to church.  He said he couldn't tolerate seein' people misuse the gospel, misuse the church, what--they were preachin' one thing and livin' another.  So he was just a sound man.  He believed in doin' what he thought was right.  But the one fault that I did find in him is that he always thought he was right (laughter).  That's why he and my mother, they, they both had identical things and my mother was the same way.  She thought she was right all the way.  In fact, she'd sit in my Sunday school class and she's the only one in there who would contradict me.  She, she always thought she was right.  Both of 'em, real, good lovin' people, and the most joyous time I've ever had was when they all were together, him, my mother, my aunt and the kids.  You'd never know that they were ever separated, but they both had them hard down, core, inside I'm right thing and they didn't give.  Neither one of 'em would give and I think that's what happened to the marriage.  They just couldn't give.
Story_ID: 289790
Speaker 1: And from that experience, I think it has helped me.  'Cause me and my, my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson], we've been married fifty-seven years, this summer we'll be married fifty-eight years, and I have learned to give and take, and I guess I got that really because of my father [R.V. Jackson].  He always told me how he regretted that he never could be there with me.  And, consequently, we, we raised our children [Ronsonn M. Jackson and Mazie C. Jackson Few] according to us, not according to anybody else, but to us. Except for the training that my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows] gave me as religiously we, we didn't--we didn't smother them with church.  It was--it was a requirement that you spend some time in church.  You pick the time and you--that kinda thing.  In fact, our family was raised on a democratic basis.  We first bought this house we moved in, we'd say what time do you wanna come in?  My son say eleven, my daughter said ten, and they had to come in at that time.  Then we made some leniencies, and if you can't get here by eleven, he's two years older than she is, at least call.  So we had another conference and he said he'd like to be out 'til twelve.  And I said, "Are you sure?  Are you sure you don't wanna be out 'til one now?"  He said, "I'd like to be."  "Well, what time do you wanna be out?"  He said, "One o'clock."  I asked my daughter what time she wanted to be out, she said, "Eleven."  Okay, we established those boundaries and they always respected me for that.  Our, our thing was not to say yeah and no, no--but no and yes.  You call me by my name, you don't have to call me father, you call me by my name.  He called me Jim [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], still does today.  And we, we just loved each other, that's all, and our family came up that way, supportin' each other.  And we--one for instance and then I--that got my children.  The, the girl--boy that's married to my daughter now came to our house one Sunday and I asked him (unclear), "What do you have a date or somethin?"  He said, "No."  I said, "Well what happened?"  He said, "I just dropped by."  "Well, son, I'd have you to know that this is not a do drop in.  You either come here by invitation or you make arrangements."  And today, he still laughs about that; we have fun with that.  They're, they're still together, twenty-some years, both of 'em.
Speaker 2: So you've--you think it's important for people to reach an--reach agreement before they do the things they do.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  We, we have to reach some kind of agreement.  You, you have to give--and you have to give and take.  You can't raise a child with your life.  You might can impart some things from your life and you try to pick out the best things and impart them, too, but you have to accept what they have to offer, whatever they bring to the table.  You have to weigh it up.  And, like going to the store, you buy a T-bone steak, they take a little white piece of paper and put it on the scale, they put the meat on there, weight it up, and put another paper and then they wrap it up and they put a price tag on it, and you go by and pay that.  You go home, you throw the paper away, you cook the meat, you cut the bone out, you eat the meat, then you throw the bone away.  So then whatever they bring to the table, we weigh it and we accept it.  What's good, we keep it, what's bad, they help me throw it away (laughter), we take it out.  Oh, they've made some mistakes, but not many.
Speaker 2: Now let me--
Speaker 1: I don't claim nothin' from my children.  Education-wise, they, they educated themselves primarily.  They always knew they had backup.  But my son, I remember vividly him borrowing eight hundred dollars in his third year of college, I believe.  He didn't ask me for it.  We never had anything too much, but we had this house.  We, we was about through payin' for it.  And I told him, you can do anything with it you want to.  You can sell it, you can borrow it, you can do anything, but get your education.  It's better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it.  And I had to learn that lesson the hard way, so I, I, I left my children open and they did it.  There's no such thing as people braggin' about what they done.  You can instill certain elements of spirit into a child and they will grow, but they make it grow.  You don't make it grow.  And that's just our philosophy.  We, we still have it.  We, we, we can argue about something from the bedroom, before we get to the stairway, we look at each other and see how foolish it is.  We don't--there's a time to reconcile and that's the story I told to the church when they began to call and put me on the floor and said I was one of the best reconcilers.  I hadn't done anything except stated some facts, some true philosophies in my life.  And I guess that's the way I am.
Story_ID: 289791
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  We, we always ask this question.  I wanna take you back to childhood.  Can, can you tell--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I have practically all my childhood memories.
Speaker 1: What's your first one?
Speaker 2: The first real vivid memory I have, when--one that hangs with me all through the years has been the, the year that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was elected president and the [Atlanta] Constitution [Atlanta-Journal Constitution] had a brown section in it, the, the newspaper had a brown section, and most folk would frame that brown section, find an old frame, frame it and hang it on the wall for a picture.  And I remember so vividly when Roosevelt went into office and everybody was talkin' about the [President Herbert Clark] Hoover days and whatnot, and then they come out with the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  And even then, I had a sound reasoning and I was--I had discussed it with a civics teacher I had at [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time.  I wasn't in high school but I was at school and we were just goin' out there.  And I asked him, "How can they say he's doin' so much when so little is bein' accomplished?"  And he said, "He has--he has--he has jobs comin' with salaries comin' in."  And, and that's what people wanted, but he didn't do it for you, you happened to get caught up in it, so tell me how is he so great?  And I never understood that.  And I, I remember that so vividly.  And then when I went to his class some years later, the first thing he had up on the board was a great big sign that had T-H-I-N-K with an exclamation point behind it, think.  And ever since I wondered about everything.  Sometimes I'm wrong, sometimes I'm right, but I wondered about anything.
Speaker 1: Now, how, how old were you when you came up with that--
Speaker 2: When he came into office, it was--I was almost ten years old, when Roosevelt came into office.
Speaker 1: It was 1936?
Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was born in '26 [1926].  He came in--well, no, he came in in '32 [1932].
Speaker 1: Thirty-two, right.
Speaker 2: He was elected--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in '32 [1932], yeah.  Well--
Speaker 1: So he was re-elected in '36 [1936].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I was really six or seven years old 'cause I started school that same year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talkin' about 1932, then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: On the first year that he--first time.  And he's about the only one has been elected what, three times?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.  But I liked--I liked the profile and I like it even better now that I've started to like people.  He was a human being.  He wasn't just--and, and, and for people that never knew, they always thought he was sanctified and holy, you know?  I was always wondering about that.  I wondered about people.  I wondered--I wondered about choices you make, why you make the choice you make?  Why really?  (Laughter) Like I said, I--when I exclaimed a while ago when you all said you were vegetarian and almost immediately it bounced off my head, why?  And then I, I remember when how people used to--didn't eat nothin' but vegetables.  There was no such thing as eatin' no meat.  But then I, I remember when things changed, everything changed, you ate anything you want as long as it's blessed.  And whatever God cleanses is already automatically.  But then there's some things health-wise that we didn't know about and I wonder about it.  I, I have a friend--that boy I showed you in the book.  His uncle died in '99 [1999], dranked every day of his life (unclear).  I never saw a day he didn't drink that I knew, but he lived to be ninety-nine, walked strong.  When he got sick, he went on and died, he didn't linger no--I wondered about it sometimes.  What is it?  In my childhood, they--I remember, like '35 [1935], I remember the freeze in '35 [1935].  I remember because of my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows].
Speaker 1: The freeze you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: Well, it froze and trees broke down and limbs broke off.
Speaker 1: Ice storm?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And he said, "Son, what's your--what's your chores?"  I said I had to get the wood supply.  He said, "Take advantage of it."  And I went out and got all the limbs that was frozen and broke 'em with a pick handle and had wood stacked all upside the little shed outside.  He said, take advantage of every situation.  And I have been outside in my bare feet, and it was cold, and I didn't remember having a cold.  He used to have a--in 1935, I remember that one, because it was so hard.  We'd never seen a freeze like that.  And he would take the two kids of us, me and my cousin, and he'd take a cup with hot water and put a tablespoonful of corn whiskey in it and a teaspoonful of sugar and stir it up, and we drank that cup of--we called it a hot toddy; never had a cold, never had a cold.  And I remember those things because he would take me in the woods and find sassafras tea, dig it up out of the ground; yellow root.  He'd take it and boil it, put it together and you'd--every day or so, you'd take a tablespoonful of it.  You stayed open all the time; no congestion.  And sometimes I think about those things.  Those are my earliest experience 'cause all of my experiences were with older people.
Story_ID: 287739
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The alum [aluminum] plant where my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows] worked.  It was right above where we passed this park on the right.  All that belonged to them.  They had a big hole where all the chemical waste went into that hole.
Speaker 1: Now you grew up here in East Point, Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right outside of Atlanta [Georgia].  It's like--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which way is, is what?
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: Which way from Atlanta?
Speaker 2: --south.
Speaker 1: South of Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It--it's like southwest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Southeast, you run into Hapeville [Georgia] over there, but you'd go through part of East Point, but it's, it's south from Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And this is like mostly a black community here in--
Speaker 2: This is on this side.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: East Point at that time was all white and the only space we had was between Central Avenue and Washington Road [Washington Avenue], and this was the end of this street right here.  Because where them apartments are over there, Montel Homes [East Point, Georgia], was a white village where white mill workers lived, came here with the mill over--see, we had seven mills up and down that street.  That's when East Point was Georgia's seventh largest industrial city.
Speaker 1: Were these saw mills or?  Paper mill?
Speaker 2: Cotton mills.
Speaker 1: Cotton mills.  Cotton mills.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had two chemical plants.  They made alum and stuff like that.  And people got jobs, and oddly enough, everybody made the same thing, twelve dollars a week and they'd take out a penny on each dollar, so everybody made eleven eighty-eight a week from the steel plant all the way up to the chemical plant [Hercules Powder Company; Hercules, Inc.], terracotta, where they made stuff outta terracotta, pipe and stuff.  And everybody lived primarily--this area was called Simtown [ph.].  We had four major streets.  We had Holcomb Street [Holcomb Avenue], we had Randall Street, we had Georgia Avenue, and then we had this area down here called Simtown because people named Sims lived on both of these streets, this one and the next one over.  There wasn't anything beyond that because the ball field was down there; that's where we played at.  And this area was black.  Behind hos- South Fulton Hospital [South Fulton Medical Center, Atlanta, Georgia] was about fifteen or twenty black families lived back there.  That was the place they called Grabon [ph.].  Across the railroad track between Egan Park [East Point, Georgia] where whites lived was a, a little section called Jungle Foot.  They had Cherry Street and Magnolia Street, two streets over there, and they had about, oh, I guess fifteen families, black in there.  That was the whole--that was the total of all the black population of East Point.  We had these major streets over here, and most of it was owned by a white furniture store owner up in East Point named Nix [ph.], had them little gunshot houses, three rooms straight back and you looked right straight through 'em.  And they would--you could holler out, jump out one window to the next one and the next down.  And they rented 'em and normally rent went--in that day, rent went for--if you made eleven dollars and twelve dollars a week, you played twelve dollars a month rent.  You paid one week's salary for rent.  And that was--that was the East Point that I know then.  [TW1]And I remember where I lived, they had the community grocery store on one corner, the schoolhouse--now, it was on like the north, northeast corner and the grocery store was on like on the southeast corner, and the schoolhouse was on the corner behind it, so I had no reason to get off that street ever except maybe twice a month I went to a movie; my uncle or somebody would take me to a movie and we went downtown East Point to a movie.  And you had to go around the side door and go upstairs to that place up there.  But it was some--but we were fortunate here in East Point 'cause we had the only school; we had the only high school.  Kids from College Park [Georgia], Palmetto [Georgia], Hapeville, they had to come here to go to school.  We had the only theater; they had to come here and go to the theater.  So--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your theater?
Speaker 2: Fairfax, F-A-I-R-F-A-X, Fairfax Theatre [East Point, Georgia].  Now, there were two theaters here at the time, but we couldn't go to the other one; it was across the railroad track.
Speaker 1: That was an all-white theater?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There were--and we, we could go to Fairfax and go upstairs, had a black ticket taker up there named Fisher Campbell [ph.]; he used to live right up the street.  And some of our great families even worked in that theater.
Story_ID: 287740
Speaker 1: Sir, could you sit back a little 'cause you're, you're out of the light when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: When you lean too far forward, you're out of the light, that's all.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that was--that was the East Point [Georgia] that I knew then.  It was--my first job was possibly 1940, I guess.  I worked at a drug store at the corner of Main Street and Church Street.  Main Street was two-way then.
Speaker 1: Now, now I don't wanna get too far ahead, now, but I wanna go back to when you were a little kid.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was asking you about sights and sounds and smells.  I mean, what did your neighborhood look like and what, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells when you were a kid growing up here?
Speaker 2: Like fertilizer when the wind shifted, 'cause you, you had fertilizer plant down at the end of the mill when they rolled that cotton and put their cotton seed out there.
Speaker 1: Fertilizer must smell--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: Doesn't smell good, does it?
Speaker 2: No.  It, it--but once you got used to the smell, you know, you, you, you didn't pay it that much attention; you didn't take note to it.  Then you had that field where the mill went towards, there was--they had--a guy had a couple of horses in there, and they roamed that.  That kept you from going through there 'cause you--normally, you'd be afraid of 'em.  And then on the other side of it was a village and you couldn't go through there anyway 'cause it was all white.  And you didn't--you didn't go out of your territory at night.
Speaker 1: Now how did you know what your territory was?  I mean, did, did the older people tell you?
Speaker 2: They would tell you and then they'd run you on over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They--and then it worked the other way around too.  Sometime we caught them coming through our territory, shortcut and going to the theater [Fairfax Theatre, East Point, Georgia].  See, they lived right over there and the theater was up here, so they had to come across through, and sometime we put the hype on them too, send them moving down through there.  They did, I was too young to, to participate in that kinda stuff.  But we--farming was what interested me as a kid mostly.  I lived on Georgia Avenue and the man next door to me, Deacon [Charles A.] Green, that's the man that I supposedly succeeded as the community leader.  He was chairman of the deacon board at the largest church here in the community, and he farmed for the government.  Remember the government--I don't know whether you--you can't remember that now, but the government used to give them a cow and a mule, so many chickens, so much seed, and they could raise it and plant it.  And he had all this farm area.  His, his bottom ground was down behind South Fulton [Avenue], down in that area, and his potato field was right up on top of the hill; you can see it.  But from here, it's right across the street over there.  From where I lived up there, you could see it across the alley.  And, and I loved to go to the field.  I loved the farm.  I, I never been on a farm in my life, but I loved to go and walk in dirt, fresh plowed dirt.  I just loved it.  I don't know why I did, and I don't know where I got that from.
Story_ID: 287741
Speaker 1: Mr. Charlie [ph.] was a--he was a farmer, had a mule named Ada, and that was when I--and I think--now, as a kid, I had no, no, no relative toys to play with.  My fourth grade teacher was Dr. Patricia Hurd [ph.], and she's here in East Point [Georgia].  Her mother, she used to live right down the street.  She taught me--and her sister taught me in the first grade.  But she taught me what the first Christmas tree was and I stole my [maternal] grandfather's [James Meadows] saw and went to the woods down behind where Washington Road [Washington Avenue] is now.  And an old white fellow was farmin' on the other side of Deacon [Charles A.] Green, and he saw us over there, and he ran us out, supposedly was gonna shoot.  He was shootin' at us, he's just shootin' up in the air.  And I broke my grandfather's saw in two tryin' to get it out the pine.  That was the first Christmas tree I'd ever seen.  We brought it to school.  We, we didn't leave that tree.  We run with that tree, got to school, and put them planks around it and stood it up.  And we didn't know what decorations for a Christmas tree--we made our decorations.  We took colored paper or took paint, white paper and colored it and cut it in strips and made circles and glued it together, but we put one under another and we'd have chain of loops, and that's what we threw over the Christmas tree.
Speaker 2: Now, how old were you when you did that?
Speaker 1: About nine, nine years old, first Christmas tree I'd ever seen.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of your school?
Speaker 1: Bayard Street School [East Point, Georgia].[AB2]
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Bayard Street.
Speaker 2: Bayard Street.
Speaker 1: B-A-Y-A-R-D.
Speaker 2: B-A--okay.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.  We didn't--I didn't know what a Christmas tree was 'cause our Christmas was a, a chair set beside the bed.  Then, you wake up Christmas morning and they'd have two little pieces of hard candy, two jelly candies, and a--they had grapes but they were in clusters like raisins on a cluster; you don't see 'em now, but they--and then you had a gift of some sort.  And that was your total Christmas.  One apple, one orange, and that was done.  And we didn't know what a tree was.  In fact, we never had a tree in our house until, oh, shucks I done got married, first tree we ever had.  But I, I loved Christmas.  I think my most vivid memory of my [maternal] grandmother's [Mattie Atkins Meadows] harshness was I found my Christmas gift one year and I told her, "I knew what I was gonna get anyway."  I had that smart mouth.  She said, "From now on, you do your own Christmas shopping."  And the next Christmas we got a dollar a piece, me and my cousin.
Story_ID: 287742
Speaker 1: I always thought I was the black sheep in the family.  I always thought--my mother [Ola Mae Meadows] would send her money to my grandparents [Mattie Atkins Meadows and James Meadows] and they, they lived--we, we lived off of that, everybody lived off.  But my aunt [Ruby Meadows] would--she'd send her boy little toys and my mother would turn over in her grave if she knew I was even saying anything about it.  For instance, he got a toy, you wind it up, it was yellow and brown, and it, it would run and when it got to a wall, it would turn if you didn't turn it.  I got one of them little things with four wheels on it; if you didn't push it, it didn't move.  When he got a blank, I got a camp busted that shot one camp.  He got a long pant suit on credit, could ask any [U.S.] Marine downtown and I was wearing knickerbockers.  But he was two years older than I was.  And at that time, you didn't even associate with kids that was older than you were.  That was a disciplinary thing.  On the street where I lived, this one woman lived down the street, was raised on that same street, we played together.  But her parents was the most intelligent parents I believed I'd ever seen.  When they got ready to call her home, if, if I stayed out, momma would say, "All right, boy, it's dark out there, get your tail in here," and I had to get on in there right then, embarrassed to the devil.  But her momma would come out in the street and whistle and go back in the house.  But she had to return that whistle to let her know she had heard her, and she'd play about ten more minutes and then she'd ease on out.  We always thought she had her way about everything 'cause she told us, you know, later on in life.  Toys, I never got.  I told that boy, he got a motorcycle one year, a little battery operated motorcycle.  We made our toys.  You take a coat hanger and fold it up and take the hook to hang and get you a wheel and a, a, a stave off a barrel around, and go running out in the street with it, making sounds like (makes noise), I'm a Buick, I'm a Ford, I'm a--you made your toys.  Didn't ever have a pair of skates.  You find skates somebody'd done, one pair after done 'em once and, oh, I need to throw away the pair, take that one, take it apart and put one in on the end of a two by four and one on the other end of a two by four, nail one to it up this way, make a skate scooter.  Toys, homemade toys.  Take clothes pins, put rubber bands around 'em, make flips.  We didn't have no toys.  I had a bicycle when I was in junior high [Bayard Street School, East Point, Georgia].
Story_ID: 287743
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows] died--I guess that's why I love him so much.  He, he had an insurance that had about sixty dollars in it, Pilgrim [Insurance] policy, and he got sick and my momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] got sick, and I stayed off.  Now, that was one of the requirements.  You had to learn to cook, you had to learn to wash, and my job was to beat out the clothes as a five, six year old boy.  And I learned to cook.  And I stayed home outta school and cooked for them.  And she--he told her, if I don't make it, give that boy that insurance policy, let him do what he want to with it, and she did just that when he died.  That's how I got my first bicycle.
Speaker 2: How old were you then?
Speaker 1: The same year that I went to work at the drugstore.  Was that forty--'41 [1941], '42 [1942]?  I was maybe thirteen, fourteen years old, thirteen years old, not fourteen, thirteen.  'Cause he wouldn't let me drive--ride except in daylight.  I'd ride up to Newman Avenue [ph.] and south to where Washington [Avenue] cross.  And when it got dark, I called curb.  I stayed outside and called curb outside the drugstore.  He paid me two dollars a week to catch curb and four dollars to week to ride.  But I never got none of that money.  He paid momma.  He gave it to my grandmother.  After I got that one bicycle--we used to make bicycles.  Somebody'd throw away a wheel, we'd grab it, we'd find a frame laying on the junk pile, we'd take that frame, put that wheel on it and find us another wheel and we'd make--sometimes the whole community be done made a bicycle.  And when I got that one, to my surprise, I rode it to work up there and some pilot ran over it up on the sidewalk.  He run off the sidewalk--off the street up on the sidewalk, crushed it.  I guess I cried a month over that bicycle.  But I never did give it up.  I took the wheels off and put some more wheels on it, old raggedy wheels, no fender.  I rode it to school downtown, [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia], every day.  You wouldn't believe it.  I pulled a boy home on the frame of that bicycle for a nickel.  What--I mean, we didn't--you know, I never--I never dreamed that I was ever poor--never did dream that I was ever poor.  But I pulled Clarence [ph.] home; he was my best friend.  And I remember one day we was coming through (unclear) and the front wheel blew out on that thing and I had hold to a truck.  Then, the truck pulled us home; we'd still ride like that.  And me and him both was holding it 'cause it wouldn't go down 'cause the tires were flat.  Finally, we had to turn it loose and we'd skin up everything, bicycle, us, and everything.  But for a nickel I put in it, that's all a token cost for a nickel; he'd give me his token, and I'd take the token to school the next day and swap it for milk, peanut butter sandwich, anything, just waste money.  And that was--that was our thing.  That's what momma gave me.  And she gave me fifty cent a week for lunch, fifty cent a week for transportation.  And I--we made it.
Story_ID: 287744
Speaker 1: But I never considered being poor 'cause it kept me clean, I went to church every Sunday, and I had nowhere else to go.
Speaker 2: Now, what church did you attend?
Speaker 1: That one I showed you right on the corner, Mallalieu United Methodist Church.  It was Mallalieu Methodist Church [East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] then, didn't have no United.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: M-A-L-L-A-L-I-E-U, Mallalieu.
Speaker 2: Now what does that mean and what is it--what was it from?
Speaker 1: It was named for a French bishop who was very prominent in freeing the slaves.  He was from Massachusetts and they moved him to Louisiana, and they, they got several churches across the south named for him, white bishop, Bishop Willard [Francis] Mallalieu.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Mallalieu United Methodist?
Speaker 1: Now--it was--
Speaker 2: Methodist Church?
Speaker 1: Methodist Church then, and--
Speaker 2: Methodist.  Yeah, that's before United Methodist was formed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in '68 [1968] it became United Methodist.  I was at the conference in Dallas [Texas] when they united with EUB [Evangelical United Brethren church].
Story_ID: 287745
Speaker 1: But I--momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] wouldn't let me--I went out--when I got a little older, I went out for school team in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], made the team, but I just made the traveling team; I didn't make the first string team.
Speaker 2: Now, now you liked to play baseball, right?
Speaker 1: I played baseball but that was football.
Speaker 2: That was football, okay.
Speaker 1: They didn't have no baseball team then.  And I couldn't go, 'cause momma didn't let me be out at night, and they played Friday night football games, and she didn't play.  And momma said--she'd whip me, and she didn't whip clothed neither.  Wherever you did it, if it was at church, it was in the street, she dropped your clothes right there and whipped you.  I thought she was the meanest person ever lived.  But I could have a lot of fun with her.  And my son [Ronsonn M. Jackson], he couldn't--when she had a heart attack at ninety-some years old, ninety-one.  He would lay down there and hide behind that seat, and when she stepped off that step, he'd tickle under her foot and holler at her and scare her.  She'd get up and just hug him to death.  And when I'd come around there, she'd almost be dead, but she loved that boy.  She's a good woman, she just--she was mean, mean.  I 'aint telling no lies, she was mean.  She whipped my behind the last time and I told her, I can't stand this, I had--I got to get outta here.  That was one of the things that influenced me into goin' into the service [U.S. civil service].  And I, I regretted it 'cause this cousin I was talking about that wanted to educated me, Wilbur Scott, said, "I want you to be a doctor.  You make it through high school, I'll send you to college, finish your education."  When I come through there, I said, no, I'm fixing to [TW3]leave here.
Speaker 2: What was your cousin's name again?
Speaker 1: Wilber Scott.
Speaker 2: Wilber Scott?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And--well tell me, let's go back to grade school [Bayard Street School, East Point, Georgia].  Did, did you like school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't no problem for me.  My cousin was two years older than I was, so he'd come home and teach me.  I could read and write before I went to school.  In fact, they sent me to the third grade the first year I went to school and they got mad and said that was too much.  My mother said, send him back somewhere else.  I went back to the first grade.  Back then, they had kindergarten, but I could read and write, wasn't no point in me goin' to kindergarten.  And that's what I learned about my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows].  My cousin taught me to read, but my grandfather taught me to interpret words.  He couldn't read nothing but he could spell it.  He had a St. Luke testament.  If he was gonna say Jesus Christ, he'd say J-E-G-S-U-S, sus [ph.], Jesus, C-H-H-R-I-S-T, Christ, Jesus Christ, and one word at a time, he'd read a sentence.  But then I could fluently read through it, and I said, "Daddy, what do that mean?"  And he'd take time, walk me--he had a little hog pen over there by the chemical plant [Hercules Powder Company; Hercules, Inc.], and he'd walk me to the hog pen.  Whenever my momma fussed at him, he'd take me by the hand and lead me away from the house.  He'd take me to the hog pen and he'd explain things to me.  St. Luke testament, he could read.  He had one book in his pocket.  And he'd, he'd read, let me read it to him, he'd interpret it.  And I was still maybe eight years old.  I went with him to a conference, old folks, wasn't no conference.  Old church folk would meet on a corner somewhere and argue with Bible.  We walked all the way to Hapeville [Georgia] down there and the man was telling me that Christ wasn't birthed, he was born.  I said, "You gotta be crazy.  You people don't know what you're talking about."  Now, he said, "Boy, are you sassing me?"  "No, but you just wrong."  He said, "Are you telling me I'm a liar (laughter)?"  I said, "I don't how you called it, but you wrong."  And do you know there were no telephones on my street.  By the time we walked from Hapeville back home, momma already had fixed the switch and has the pl--.  How the word got back to her, I'll never know.  She said, "Boy, you been sassing grown folk?"  I told her, "No, I wasn't sassing."  And she said, "Jim, did he sass?"  And he said, "Well, he talked back to him, but he was right."  "Either right or wrong, you don't talk back to old folk."  She whooped my behind and I regretted that, 'til this day  I don't like people tellin' kids, especially when they're right, be, be orderly, be respectful, but let 'em have their say.  If it's--if it's--if it's true, accept it.  Don't, don't, don't make 'em out a liar when they're trying to be right.
Story_ID: 287746
Speaker 1: But that was--speech, I never could say a speech.  I'd get up with them little ole buckle-up britches, no, I think I was too ashamed.  You know what Buster Browns were, they had a little thing that you could hang down but you pulled 'em up and buckled 'em around your knees, and I always wore mine hangin' down.  Momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] said I was so mad I couldn't learn to speak, never said one a day in my life.  Get up there and start cryin'.  My granddaddy [James Meadows] come and get me.  Well, we just had our--our, our--my childhood was a family relationship.  The only baseball I ever knew then, we had a tennis ball and as we got bigger, like eight, nine years old, we'd throw that tennis ball and swing at it with a broom handle.  If you can hit a tennis ball with a broom handle, you can pretty well hit anything.
Speaker 2: I agree.
Speaker 1: But I--my childhood was to the store, to church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia], to school, and that's it.  Nothing else.  No addition.  I never went nowhere.
Speaker 2: Were these things very close?  They were close by?  Church--was the church--
Speaker 1: On each corner.
Speaker 2: --close by?  Right.
Speaker 1: Church was up on this corner, school was on the other corner, the grocery store across the street from the church.  The only people I knew was the people that belonged to the church.  Some lived up on the next street, but I saw 'em at church.  All of 'em are dead now.
Story_ID: 287747
Speaker 1: When you were in school, did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All, all--Miss Gray [ph.], she taught me in fifth grade [at Bayard Street School, East Point, Georgia].  Miss Churn [ph.] taught me in fourth grade.  Miss Tatum [ph.] taught me in sixth grade; she's one of my favorite.  She learned me a new word, instigator.  I had never heard of the word instigator 'til I got in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Did she--did she--who did she use it in reference to?
Speaker 2: A friend of mine, Mark--the name of Mark Green [ph.].  She said, "You just a regular little instigator," and I said, "What does that mean, Miss Tatum?"  And she said, "Stink stirrer (laughter)."  And I never--I never did forget that.  But Miss Gray, she married a Cole [ph.].  She was one of my favorite teachers.  And Miss Ruby [ph.], she showed me the Christmas tree.  She was a favorite.  I still got some of her things in the notebook where I never was absent or tardy a day in her classroom, stuff like that with her signature.  Her daughter wants it so bad, she don't know what to do.  But I didn't have any other favorites except--'cause by the time I got up to the seventh grade, they had started letting young black girls come out of school, teach--then, they'd come outta college and start teaching.  And they, they kinda shown that we was getting stinkified then, you know, getting managed.  And they--I never had any favorite teacher up there.  McClarin [Frank S. McClarin] was my favorite of all favorites.  He was the principal.  He taught me algebra.  But we were--we were--we were past--we were using some geometric theory until we were in his class.
Speaker 1: And how--what, what--at what age?
Speaker 2: At eighth and ninth grade.  When we left ninth grade out here and went to [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] to a city school, we didn't go to tenth grade.  We went straight to the eleventh grade and didn't need to go down.  Everybody went out there and I don't never remember nobody failing them grades.  Once you finished ninth grade out here under McClarin and Harrod [ph.], she was a favorite English teacher and I didn't like English.  But she was one of my favorite teachers, try and buy her an RC Cola every day and bring it to school.  McClarin (unclear) for the teacher 'cause he, he threatened to slap me one day and I told him I'll defend myself.  He said, "That's exactly what I expected you to do.  If you win, you win.  'Aint gonna be no consequences."  He said, "But I'll tear your little butt up," and I believed him (laughter), and that was the end of that.  But he was--he was a good teacher.  After that, I went to Washington High.  I got my first B or C when I got to senior high school.  Never had--I didn't know what it was to get less than an A in a subject, especially mathematics.  I got an--I--
Speaker 1: Now what, what was Washington High School like?  Was that a--was that--was that an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, city school.
Speaker 1: Was it Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Downtown [Atlanta, Georgia], city school.
Story_ID: 288953
Speaker 1: So you went into high school, into the eleventh grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From out here [Bayard Street School, East Point, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a graduation exercise at the ninth grade and that was the one that I showed you that little picture of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where you had to wear white linen pants with black coat.  There were--all those people on that picture except maybe Evelyn [ph.] is, is practically dead except Jimmy [ph.] and one more girl.
Speaker 1: So you went through middle school out here, and then when you went to high school, you went to--
Speaker 2: Wasn't no such thing as middle school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You went from elementary school, which was like sixth grade they called it, but then you had a seventh grade, and then you went--we had a graduation exercise in the seventh grade and we went over to junior high, which would've normally been--at [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia], it would've been--you'd a just been in high school in your freshman year.  But we had a graduation at the ninth grade, but we did not have to go to the tenth grade.  We went from the ninth grade to the eleventh grade.  And, like I said, we really didn't have to go there, 'cause we had been--we had been well taught.  McLarin [Frank S. McClarin] didn't have no junk.  They, they were teachers.  They'd love you to death and then--well, they whipped you in school then, too.  I used to get some lashes in my hand 'cause I talked a lot.  I run my mouth a minute.  And he was--I called his wife by her name and boy he, he, he put stripes all across my hand.  Her name was Rosemary Clemens [sic. Rosa Lee McClarin].
Speaker 1: Was she a teacher?
Speaker 2: No.  But I knew her sister who's younger.  She was pretty.  And I thought I was familiar enough with the family to call her by her first--man, he lit me up.  But he was a good teacher.  And in his spare time, he didn't waste no time.  If you were sitting around talking like we are, he'd get your book out, and my number was ten; I never will forget it.  My, my number to all my algebraic studies was ten.  He'd say, "Number ten," he wouldn't never call anybody a name, "number ten, tell me what this is.  If A is this and B is this, what is AB?"  "I don't--I don't know."  But we had a girl in my class named Flossa Nims [ph.] and it was a lady in the city that never could learn math.  And every year, she gave a prize, a, a monetary prize to the person with the best mathematician in the class, and we tied for it every year.  The only advantage I had over her is she couldn't never complete nothing.  If she had 2A equals to 10, she couldn't tell you what A equals to save her life.  She'd get to that point and quit.  Then I'd just go on and put A equal to five.  And, and, and he knew she knew what she was doing, but she was--at that point, she--simple things, she couldn't do.  Hard things, she'd tear 'em up.  And Gervard Smith [ph.], another boy, we sit side by side, and out of--I think we supposed to have--like if we supposed to work ten problems, he had maybe fifteen, you had your choice, we work all fifteen of 'em.  And we both come up with an A and he couldn't believe it.  He said he just didn't believe two people could have the same answer and not talk to each other, and we sit side by side.  So he separated us, made us take another test and we did the same thing again and both of us got an A plus that year.  Professor Gay [ph.] used to live right on this lot by that house, just part of this house here.  He was one of the smartest people that ever went through this community and he didn't get one of those, but I got one.
Story_ID: 288954
Speaker 1: And in the next year, I went to [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a D in geometry.  Ooo, it hurt me so bad.  It hurt me.
Speaker 2: So why, why, why did you end up--end up with a D?
Speaker 1: New territory.  New territory.  I went to Washington High and I found myself up on the corner at Amos [Drug Store, Atlanta, Georgia], you could cut class, nobody would know you cut.  They didn't know whether you come or not.  I'd be up to Amos eating them--I think I put in that letter to my grandson, one of my favorite foods back then was a glorified split and when they took one of them link sausages and split it half in two and put a tomato on it and dressed it, now, we called it a glorified split, split.  And I'd go up there and get me a glorified split and a Coke, fountain Coke, and just sit there.  And I wasn't doing no studying.  And here before, McClarin [Frank S. McClarin] would sit down with us and have us--you know, we figure that--when I was in the seventh grade [at Bayard Street School, East Point, Georgia], I'd go up to the eighth grade and work algebra problems, 'cause he, he worked with us.  He'd give you--in his spare time, if you wanted to hang around the school, you could hang around there and he'd study with you.  Miss Harris [ph.], the same way.  She wasn't in no hurry to go home in the evening.  And if necessary, she'd go by your house with you.  You had to feed her, though.  She--and she loved RC Cola.  You buy her a RC Cola, you could just about walk the floor.  And consequently, our students come out--if a class had fifty students--had forty-five was about the most I remember having in a class, out of forty-five students, forty-four of 'em would be top notch students, and that one would be some little sorry drop out.
Speaker 2: Now, now, Washington was quite a distance from--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --East Point [Georgia], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So how, how far do you think it was?
Speaker 1: Well, Washington High was city school more or less.
Speaker 2: It was behind Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I heard.  Is, is that--is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  It was over on C Street [ph.] and you could--it was last, last place you get to before the park, they had a Washington Park [Atlanta, Georgia] out there, and it was right on the edge of the park.  Hunter Street went right by the lower football field at Washington High.  It was up on C Street, have a great big statue of Booker T. Washington up now.  And what's this guy, used to play that--them things for the president, Jackson, Graham [W.] Jackson used to play.  Well, he played for [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt, played them, whatever them things then.  Well, he lived right across the street from the school and we just enjoyed walkin' by his house.  But you didn't--you didn't learn very much there.  Sports was the main thing at Washington High.  Coach Baker [Leslie "L.C." Baker] was the coach--(unclear).  I remember one boy went to Washington High I bet eight years.  I think they just took him out and carried him over the cloth, set him on the football field 'cause he could play.  And, and the coach wouldn't let me make the team that first year.  And he came out here one Sunday and watched us play on a field covered with glass and stuff, no grass, red dirt.
Speaker 2: Playing baseball or football?
Speaker 1: Football.
Speaker 2: Football, okay.
Speaker 1: But it was behind second base, between second base and the fence.  We played baseball there too.  And I was lightin' him up.  He wasn't comin' through there no kinda way.  I was--I was--I wasn't quite fourteen, but I was playin' with some men that was twenty-eight, thirty.
Speaker 2: Were you big for your age?
Speaker 1: Not big, crazy (laughter).  They kicked my two front teeth out and I stuck 'em back in and put a handkerchief in my mouth and kept on playin' (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did they--did they take root back?
Speaker 1: They took root back until I got older, and then they started aching and had to take them out.  But man, I--and then he asked me if I wanted to play and I told him yeah.  But then, like I said, momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] wouldn't let me play.  On Sunday, I'd sneak off after church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] and she gave me a little leeway.  I'd run down there on the field and pull them tall pads up over my suit and play.  They thought I was pretty good.  That's why they let me play baseball.  I had never played no baseball. I come home out the [U.S.] Army.  Like driving, I never driving anything.  I went in the Army, the guy said, "Can you drive?"  "Yeah, I can drive."  He let me roll the wheelbarrow around for a while and then I, I got used to that.  I finally got a way I can shift gears.  I scratched a few gears for a while.  I got to where I could--didn't even need no clutch, take the gas and shift gears with it.  That's why I tell ya, I believing if you gonna do something, do it good.  If you can't do it good, then leave it alone.  And I've always figured--and that's, that's comforting saying--not that I'm that good, but I always figured I was the best at doing whatever I done.  I was better than anybody.  And never--wasn't nobody gonna be no better than me.  And you were not gonna sit around me and know something that I didn't know.  You wasn't gonna stay around me and not let me know something.  I had to learn something from ya.  That's why at the church I became a prominent figure.  I knew when to keep my mouth shut and when to open it.
Story_ID: 288955
Speaker 1: Did you finish high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] or did you--
Speaker 2: I left in my twelfth year, in my twelfth year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't graduate.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, not with my class.
Speaker 1: This is nineteen forty--
Speaker 2: Two [1942].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-two [1942].  And you joined the [U.S.] Army then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you said your, your [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Atkins Meadows] was pretty mean, so that was the catalyst?
Speaker 2: That was the catalyst for me getting away from there.
Speaker 1: And this is in the--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if you're a high school kid, I never went to--got to go to one of the proms, the junior prom or nothin' like that.  I couldn't go.  And then she got out in the middle of the street and whipped me with my pants down.  That, that was totally embarrassing.  And my aunt [Ruby Meadows] was a liberal-minded person.  My aunt took me down there and she was gonna sign me in and they said you had to be eighteen, and I told 'em what my age was.  And I said, "Well, that's all right, next month I'll be eighteen."  I went back, back in November and signed up.  My mother [Ola Mae Meadows] came to get me out in March over at Camp Lee, Virginia [Fort Lee, Prince George County, Virginia], and the first sergeant told her he wouldn't advise it, that I was pretty well-settled for a kid my age.  And I stayed on in there and fought through it.
Speaker 1: Now you were really sixteen, though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Put it up two years.  But it was--it was an experience.  I hadn't had no experience.  I hadn't dated but one person and then didn't date her, just went down to her house one time.  Her daddy sit there and talk to me all that time.  I wouldn't go back no more.  I didn't wanna talk to him.  And then (laughter) I tell her now, sometimes, I never seen her. And I went back--and I went, went in the service.  I went to Virginia and left Virginia and went to Texas, and by just coming out of school, I went into--like I told you combat engineering unit down in Texas, and I became a demolition expert.  I could calculate charges.  Oh, man.  I was--that's what I started to tell you.  I could--I could do calculus before I left high--algebra with McClarin [Frank S. McClarin], just minor things, you know?  And we got out there and Lieutenant Robinson, James [E.] Robinson [Jr.], was in the outfit, and he could take a tree and take the sides of it and put nitrous starts on either end of it, and he'd have a breaker and a kicker, and he could pick something according to where he wanted to send it.  He could put one on the mess tent.  He said, "Y'all wanna tear down the tent?  Think y'all gonna eat today (laughter)?"  He'd put one on the mess tent.  And I learned to calculate charges.  Then I learned to build pontoon bridges.  We went and put a bridge across the Colorado River.  We was in Texas then.  And that's what I'm telling ya, they--the people around the government don't--don't ever pay any attention about the government runnin' the people.  The people still running the government.  If it's bad, it's some bad people runnin' it, people running the government.  'Cause they had a tank destroyer battalion down there and they'd said they didn't want no black tank bat--destroyer battalion in Texas, and they wiped them out and brought them up there with us as engineers.  Oh, I remember a time, Lena Horne came to visit us and they wouldn't even let us see her until after she done went up to the officer's club.  It was--Texas was a terrible place.  I was out at Bastrop, Texas.  And we left there and went into AVS.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bastrop?
Speaker 2: B-A-S-T-R-O-P, Bastrop, I guess that's the name of it.
Speaker 1: That's--okay.
Speaker 2: Bastrop, Texas.  It was Camp Swift [Bastrop County, Texas] was the name of the camp.  It was Camp Swift, Texas.  And we left there and went to--well, we left there going to--headin' for overseas.  I stayed a few days over time.  I shouldn't stayed but, but I finally caught up with 'em in Massachusetts.  And we left Massachusetts, going to Scotland, to England, and you know the rest of the story, went onto France, the World War II [WWII] thing.
Story_ID: 288956
Speaker 1: Well, the--we were talkin' about it before but it wasn't on tape, so--
Speaker 2: No, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --we have to talk about it now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, you, you went to France--now, you all went over there as an engineer and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Right, and then--but you had to change--
Speaker 2: We had to change to quartermaster battalion called 4253rd trucking company, and there was a 4251st, 4252nd, 4253rd, and a 4254.
Speaker 1: And that's, that's the company that--I mean, it's--those companies were called the Red Ball Express.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well our company was called Red Ball Express, 'cause the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --two companies got wiped out going in, and we was on the Red Ball Express.  We was in the advanced section, communication zone.
Speaker 1: Now, what did the name Red Ball Express mean?  I mean, to somebody now.
Speaker 2: Well, it meant express (laughter), hot express.  You, you had to get it down in a hurry.  You had--the front--depending on us getting the material to the front.  [General George] Patton was runnin' through Saint-Lo [France] and Vire [France] and takin' places and movin' and Patton didn't slow down for nobody.  But you had to have gas that'll keep them tanks goin'.  So you had guys that brought it up to Chartres [France] and then you had a dump and you had the guys that would get--take it to dump and go to the front line with it.  We were in the front line troop gas check.  And there was a white unit there called the Green Diamond [Express] and that's why I didn't--I didn't notice that mentioned in the movie ['Red Ball Express'], but they were--they were in competition with us to see who could haul the most, friendly competition, you know?  We, we would divide ours into sections.  We been there long enough to divide ours into sections.  And we'd have one group going with gas, one group going with food.  Like I told you, I had eleven trucks.  Somebody else would have eleven more and we'd take from one dump to the other.  I remember so vividly, I had a--I was the fourth truck because--instead of having a command car, I had a truck.  And the fourth truck always had a fifty caliber machine gun on it.  And I was sitting up looking at that machine gun and watching the German missiles fly in over the gasoline dump, we sitting there getting loaded.  And I was--I said I got them in my sight and the lieutenant behind me said, "If you pull that trigger, I'll blow your brains out."
Speaker 1: Why?  What, what what--
Speaker 2: Well, that was a gasoline dump and they were flying over trying to find it, and if I didn't shoot, they wouldn't never know where it was.  It would--but if I shot, I might get one of them, but the rest of them would blow up the gasoline dump.  I didn't understand that process.  But I did after he done that threatening.  It was fun.  'Cause we had some guys that--not in our outfit but in the outfit that came up from Italy.  One or two guys in there had shot down a plane, but they were in an open area.  It was what we called, the newspaper we had called Stars and Stripes and they'd give you a big write-up.  You were young, we didn't get--we didn't care nothing about nothing but reputation.  That's why we got so, so, so crazy.  Like I tell ya, I backed across a field with mines in it just to get apples off a tree.  I mean, we learned how to drive good.  We learned how to shoot good.  I had never shot a weapon in my life.  First time I picked up a rifle weapon, I shot expert and shot it from both sides, left and right side.  I guess I just born to shoot anything with a bell on it.  And--of course, if you'll notice on that wall, there's three four-ten's on there.  Very few folk hunt with a four-ten (laughter).  Four-ten's almost like a rifle.  I, I, I got to where I could shoot.  Like I said, Lieutenant Shoebridge [ph.] was a white boy that told me--I told him I'd kill him if I ever seen him overseas.  But he, he, he made me learn the hard way.  He put me down under the snow aiming at something and make sure I didn't pull the trigger.  I'd snatch it, you know, so I could hurry up and get out the snow.  Squeeze, lock and load, squeeze, lock and load, squeeze.  And he told me, if you don't do like I said do, I have you double-time around--(unclear), I'll never forget it.  I have you double around here--double-time around here 'til I sweat, and I'm gonna be sitting out there under that shade.  He was tough but he--I learned a lot from him, like Lieutenant [James E.] Robinson [Jr.] by putting them bridges up.  I put a bridge across a part of the Colorado River.  I think it took nine to thirteen minutes, nine minutes, thirteen all told after we got that abutment thing thrown in.
Story_ID: 288957
Speaker 1: Well, once, once we got overseas to England [during World War II], we transferred to outfit and then we lived outdoors in tents and the only thing we had to worry about then for a while was what they called them buzz bombs.  They'd drop all around you out there in the field, and watch your tape they said.  They had--we had little slit trenches we dug, put water, put a five-gallon can in it and build a platform over it, and we used it for latrine.  And they called them buckets honey buckets.  England's called--that's what they called hem.  Milk--French called it milk, we called it something else.  But they, they called them honey buckets.  And you had people that come around and picked up them buckets every month.  And you know what they did with them?  They farmed with them using human manure.  Man, them cabbages got that big.  Potatoes got that big.  I quit eating fish and chips after I found out what they were doing with it.  They--and then it went from--we carried a load of stuff over to Scotland and come back and got some new trucks.  Then, we had to fix them so they run in water, had to wax them down.  And we went to France, and from there, we became on our own.  We were--we were at our outfit.  We had a black commanding officer.  All officers were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really?  Now, now that was rare, wasn't it, to have a black commanding officer?
Speaker 1: Well, you was an individual unit.  You, you had a company and we didn't have not a single white officer in that company, and we, we--that was unusual, but it, it worked.  We had some good officers, too.  And we went from--
Speaker 2: Who was your commanding officer?
Speaker 1: Captain Griggs [ph.].  He was from Alabama.
Speaker 2: Black?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was a first lieutenant when we first went to him.  He made captain overseas.  But he was a--he was a good leader.  He, he, he didn't lead by forcing you to do nothing and he didn't do all that punishing to make people do nothing.  But he, he was a compassionate leader, and you wanted to do something for him.  If he said do it, you wanted to do it.  You wanted to be successful at it.  That's why I volunteered to take that, that gun up 'cause they wanted our outfit to get them up there.  And we would go--like, we'd go down to Le Havre [France] to pick up a load of maybe food, say 10W1 ration and we'd come back, and if our outfit hadn't arrived that supposed to meet us, we'd go on through, 'cause we didn't want him to have a late schedule.  We didn't want nobody complaining about he couldn't keep the food where it was supposed to be.  And we'd just drive straight on through.  Sometimes we'd run from Le Havre up to Argentan [France] right out of Rouen [France] just outside of Paris [France].  And we, we wanted to go anyway.  Every once in a while, say if you was on the back shift and me and you drove the same truck, you would drive up to here and say, "Jack [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], how's Paris?" and I'd explain how Paris was and you'd say, "I wanna go."  "Okay, you, you drive on up."  "If you wanna make the trip, you go on up and let me go back, and I go back and pick up the load."  Next time it come up, I go back.  I've got a partner, Valentine [ph.], from Washington, D.C.  I didn't see Valentine for a week.  He stayed in Paris.  We had to find that joker.
Story_ID: 288958
Speaker 1: What were the relationships like with the local Parisians and--I mean, the local French people.
Speaker 2: French people are just like they say, comme ci, comme ca.  If the Germans was--went in today, they went with the Germans.  If the Americans come in today, they went back with the Americans.  It was--it, it--Lord, they pleased anybody that went there and that's what they'd tell you in a minute, comme ci, comme ca, like this, like that, whatever.  And I know when--and like I told you about Vire [France], [General George] Patton took it and they come back and took it back again.  He come back and took it again.  They come back and took it again.  And this black military unit went in.  That was the end of it (laughter).  They didn't leave nothin' (laughter) standin' but the side of a church.  That--that's all was left standin'.  And they recognized it as a church 'cause it had the steeple and everything and wasn't nothin' touched on that side.  The rest of it was tore down and everything.  We went in the city one day, they had animals runnin' all up and down the street.  The Germans left there.  We come back through, there wasn't an animal in sight (laughter).  Man, I've seen 'em take a jackass--wasn't--they didn't call 'em jackass, they're little old mules they had pullin' them beet wagon and they'd be tellin' me, (speaking French) "Allez, allez! Allez vite," and if he didn't get up and move, they go and get that big blunderbuss with the barrel on it like that and stick it on the back of the ear and blow his brains out.  Within a matter of an hour, people be coming out of everywhere.  Wouldn't be nothing left there but a few hooves and a few bones.  He didn't get thrown away.
Speaker 1: People were hungry and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were hungry.  They ate anything.  I--and still, I--like I told you, I went to Paris [France] during that time, and I ordered a steak dinner and it was about seven courses to it, and the soup was made out of something they pulled out the grass on the side of the road.  They made some kinda soup out of it.  But then, later, I discovered that they were--they were eating horse meat, and that was in the refined restaurants in Paris.  It cost you about sixty-five dollars for a meal then, and that was back in World War II [WWII].  And they had champagne and everything.  They, they, they served you royally, and I got a whole crew in there.
Story_ID: 288959
Speaker 1: Now, you became a sergeant, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a--I was a tech sergeant [technical sergeant] where you had three down, one up with a T in there, and I was goin' for master sergeant, and that's when we had the little problem, and I was--stayed a little bit too long.  And I, I went to Switzerland on my next furlough when I got my next rating.  They tried to get me to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School] but I didn't--I didn't--I didn't think officers--I thought officers was something unusual.  I thought promotions were made so that you could do what you want to do, and all they could do to you then was bust you, and then you'd start over again.  I was young and wild.  Could've easily went to officer training school overseas, could've made a grade in the city in the service, turned down a warrant officer school.  I never, never, never was too ambitious about anything I was uncertain on.  And then when I went down to Switzerland, that tore up everything.  I--they gave me a week's vacation, and I went over to Geneva [Switzerland] and I liked it so well, I stayed another week, sold everything I had, even sold the underwear I had on, hadn't nothing but a suit uniform.  You get nine francs [currency] for them, and you take nine francs and live two or three days off of it and buy a watch besides.  You get a (unclear) on that.  But I enjoyed it.  It was--it was--people were free.  You don't, you don't know what it is to, to be free, to really be free.  I mean, it's, it's--we went to Lausanne [Switzerland].  Now, Lausanne is--let's see, I think that's like, like if you spelled it L-U-Z-Z-A-N-C-E [sic.] or somethin'.  Lucerne [Switzerland] was L-U-C-E-R-N-E.  Lausanne was a French town that had Italian flavor to it and Lucerne was an English town that was French.  And every little kid, three or four years old spoke four different languages, German, Italian, French, and something else, English.  And in the English-speaking town, everybody spoke English.  I know I took the ambassador's daughter out one night, but you couldn't just take them out.  You had to have a chap- chaperone or something, maybe about seventy or eighty years old.  I done got hip to the world, you know?  It didn't mean nothing.  Spent all your time with the chaperone, rock off to sleep, find out where he live and then wait 'til dawn come day and I never would go back to the outfit.  And when I went back, my captain, he was punishing me, grounding me, you know, and that was punishment.  You be sitting in France and can't go to Paris [France].  Everybody going up to Belgium, everybody going' up to Neuenburg [Germany] and you can't go.  It's just like being in prison.  But to meet the people, that was the most fascinating thing to me, honesty in people.  French people were lying a minute.  French people would lie according to circumstance, prettiest people in the world.  But Germans, if, if--like I said, if they told you that hen did snuff, all you had to do was look under a wing, you'd find some kind of snuff under there.  I've had an experience with a, a, a lady.  I asked her one time would she mind going with me, you know?  She said she had a--said I have a noir soldat called them.  She used French and German, black soldier and he's--his name is Johnny, and I'm waiting on him.  And I wouldn't lie to you, we had barrels of gas sitting outside our camp.  We have--like, we have a barrel in here, they have barrels of gas, where the guards do, and he'd light that barrel and they would come up and warm by that fire.  I've seen her stay down 'til she looked like that thing in there, waiting on Johnny.  You come up to her, you wanna eat?  She said, no, Johnny'll feed me, two, three days.  But in France, no, brother.  If you wasn't there when you supposed to have been there, whoever come up next--
Story_ID: 289792
Speaker 1: We were getting ready to talk about the 99th Pursuit Squadron, the Tuskegee Airmen.  You bumped into them in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in France or, or--
Speaker 2: In, in France and Etretat [France], at a rest center where I--they had brought back prisoners of war and they were getting' them prepared to bring 'em back home.  We called it a rest center.  And we were--we were operating that rest center.  That was our function when we come back.  We came back from Germany to France and we was operating that.  And we ran into quite a few of 'em, not quite a few, maybe six or seven.  They were officers.  And the way they explained it to us is the only reason they ever got caught was the fact that they ran out of fuel and, and, and they got picked up.  But a lot of 'em never got to be prisoners, they just got picked up by the French and they, they were there at Etretat.  But I remember very vividly, they had a, a mark fight one day up over the campsite with a P-38 [Lockheed P-38 Lightning] and a thunder bird--thunder?  What was that, that little old small plane, P-47 [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt].  But they, they had some kind of thunder-something, but it was--
Speaker 1: They called it--okay, the Mustang?  The, the--
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they had--they had one and then the P-38, they were saying that they couldn't maneuver that P-38, especially them boys 'cause they had never had no experience with them.  And, boy, they, they took that thing up and you talking about a marked battle.  They had a whole camp of people out watching them put on a performance.  I had never seen a greater air show than what was put on that day.  And that day brought that plane almost to the ground and done an impossible flip with a P-38.  You could hardly do a P-38--had them twin tails on it.  You couldn't hardly do it and he did it.  And then everybody learned to respect them.  And they would have little sessions, they'd tell their stories, and every time when somebody got a chance to go listen to them, they would go listen to them.  They were authentic people.  They, they were--they were--they were real people and they were good at what they were doing.  And, and this, this boy was flying against them.  He, he all but lost his life in that--in that thing trying to get that thing to maneuver with that.  And he said he'd never seen nobody fly a P-38 like that, but them boys were good.  They were good.  And I was reading a story where one guy said that in all the flights that they took up to bomber flights, they never lost a bomber during that time.  We had a friend here that belonged to them that lived out here in the City of East Point [Georgia].  And he--his name was Glenn [L.] Head and Glenn, Glenn turned one upside-down, one of them training planes going through Tuskegee [Alabama] and went under a bridge.  That kinda wiped him (laughter) out.  He would do some crazy things but they could fly.  I just--I, I admired them so much.  They--and they held their ground.  Even in--even in conversation when we would be at camp there.  They knew what they were doing.  I never understood why they kept them down on that end.  They come up from down at the Italy end.  But if they'd been up there, it would've been a joyous time up there.  There's a lot of stuff up there.
Story_ID: 289793
Speaker 1: Now--tell me, now, you encountered Africans for the first time I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In, in your--
Speaker 2: French Martinique soldiers.  They were--
Speaker 1: From West Indies and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  They were--they come from this part of Africa.  They was France--
Speaker 1: Senegal and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Ivory Coast--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Cote d'Ivoire.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They'd come in and they, they were--they were good people.  They spoke English pretty well, but they were--they didn't--they didn't take no junk.  You see, the difference between those people and most of the foreigners that I met, they were real people.  What--though they were different in color, there was no distinction between 'em.  The respected one another for whatever they was.  If you'll note last week when they said that terrorists bombed England, boy said, "Well, well, some of our Islam friends, I know they couldn't have been in that crowd."  They didn't care about what color they was or nothing, but they were English people.  They respected them for what they was.  If once you fit into that--well one is about as bad as the other.  Once you fit into a class structure, you just in it and that's what spoils us.  Once we fit in the class structure, we forget the structure that makes up the class.  But they--they were--they were--they were real people and they liked us primarily.  I--well, I'll tell you, it didn't make no difference.  I had a lady tell me in Bern, Switzerland, I think it was, she said, "You're nice and I don't mind," we go out to dance or something, she said, "but I like the close curl people," what we call nappy hair.  She said she liked the close curl people.  That put me out of business (laughter).  But it, it was--they didn't recognize--they, they were so honest in their opinion of things and I, I, I admired that.  Germans had--part of 'em had a different story.  They were honest about how they felt.  Schwartz, that's what they called it.  French was noir black, but schwarz was German.  If you were schwarz, you--I mean, that's, that's true, didn't want nothing to do with you.  But they discovered that schwarz people was tough to get along with 'cause they had some good fighters up in there.  And, see, everybody fought.  That's what made it diff--different for, for--when we got back to the rest center, I had people that was in the, the parachuters people, paratroopers, boy from Louisiana, the 85th Airborne.  We became fast friends.  We fought about three times but we became fast friends because of the relationship that developed in the war [World War II, WWII].  And it, it leads you to know that unless you have lived with a person, there's no way you can describe that person.  There's no way you can claim against 'em.  You can't say a person is this or that unless you, some people say walk a mile in his shoes, but you got--you gotta have some kind of communication.  And overseas, most of the people communicated and they, they dropped whatever prejudice they had.  They went ahead with it.  And in that little circle of friends, not friends but people that--war heroes and war prisoners, at Le Havre [France], the 99th Pursuit Squadron [Tuskegee Airmen], you had people out of the 90 [90th Infantry Division], 85th Airborne.  You had all kind of people that had been captured and released, and they met and had their stories to tell.  And it was--to me, it was a fun thing 'cause you gotta realize, now, when I got back home, I still wasn't but nineteen and done spent three years.
Story_ID: 289794
Speaker 1: Now you contemplated, you know, staying in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: It made no difference.  I just getting away from home.  And when I come back home, I would have stayed in had, had I made--had they made the right offer.  If they had gave me my, my rank back, I would've--I would've stayed in.
Speaker 1: Now you, you lost your rank, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how did you lose your rank and what happened?  What, what--
Speaker 2: One of 'em stayed too long.  I come from--I never lost the position, just lost the rank.  I went off as a T/3 sergeant [technician third grade sergeant], one up, three down, and I stayed that extra week down in Switzerland and come back, and they cut it down to a T with two down, just tech corporal [technician corporal].  But I still managed to hold onto my position.  And as long as you hold position, you can always go back where you want, but it wasn't time to go back then.  It was either ship out--like I said, we was gonna head for Japan and, and they told me that they would give me back a sergeant's rank, and I said, "No, that's what I had.  I gotta have something better now.  Give me back either tech or the master sergeant."  See, if they had made me even a truck master, I would've went back.  And I wouldn't even have thought about it the second time 'cause I didn't have nothing to really draw me back in.  See, I'm a--I'm a peculiar person about love.  'Cause if I had known my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] now, I probably would've said I, I had something to come back to, but I didn't know her then, and I didn't know nobody.  I didn't have nobody back here.  I, I knew--I didn't know nobody, 'cause I didn't wanna come back and, and have to go through that thing with momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] no more, 'cause she wasn't gonna never change.  I seen her try to whoop my aunt [Ruby Meadows] when my aunt was forty-something years old.  And I would've stayed, but then they didn't--they didn't have nothing to offer me.  And I, I said, no, I, I wasn't gonna stay, so I came home.  And I went onto Connecticut and stayed there for about, oh, a few months.
Speaker 1: This is 1946, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--I started home in the latter part of '45 [1945] after they closed out and I was goin' to Japan.  Then, we came on over to--well, we came over to [New] Jersey and then we went up to Massachusetts, Fort Devens, Massachusetts.  And I stayed in New Haven [Connecticut] there with my mother [Ola Mae Meadows] 'til I got tired of her bird dogging me, you know?  Young boy done been in the [U.S. military] service, now he grown.  Now, he don't--he ain't gonna take too much stuff.  So I came back down here [East Point, Georgia].  My grandma was kinda glad to see me.  She still had restrictions.  Twelve o'clock I had to be in.  Still wanted to put that night thing on me; no, can't do that.  So in that time, I played some baseball, and I, I, I met my wife, and we started to date.
Story_ID: 289795
Speaker 1: Now, you were a pretty good baseball player, right?  From--
Speaker 2: Pretty good.
Speaker 1: From what I can--in fact--
Speaker 2: That what they--that what they said?
Speaker 1: One of your coaches said you were real good.  You were one of the best (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, well--that what he said, 'cause I could do what he liked.  See, I switched--I was playing first base and I was good at first base but--our brand a baseball and that's not condemning anybody else brand of baseball, but I brand a baseball, like, for instance, if a shortstop threw a ball and it hopped on the ground, if the first baseman missed it, it's a error on the shortstop, the thrower, not in our brand of baseball.  If you couldn't catch that kinda ball, you didn't play first base.  And I could--I could do all kinda funny things with it, twist with it and get cute out there I called it, you know?  But--so they thought I was good.  And he asked me if I would play third base for him.  Now, what he didn't know is that when I was trying to make the team, took me two years to make the team.  I sat on the bench two years; that's how good the team was.  And on Sundays, some team down in Fairmount [Georgia] would come and ask him could I play for them and they'd borrow me.  I played second base, so I learned to use a finger glove.  And he asked me one day, he didn't have a third baseman.  He said, "I know you ain't got no arm," he said, "but will you play third for me?"  I told him "I'll try."  And I could pick it.  Let me tell you, I got that glove right in the house now.  It had eyes in between there and I just point it toward the ball and they'd look it up (laughter).  But I had to get quick release 'cause I didn't have much of a strong arm.  So everything I played, I played it going toward first base.  If a ball was hit--I don't care how hard it was hit, I'd charge and move toward first base so that I had momentum going that direction.  And I could just toss it down there.  We had pitchers that pitched for [Atlanta] Black Crackers, one pitched for Kansas City Monarchs.  He couldn't field bunts, so he'd tell me play up short and cover him on bunts, and I'd play right in the batter's face halfway between third and home.  I trusted him 'cause he wasn't gonna let nobody hit nothing down there.  Once in a while--now, a boy (unclear) hit one through there, took my glove off and--glove, ball, and all went down to the fence, that's how hard he hit it.  But then that boy said this, this is the best I've ever seen.  Didn't have the best throwing arm, but I had the best glove.  I could pick it.  And I, I wouldn't tell no lie, I could pick it.  But then I had developed a knack for hitting.  First, I couldn't get nothing.  It went out, down and out and everybody would holler when I come to bat, "Deuce him."  And they'd deuce me outside and inside, and I couldn't do it.  But then we had a good pitcher named Dave Davis [ph.], died, left-hander.  The only reason that boy didn't make the big leagues, he couldn't stay away from the wine and women.  He'd go down in the evening and throw me curveballs.  That's the way we did each other; we practiced together.  I got spiked by one of my teammates trying to tell me how to get off the base, spiked me.  He didn't mean to do it, but he meant to show me how.  So, Dave learned me how to hit anything.  And from then on, I just kinda picked up.  And I'll tell you the worst disappointment I ever had in my baseball career.  My daddy [R.V. Jackson] was an excellent baseball player.  He had never seen me play, so he came the third--first year I played regular, third year I was with the team, and they had a new manager come in and the manager brought his first baseman who was a long, lanky, pretty lookin' guy.  I was awkward but I played the heck outta there.  And that first game with the Atlanta All Stars, Nish Williams, he had a all-star team.  Dusty Baker [sic.] and them was--they were around them then.  And Nish wife bet him that we would beat 'em one of them games.  We played a doubleheader and he, he bet her he wouldn't--we wouldn't win one of 'em, we wouldn't see daylight.  They beat us the first game by one run.  The boy asked the manager to let me pinch hit in the first game for his first baseman and he wouldn't do it.  The same pitcher, Earle King [sic. Brennan Early King] that used to be--he was great around Atlanta [Georgia], he pitched the second game.  He didn't pitch but the ninth inning of the first game.  And my dad was out there in the stands and I wanted him to see me play.  I have you know, I got a homerun, two doubles, and a triple, four for four.  But do you know my daddy had left that first--after the first game (laughter).  And I said, that's my worst disappointment in baseball.
Story_ID: 289796
Speaker 1: I guess I've had some failures.  Atlanta Panthers was one of the better teams.  We had a man bet a hundred dollars that we'd beat them, and we was leading them two to one.  In the ninth inning, boy hit a ball to first base.  I swung one of them fancy things at it and snatched it and went over and touched the base and looked back, and the ball was still going (laughter).  He called me all kinda names.  But, but I have--I've made some errors, but mostly I was good.
Speaker 2: Now you played for the Bears, right?
Speaker 1: East Point Bears.
Speaker 2: East Point Bears, all right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you all traveled around and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we played.  We went to New Orleans [Louisiana] a couple of times.  That's where they--I had the offer from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one from a girl that was scouting for St. Louis [Missouri].  She, she was looking for a class C person, five thousand dollars.  Told 'em no, I wouldn't give up a government job to go down there.  And they wanted me to be twenty-one and I was twenty-nine then.  And, and when you play infield ten years, you about done wore out your legs, and you're gonna tell that lie if you want to but it'll show up in a year or two you get in major playing.  And I had to start in a higher league than that.  They wouldn't do it and so I wouldn't sign.  But Pops [ph.] did, D did.  We had four or five guys that signed up.
Story_ID: 289797
Speaker 1: Tell me about your job.  Now you--when did you start working for, for the government.  And what did you do for employment when you got back from the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: I stayed on that 52-20 club for fifty-two weeks where they give you twenty dollars a week, 'til you could find a job.  And I, I always asked for my job, and I'd ask for the heavy equipment operator, 'cause that was the highest paying job they had around this area, and they never would give me one, so they had to keep paying me that twenty dollars a week for free.  And I went up to fruit grower, and they were paying forty-some cent an hour.  That cousin was working up in there, Wilbur Scott.  And we told 'em we wouldn't work for less than a dollar a hour, and they hired us to get us off that 52-20 club.  They didn't wanna see us, you know, not working and drawing that money.  'Cause at forty cent a hour, they were paying a dollar more than we were getting every two weeks.  But I told him, "You know, I don't have to eat but one meal a day if I don't work at all.  I come out cheaper just getting his twenty dollar a week."  And we didn't, so I finally worked up there for about a month, left there and went to the battery plant.  They paid a dollar and a quarter something an hour.  And I loved baseball then; I was tryin' to make that team.  And, and they--I was--my job in there was to clean out the restroom.  I made more than anybody working on the line, and I wasn't doing nothing but cleaning out the restroom.  Like I said, he would hire you to get you off of that government subsidy thing.  And old boy knew how much I loved baseball.  He come by there one Saturday to tell me we going to play the LaGrange City Cats.  That used to be the best team going, down in LaGrange [Georgia] at the mill.  That man hired people to play baseball and paid them a weekly salary to be a year-round.  And I told him, "Well, I think I can go."  They had already stopped by the house and got my uniform and my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] knew I would go, 'cause I, I loved the game.  She didn't care nothin' about but I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now--
Story_ID: 289798
Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] and, and how did you all meet?
Speaker 2: In church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia].  I'd see her and her, her family and her sister, and we--me and another boy thought we'd go over there and holler at her.  She had a reputation then nobody could touch her, and that was my thing then.  Anything nobody else could have, that's what I want.  I don't want something anybody can have.  And they were about right.  I, I dated her for, oh, I guess she'd know more than I do, but maybe eight or nine months before I even kissed her any time (laughter).  She said she told her momma and she had--her momma asked who I was, "Some joke with some money don't know what to do with it (laughter)."  I took her to a couple of Royal American Shows.  They used to have a circus come over here.  And we just started, started dating one another and we, we kept it up.  And I'd, I'd walk to her house, walk her home, and then start back and walk halfway to the battery plant, she'd walk me back there before coming back and I'd turn around and walk her part way, but, shoot, we wasting time (laughter).  And I, I paid the man so much in cab fare after I got where I could pay her cab fare, we wasting money now.  And the oddity of it is that I knew she was who I wanted 'cause I, I wanted me a family and I wanted somebody decent that wanted a family.  But her sister, she told me, "Don't you mess with my sister.  I'll kill you if you mess with my sister."  I told her, "Well, I'm gonna marry her come Christmas."  We hadn't even talked about it.  But then we talked about it and my wife starting doing, putting aside furniture and stuff.  I, I couldn't have made it without her 'cause I was hit and run, you know?  She was steady.  She'd, she'd save money and started me to buying something.  I think she bought the living room furniture and I bought the kitchen stuff or something.  We started saving for it.  We got put out of a couple of places even after we got married (laughter), but we were--we were ready.  And finally, she agreed and we went and got some license and come back to her house and married.  Preacher went over there and married us in the living room.  And it's been--it's been a, a growing thing.  She get mad with me.  She--sometimes she don't like me, but, you know, I, I like her enough for both of us so we don't--we don't need to worry about it.  And we been married--come Christmas, we'll be married fifty-eight years.  And without her, I don't know how I could make it.  In fact, I know I couldn't.  She's been armed and we, we fuss, but that's about all we do.  We ain't got no--we ain't got no strength enough to fight.  We just fuss.  Let me tell you something, love is a funny thing.  It ain't just emotions.  It just ain't a good feeling or a good touch.  It's something that grows inside.  We--when life got the way, it was miserable.  Not miserable, but what most folks say, ain't no fun left in it.  We, we were still going to church, singing in the choir, mixing and going to different churches.  We were doing' the same thing and I think it's because we had the same educational background.  We were more or less equal on everything.  Nobody could look down at nobody.  We looked at each other.  We listened to each other.  And we just kinda hung out.  And we--and we--and we made it.  It's--I, I think if I had to do it all over again, I'd marry her quicker now.  [TW1]I wouldn't wait no nine months to kiss her or nothin', you know.  I, I, I think--I think a lot more of her now than I did then.  She's, she's steady.  She's been a good mother and she's been a good wife.  Of course, I been a little contrary at times, but I've always made up my mind.  It's, it's, it's a thing.  You don't have to fight to get along.  We had one or two arguments, strong ones, fought one time, and that was it.  And I think she and everybody else made the moves.  And if this what we gotta do, it won't work, and we decided that wasn't gonna work.  You know, and we, we, we raised our kids and they still respect us today 'cause we respect them.  We never disrespected our children.  And out of all the things I've done, I've been contrary as the devil at times, but I never disrespected my family.
Story_ID: 289799
Speaker 1: Never had no reason--you've had gossip, you have that all the time.  Right now you'll have gossip and I'm right at eighty years old.  Folks still tell lie.  Folks tell me every Sunday, "You sure do look good."  Man, good God Almighty, ain't nothing--you, you been out here that long, you can't take a rat been there long enough and still look good.  But folk, folk will start things and, and it just doesn't--and if you listen to 'em, it would break it up.  And I have a young man and I, I love him so much.  I tell him all the time, "Y'all quit fussing and quit arguing with each other.  You, you stay mad all the time.  Level off.  Give anybody the respect the same respect that you want.  And if you get it back in return, you'll be--you'll be on even keel.  If you don't, the boat will rock one way or the other all the time."  So I--I've done that in my relationship with her [Jackson's wife, Gladys Phillips Jackson] and she, she didn't like my runnin' for council.  She didn't like my politics.  She didn't like that no kinda way.  She didn't like baseball.  She didn't have nothin' against it, she just didn't like it.  Excuse me.  She went to one game with me and she got a little bit out of school at that game 'cause somebody called me a funny name (laughter) and next pitch, I hit it out the ballpark.  She called him that name right back and she's so embarrassed.  I don't think she ever went to another ballgame.  But she didn't mind me going.  She never--she never questioned my going.  And I always--and even though them people were out there hollering, I always conducted myself in a gentlemanly fashion.  I never--I never brought no embarrassment to my family whatsoever.  And I think that was a part of the thing in the community that kinda kept me back.  A lot of people wanted to find something wrong and there wasn't nothing wrong, 'cause that was no life that I had lived in East Point [Georgia].
Story_ID: 289800
Speaker 1: When did you start working for the government?  When was it?
Speaker 2: Same year I married (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: And who did you--
Speaker 2: September of '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Who did you work for?  The--
Speaker 2: I worked for purchasing contracting down at the federal, Atlanta Army Depot [Fort Gillem] down there at Forest Park [Georgia].  They used to call it Com [ph.] but it's Atlanta Army Depot.  Now, it's Fort Gillem.  And I worked in--I went in as a heavy duty operator.  They didn't--they had one opening and they gave it to a young white boy that was a diesel mechanic, and they didn't have a place for me so they created a job called a mechanic's helper grade five [General Schedule (GS) level], which was six grades under, but it was higher than what most of the employees were making down there.  See, from four back was like common labor and from four up was like going progressively up.  So I took it and I worked--
Speaker 1: Now, now what, what year is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: Mechanic helper?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Around December is when I went in as a mechanic's helper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when the--I, I--I'll, I'll never forget.  That's the year I married [Gladys Phillips Jackson].  I married--I went to work the year I knew I had to marry.  Didn't have to marry, but we was going to marry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked about six, seven years, and every year I was on a RIF list, reduction in force.  They never would let me become career.  They wouldn't never take out no money on me.  And I wanted to be career, you know?  'Cause I wanted to establish a retirement program.  Then they--I, I run into a man from--supposed to have been a racist from down at Fayetteville [Georgia], J.O. Sams [ph.], and he saved my job one year.  He took me from where I was as a mechanic and made me a painter and let me paint six months down there and then transferred me back to where I was.  He did it for three times and then somebody else started to like me a little bit.  I worked.  Like I said, I don't do nothing that I don't try to be perfected in it.  I'm a perfectionist.  I, I just believe in it.  I believe in perfection in religion.  I believe you can be perfect.  But the other fellow, Mr. Roland [ph.], he, he said Sam Calloway [ph.] wanted to get me a job and he couldn't get me one as a junior mechanic.  I was training in white junior mechanics to take out the power unit, the motor, the transmission, the pillow block, but I couldn't be one.  I couldn't sign a truck out before '61 [1961].  I could work on the truck and get it ready and it would just sit there.  If the man was sick, it had to sit there 'til he come back so he could sign it out, but I couldn't sign it out.
Story_ID: 289801
Speaker 1: So how long did you work for the U.S. Army depot [Atlanta Army Depot; Fort Gillem, Forest Park, Georgia] before they made you a career employee?
Speaker 2: Let me put it this way.  I can't give you exact time but it was something like between eight to ten years.  But then, what I did--what I put in there between the time that I retired, between the time I got career and the time I retired in '74 [1974] was just enough money to pay my retirement for two years, and now I've been retired thirty-one years.
Speaker 1: So you got the best part of the deal.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you're--when you're blessed you're blessed and nobody can stop that.  See, blessings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they should've--
Speaker 2: --don't come around, they come down.
Speaker 1: But don't you think they should've made you--
Speaker 2: Sure, in the first month.
Speaker 1: In the first place.
Speaker 2: First month.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: First month, they should've put me in.  And then if, if they didn't like it, they could've cut it off.  But then when they did, I got two or three outstanding efficiency ratings.  And when they do that, they give you like a hundred dollar award and then they give you three years they can't cut you're salary.  You can increase but you can't be cut.  And I--and each one of my supervisors, even the ones that didn't like me always gave me a good report 'cause I worked.  Like I said, they didn't let me sign no papers, but I still got trucks out.  I could get out two trucks in a week and two men working wasn't getting out two trucks in a week.  But I didn't mind that as long as he knew I was working.  And then I worked into a good relationship with my supervisor and he moved me from where I was to a grade nine [General Schedule (GS) level] engine assembler.  I went to the assembly line, Mr. Roland [ph.], and that grade nine was like a junior mechanic.  That's four grades up from where I was.  And I had a friend down at--Ralph [ph.].  He taught me how to weld.  And Roland said, well, if you can do this good, I'll just--learn how to weld during your lunch hour.  And I worked during my lunch hour to learn how to spot weld with electric welder.  And he carried me to grade twelve and made me a welding mechanic.  That government (laughter).  And I worked down there--I worked from welding mechanic then to the, the line, putting on carburetors and putting the clutches into it.  And he, he liked me.  And that's when that man was--he was so prejudice and he, he come out and call me the N-word.  And I went in the office and sit down, he wanted to know what I was sitting, I told him I was waiting on him so we could go up to the office.  And I went in the office and told him that I worked and I didn't come to be characterized.  And if he ever did it again, and I had this little candy stripe switch blade (laughter).  I, I do something to you.  And he just looked at me and he said, "You make sure you don't do that again."  The top supervisor, Watson [ph.], I went back and he was as nice to me as he could be.  And then he transferred me to the motor vehicle branch where you don't service vehicles, you either drive them or something or, or preserve them.  And I chose to preserve them, me and a friend of mine.  And then they had a union come in and I wouldn't join the union.  It's--I, I wouldn't--I wouldn't pay somebody to do for me what they, they can't do for themselves.  And you can't strike against the government so it's useless to, to have a union against the government.  And I explained that, and though some of the blacks disliked me for it because they were in there for it wholeheartedly, my raises came more frequently than theirs did.  Then, it became a confused thing, you know?  'Cause I was having the efficiency rating plus I couldn't be cut and I was getting advances, and they were fighting on the balance line depending on the union.  And finally it come down to the fact that--I, I told him, "Man, I come down here looking for a heavy duty driving job, tractor trailer."  He said, "Can you drive one?"  "Anything from a forty-four passenger bus down to a motorcycle, I can drive."  And he gave me a job, but he quick wasn't the job I wanted.  So he put me in purchasing and contract where I wore a tie every day.  But it was like a grade seven; that's a cut back.  No, you can't cut my salary, but you notice if you stay there long enough they can cut it.  In that efficiency rating thing, you gotta stay three years.
Story_ID: 289802
Speaker 1: And then I went to a bus driving job carrying kids to school and we got in trouble 'cause one of the little kids kicked my leg, you know, he--I told him to sit down on the bus and he kicked me and told me he wasn't gonna sit down.  I put him off the bus and left him down in Jonesboro [Georgia].  His daddy raised ten times the amount of hell, he was a colonel, came in the office [at the Atlanta Army Depot; Fort Gillem, Forest Park, Georgia].  Oh, by the way, did I mention he's black?
Speaker 2: Really?  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He kicked my leg and I said, yeah, I put him off.  He said, "Well, do you know what you were doing?"  "Sure, I knew what I was doing.  If it'd been you, I'd a been kicking on you down there now."  I said, "But it was him and I had no alternative but to put him off the bus 'cause I didn't wanna hurt him.  'Cause if he'd a kicked me again, I'd a probably kicked him off the bus."  And his wife stood there and said, "Yeah, that sounds just like him."  He was raised with them, and that's all they knew how to do and they don't mean nothing when they said they'll kick your behind.  They play like that.  I said, "Well, I'm not one of them."  So he took me off of that and gave me a truck.  And that's where I tell you that I, I believe in--I believe in the God principle.  I don't believe in everything these folk talk about, but I believe in the principle.  I--he, he didn't have nothing but a Sunday job.  I took it and I never missed a service on Sunday.  I drive up to the gate at eleven o'clock, get in my car and come to church, worship, go back, get in my truck, and drive the rest of the day.  Didn't make no difference what I wore 'cause I wasn't doing nothing nowhere, driving from one house to another one place to another, and somebody reported me.  And they took a vote and guess what?  All of the whites voted that I should be their representative when they went before the union board, and I wasn't even in the union, and that made the other folk get kinda mad, and the man told me I couldn't do that, and I said okay, went right back the next Sunday and did the same thing again.  And I told my supervisor, "What position do you hold in the church?"  He said, "I'm the chairman of the deacon board over at Decatur, First Decatur Baptist Church [Decatur, Georgia]."  I said, "Well I'm the lay leader over at my church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] and that's the same position in the Methodist church."  I said, "Do you miss your service?"  He said, "No."  "I'm--and I'm not gonna miss mine."  We argued and he said, "Well go on back."  And I did it for about six more months and they reported me again.  And then he called me in the office one day and said, "James [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], I know you done worked this weekend," I worked Saturday and Sunday and I was off Monday and Tuesday he said, "But can you come in Monday?"  I said, "Yeah, what do you want me to do?"  See, that's the difference in getting along with people.  If he wanted me to work, I would work even though it was an off day, 'cause you know I was gonna get paid anyway, but he said, "From now on you go to work at 7:30 and get off at 4:30 Monday through Friday."  And I said, "The Lord moves in mysterious ways, doesn't he?"  And he said, "Yeah, he sure does."  But we had the right kind of relationship.  And, and Sam [ph.] was prejudice too, but we got to knew--got to know each other.  Sam wanted somebody to work on Thanksgiving, he called me here at the house, called me down when I lived on Georgia Avenue [East Point, Georgia].  "I need you to come in Thanksgiving."  "Okay, no problem," zip.  Christmas, everybody wanted to be off, yeah, I'll work.  But I could be in Chicago [Illinois] at a church meeting on Sunday, and it'd freeze up.  I'd call Sam at his house and tell him, "I don't think I can make it back tomorrow."  He said, "What kind of leave are you on?"  I said, "I don't know.  Look at it.  If I got sick leave, put down sick leave.  If I don't, put down annual leave."  We worked like that 'til he died.  Had a perfect thing.
Story_ID: 289803
Speaker 1: But when I retired in '74 [1974], they offered me a job at Fort Mac [Fort McPherson, East Point, Georgia] but they wanted it to be a, a menial job driving a two and a half ton truck, garbage truck, grade four.  I had two more years on a--another one of them old funny things I got.  And I said, "No, 'cause if I work two more years, they'll cut me back to a four and I--whatever I can get now, I'll, I'll take it."  And the girl that hired in with me, young white girl, she said, "Jim [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], I can get you a job at Fort Mac," said, "but it's a grade four [General Schedule (GS) level] and it will go to a five within the year."  "No.  If I can get four hundred dollars a month retirement, don't call me no more, don't write me, just start mailing my check.  'Cause I can live off one hundred dollars a week."  See, my notes was already established on the house and everything and my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] was working.  She has worked every--as long as I have.  And she said, "But, Jim, I got you a job."  "No, just start sending me my check."  And now at my retirement rate, my salary is more than I was making when I was working.  It steadily just crept up.  And, and, and though they were prejudiced enough not to let me become career, what they paid me the first two years in 1975 and '76 [1976] eat up all the money I had put into the pension fund.  And these other twenty-nine years, them, them blessings coming down.  Some of your money and some of everybody's (laughter) coming in.  And I said, "Well, you know, if you do the best you can on any situation you can--and that's what scripture mean when it said learn to be content in whatever situation you find yourself in and let him work it out, he'll work it out," and he has worked it out in my life.
Story_ID: 289804
Speaker 1: I started like in '72 [1972] running in politics and in '74 [1974] when I retired, I had ran twice and lost and I ran right on up until, I don't know, around '88 [1988] sometime and they called me and told me I had won, and we were here partying that night.  This young white boy I was telling you about was in the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] thing.  He called me and said, "Jim [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], don't put your faith in it.  You can't win.  They got you scheduled to lose by half a percentage point."  And I said, "They can't do it.  They count the votes by computer."  He said, "The computer only puts out what you put in it."  And I said, "Then I learned not to trust computers."  They, they called me that morning and told me that I had lost by a half percentage point.  And I told my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson], "I'm through with it now."  We likely had a fit.  But I still was able to accomplish things.  Like I said, even though they said I was mean--I had a councilman to tell me--used to be over this, "Boy, you don't run this city.  We run it."  We had a baseball game where whites played against blacks, and they said that would never happen in East Point [Georgia].  And I said, "Well you don't know that.  He might not be here that long."  And he said, "But it will never happen as long as I'm here."  And we got into an argument and I told him, "No point in disgracing ourselves, you weigh about two thirty and I weigh two twenty-two, let's take a break in council, let's me and you go down here and settle this thing 'cause I'm not the least bit afraid of you."  We became the best friends on that council, that I had on that council, Bud Watson [ph.].  So anything I asked for, he would be right there to give it, to help, help me get it.  And it became a thing then.  And they started saying, "You're a community leader, you're a this, you're a that."  Wasn't that much I had done.  Then, like I said, after all that struggling I'd done with community chest and all that stuff I'd done, nobody never said anything about it.  Then, all of the sudden, the claims started coming in.  Them plaques down there on the wall, they started coming in like snowdrops.
Speaker 2: Now when did that start?  When did that start?
Speaker 1: Around '74 [1974] after I retired from the job [U.S. civil service truck driver].  In '78 [1978], then in the '80s [1980s], it just--'84 where I got the citizen award from Burnett award [George C. Burnett Citizen of the Year Award].
Speaker 2: Now when did you start like community involvement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A little--when I--
Speaker 2: --where, where you became like known as a agitator and (laughter)--
Speaker 1: When I first came back (laughter).  When I--see, I moved down on Georgia Avenue [East Point, Georgia], back down there where I used to live and Deacon [Charles A.] Green still let me go around with him.  He'd invite me to come to things.
Speaker 2: Now that's the--that's the man that you, you characterized--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as a--
Speaker 1: An obsequious kinda person.
Speaker 2: --obsequious kind of person.
Speaker 1: But he was a leader of the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He'd get things done.  If they said they had a--if they had a, a vote and the man come over and say, take care of the community, fifty dollars here, you give fish fry up to twenty-five dollars, tell the community who to vote for, they'd vote for him, 'cause there wasn't but a few folk voting no way.  And we just went along with it.  But then one day he, he died and they didn't know anybody over here.  And the man that ran came by and hit me (laughter), and I told him, "No, you got the wrong person now."  And if you notice on that sign down there--the next time you look at it, you'll see on that sign, cannot be bought with any price.
Speaker 2: Now, so they gave you fifty dollars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and expected you to have a--have a--
Speaker 1: Carry the community for, for--
Speaker 2: --fish fry--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and tell 'em who to vote for.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I gave it back to 'em.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the Democratic Party?
Speaker 1: It was then--you had two primaries.  You had a Democratic primary and a Republican primary.  Now, it's just one--you don't have--it--it's nonpartisan election in the City of East Point [Georgia].  But they changed it, 'cause when I started running, everything on this side of the track was in Ward B, and it had--we began to pick up more voters in this area.  And to compete with me, gaining more people registering to vote, 'cause every year it got higher and higher.  They cut it off by adding Colonial Hills [East Point, Georgia] across the track over there, added that to this ward.  That cut that ward down, but there wasn't nothing on the council but white nowhere, didn't make no difference.  Then they added that to this ward to combat me--
Speaker 2: Okay, to make (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like that.
Speaker 2: To dilute your strength--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --here.
Speaker 1: And it--and it became a thing.  But still, I if I went to council and asked for something, they gave it.  It wasn't no problem.
Story_ID: 289805
Speaker 1: Then I became--they had a riot over here and I helped quell it out some kinda way.
Speaker 2: Now when was that?  Was, was that when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed or, or when?
Speaker 1: No, that was before when he--and then he--
Speaker 2: When, when was it, though?  Do you remember?  And what was it about?
Speaker 1: Man run the store down there, Scoggins.  He had been running the community store for years in the City of East Point [Georgia].  And you could go there and buy all you wanted on credit, and you could go take him your check and he'd give you back what he wanted you to have and tell you how much you paid your bill, and they thought he was an angel.  Most of these folk thought he was an angel.  And he got robbed and he got killed, black guy killed him.  And then they started having little quells and then the Black Panther [Party] group came out here and they started to fight over there and they start--once it got cooked up, it was all about heroin, marijuana and stuff.  And one of the boys that was--headed a little group out here was a friend of mine's son, and I called him off and told him that, "It, it, it didn't look good."  We was gonna have a meeting to discuss it.  And when we went to the meeting, the mayor got up and spoke and said, "I ain't never had nothing against niggers."  And the preacher sitting beside me jumped up and said, "I, I think that you out of place."  I mean, he went to arguing with him and I said, mayor--it's Mayor [R.E.] Brown.  I said, "Mayor, I think what the people are saying is you owe them an apology.  I understand that you're speaking from your past and you can't help yourself, but I think you do owe them an apology," and he said "I apologize."  And, and, and the thing broke completely out of hand.  And I went down there with some of the pastors and told this boy, I said, "Son, why don't you get your little gang and, and, and clear out from down here."  And the chief of police named Turnkey [ph.], we called him, he said, "Jack [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], what do you think we ought to do?"  I said "Leave.  Leave, 'cause as long as you here, they gonna stay there and argue and squander, 'cause they think you trying to confront them."  So he left and I said, "Don't go too far now.  Say up on the top of the bend up there."  And the preacher said, "We got it under control, we got it under control."  And as soon as they left, I done got out of sight, they throw them five things back up on that thing and started again.  And I, I got it stopped.  But then the mayor said after that night, after he made that apology, he said, "James, I wanna meet with you."  So we organized a Community Relations Commission here in the city.  And I guess you know I was the first chairman; he appointed me as chairman.  And I told him that appointment would be only good until January and then we'd have an election and the group could elect who they want.  We had ten white, ten black, five female and five male of each sector.  And even at the election, I, I keep--I kept winning the chairmanship.  And we would get problems.  If a problem came up in the city, the police wouldn't take the advantage, they'd bring it to us in our meeting.  We would discuss it and make recommendations to the council.  We didn't do nothing about it.  We made recommendation.  But we could go over to the jailhouse and talk to the detective and say, you need to check this out and give us a report.  And then somebody got up and said I had too much power; black man said I had too much power.  They was ready to cut it out.  So they gave me that big plaque down there sitting up on the wall and retired me from the community relations commission and wiped it out 'cause they didn't have nobody to help to fight for it, carried it down to five and then wiped it completely out.  Consequently, we started riff-raffing back and forth, and he, he became one of my greatest supporters.
Story_ID: 289806
Speaker 1: And then the next mayor, he became a great supporter, 'cause I was honest with him.  I'd tell him exactly how I felt.  And I--
Speaker 2: Now, who was the next mayor?
Speaker 1: [Bruce L.] Bannister.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's the one in the book downstairs with his wife standing by the piano singing.  She--he used to come down to church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia].  And I'm one of them people that believe if you--if you--if you need something, ask for it.  And if you ask for it, make sure you need it and use it appropriately and then be grateful for getting it.  And I--anything I asked for, they gave it.  We went to a meeting one night to give you an example, and one of the black people said--we (unclear)--they said, "Well, I don't know why you should vote for Jack [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson].  He just about white as they are," one of my people.  So I said, "Well, you know, you can vote for who you want to, you know?  You are supporting me.  You are paying for me to run.  You are paying all my expenses.  If I lose, you lose.  I'm not losing anything but time.  Now, if you wanna fight against yourself, that's your business.  I'll try it one more time."  And we did and we thought we had it sewed up that time.  But then this woman got up in, in a council meeting.  I asked them to change that street over there to a one-way street because it was two-way, and it didn't have a playground, no parking, no nothing, and I told them they needed to make parking in that project, the need to put a playground for kids if they gonna let them bring children in there, and they did it.  And this woman stood up in council meeting, one of y'all, and said just as loud as the man said it that night in the council meeting, "Who does this nigger think he is?"  Black person.  And the mayor asked me, he said, "James, you wanna respond?"  I said, "No, why should I?  I'm not gonna let ignorance predominate when intelligence can prevail.  Continue the council meeting."  And then I won a lot of people.  I was contrary and I fussed a lot, but I didn't waste time on useless things.  And then they came and then we got--decided to vote on a woman over here.  They, they--she finally won.  And it's--they hadn't done anything that, that, that outstanding, but at least the council is full now and still it's--you got the same problem.  You got a gay community group and you got a black community group here, and you got a neutral group in the middle, and the mayor got her a block group down at--whenever anybody wants something, then folk vote and she breaks it down.  So it's, it's a confused state but the city is growing and they still respect me.  And all of a sudden, these awards and things start raining.
Story_ID: 289807
Speaker 1: When you read the number of committees and activities that you've been involved in, it's just unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: I mean, the awards in your basement--I mean, there's some on the wall, there's some in boxes, they're all--they're all over the place.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they, they, they came--in the church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] I got a lot of 'em 'cause, like in this Ethnic Minority Local Church [Committee] thing, the church is no better than nobody else.  They got the same prejudice in the church they got out here in the--in the street.  They gave like $20 million to be spent over a four-year period in, in ethnic minority churches, which consisted of Hispanics, Asians, Indians [Native Americans].  You, you had to cover the whole waterfront.  And I was selected to be the chairperson of that group for four years.  And we, we ran that thing they said with an iron fist.  We, we just simply said you had to qualify to receive the grant.  We had white superintendents putting in grants for black churches, and they never saw the grants.  It would go through the superintendent's office.  And we started checking 'em out, you know?  So they, they, they thought I done a good job, so they requested I come back another full year to work on the board.  And on the board, the problem come up the same as it is here.  Most of our top people in the church were at that time split up over the gay rights situation and, and, and it became argumentative rather than advancing.  Instead of going to do something, they--they're arguing about who was who and what was lifestyle and who could marry or who--it became a problem.  And now it's one of the problems that's gonna destroy not only the country but the church, not the church, it's gonna destroy some churches.  But the church will never be destroyed.  But the problem is that you don't--you don't need to argue those positions.  You need to live out your own lifestyle and seek, seek repentance in your state.  Boy said, if you can get that log outta your eye, you don't have to worry about seeing a plank in somebody else's eye.  So I, I--and that's been my state.  That's why they say I'm what you call a reconciler.  That bridge represents across the track uniting with the other side of the track.
Story_ID: 289808
Speaker 1: The bridge [James L. Jackson Pedestrian Community Bridge, East Point, Georgia] is named after you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They named the bridge after me.  They tried to name a street and told them they wanted to name a street, and they wouldn't, wouldn't name a street, said they didn't name a street after nobody living.  So they, they, they did name the bridge, and it was a young white boy, that me and his father were great friends, that recommended it.  And this black girl was council for this ward, she second the motion.  And they--it's--when you come back some time, I try--I'll get them together and get them a copy for you.  They got all kind of pictures.  The whole community turned out.  Everybody come.  They got a big bronze picture there.  I never knew I could be pictured in bronze.  I mean--but they got it on the backside of the bridge, on the Cleveland Avenue side, and I'm gonna suggest to them that they move it around to the front side so it would be on the city's street side.  But then everything started coming.  The church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu Methodist United Church, East Point, Georgia] I belonged to, they gave me an award this year in conference as a reconciler.  The church group within the church had never had a black to receive the (unclear) award.  That's award for achievement in the church and dedication to the church.  I got that this year, Mr. East Point 2004.  I--you know, I couldn't understand it.  I said, all the years that I really worked at doing something, that I tried to get people interested in.  I wasn't paying it no attention, 'cause I was just doing what I thought I should do.  I was reversing what I had seen happening before me.  I was not gonna shuffle my feet and scratch my head, but I was gonna get the same results.  I believe you can lead without leading.  Sometimes, you can follow and lead.  And I, I, I had that conviction and it started to pay off, Gus Thornhill Foundation [Gus Thornhill Scholarship Fund, Inc.], I chaired it for some years.  Then, the police, they gave this award for citizen of the year, I, I received it by outstanding work.  And I worked with all the churches.  Not one I--I was superintendent of a joint Sunday school for fifteen years there for five churches.  I was the superintendent of that group.  I won outstanding teacher awards.  I'm, I'm supposed to be pretty tough with--as a Bible teacher, but I never look at things as being good at, I just, like I said, I'm simply one of them perfectionists.  I like to do--whatever I do, I like to try to be the best I can at it.  And if you as good as you wanna be at what you are, I wanna be like you.  I try to get some of your stuff.  I, I believe in advancing.  That's because I guess partly due to the fact that I didn't take advantage of all my educational possibilities and I believe that to learn is just a great experience and everybody ought to attempt to learn.  That's all--that's all this life is, a learning experience.
Story_ID: 288977
Speaker 1: Good morning.
Speaker 2: Morning, sir.
Speaker 1: We're happy to be at the home of Mr. James Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson] again to continue our interview.  Good morning again, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah, good morning.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, if you would--by the way, let me state that with me here, I'm Ed Anderson and interviewer/producer for [The] HistoryMakers, and with me here as our int- as our videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns of the home office in Chicago [Illinois].  Mr. Jackson, again, may I ask you to state your full name and spell it please, sir?
Speaker 2: James L. Jackson, that's James Louis Jackson, and that's--do you wanna spell it out?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Capital J-A-M-E-S, L-O-U-I-S, capital J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And today's date and our present location, please.
Speaker 2: We're at 1229 Calhoun Avenue [East Point, Georgia] and I believe this is the ninth--seventh.
Speaker 1: Seventh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: December 7 [2005].
Speaker 2: December 7, yeah.
Speaker 1: As a World War II [WWII] veteran, you probably remember a little bit about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --December 7th don't you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  As Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] said, a day which will live in infamy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 288978
Speaker 1: Before we get off onto any discussion of the war [World War II, WWII], let me just summarize where we are.  Up until now, you've talked to us about your, your family, your, your upbringing in and around East Point [Georgia], about your service in the [U.S.] military, especially during the time you served as a driver, a truck driver in the Red Ball Express, which we all know is the unit which, which had responsibility of ensuring that General [George] Patton and the rest of the [U.S.] Army in Europe did not outrun their supply lines, and your unit of course developed a reputation of always ensuring that food, gasoline, and so forth was available.  You, you all kept up with the military operations of General Patton and our Army as they moved toward success, as we moved toward success in Europe.  We thank you for your service there, sir.  You talked to us about your early childhood, about your marriage [to Gladys Phillips Jackson] and family as well.  You've shared with us many aspects of your career at Fort Gillem [Atlanta Army Depot; Fort Gillem, Forest Park, Georgia] as a federal employee, and you've talked about your activism here in East, East Point.  There's just so much from your rich life and career that we can go back and accentuate, but let me just ask one question before I get into the philosophical questions that we wanna ask you, I wanna determine if there's anything that, that we have not asked you regarding any of those categories that you'd like to share with us before we continue our questions.
Speaker 2: I think that you've been very thorough in your questioning and with your thoroughness and my lack of memory, I think we covered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --just about, about everything that, that's--
Speaker 1: Well, I think you have--
Speaker 2: --that should be covered in there.
Speaker 1: --a great memory, a very vivid memory and this will be an, an exciting tape to watch for generations hopefully.  Let me just ask this question if I could.  Why did you agree to tell your story?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was on a promise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I told my grandson, the one in the picture that I was gonna write one for him so he would know.  And in the book that I started to write it and I, I wrote--sketched it, I just wrote highlights in there for him so he could turn into his class for a class report.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And when this opportunity came along, I think Nicole [ph.] mentioned it to me, I thought this is an opportunity to, to tell it and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then I have a young white friend at church.  She's--she bought me a book and wants me to write it in that book.  And what people seeming to be interested in, I didn't think very much of it, but it was--it was a great story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 2: And, and it had so much and I said very seldom--I think we need to see that you're never all that you can be and I have gone from the rugged life to a Christian life and enjoyed every moment of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and part of it was in spite of myself.  And I thoroughly just--I, I like the opportunity to talk about it.
Story_ID: 288979
Speaker 1: In that regard, how do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you now?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I would exchange any part of my life for a different life.  I often thought about that.  When I came home [from World War II, WWII], I went out to Clark [University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I--excuse me--I was gonna register for Clark, and I had three or four years of time to go.  And there was something in, in there that disrupted me.  I was phobic then in certain areas and, and I was invited to, to stay on campus.  And I, I just left and I couldn't--I didn't think I could stand it after three years in the [U.S. military] service, being nineteen years old, and, and that's, that's just little bit too much confining.  I didn't think I could stand it.  But I wouldn't trade any of it.  The three years that I spent in service, I wouldn't--I wouldn't--I wouldn't trade them three for no ten years of my life except maybe these last ten.  These have been glorious days in, in, in love and everything else.  But those, those first days, I wouldn't--I wouldn't--I wouldn't trade it and I wouldn't change anything, 'cause it shows, and that's what I like to demonstrate in my life, how you can--people say nothing from nothing leaves nothing, but you can go from nothing to something 'cause according to ingredients you put with it--you try to put natural things with it, it doesn't work, but if you put spiritual things with it, it adds up.  One and one makes one, and one and three makes one, and one and four makes one, you keep going.  Yeah, the godliness in you brings a different kind of happiness from the happiness I served when I was, you know, back in the war.  Travel, I never would've seen the places I've seen, never would've come in contact with the people I come in contact with.  Through the church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia]--I, I don't know whether I mentioned that or not, but it was through the church that I did my traveling within the country, it was through baseball that I did my traveling within the state, and then I came back to the church and we went all over the country, but it was the [U.S.] Army that took me over the world.  Between the baseball, the Army, and the church, my life has been full and almost complete, complete in the church now, but it was--it was--it, it was something to, to live from.  I had never been on a train when I was twelve years old; I had never been on a train.  I rode a train first time at twelve.  And I hadn't been out of the state.  As far as I'd been was down in Griffin [Georgia] up to Atlanta [Georgia] from right here, and just start moving about the country.  The Army put me in Fort Benning [Georgia], then down to Fort Lee, Virginia, Camp Lee [Fort Lee, Prince George County, Virginia] back down to Camp Swift, Texas [Camp Swift, Bastrop County, Texas], and then I started, out ho-boing then, you know, you go different place.  We went to Massachusetts from there and to Scotland, England, France, Belgium, and Germany.  I hit Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia] and Holland [the Netherlands] on trips just to visit, not to--not to have any fun or do anything, just to drive up and unload and come back.  But I had a chance to see some things I never would've seen.  I spent three weeks in Switzerland, two of 'em illegal, but (laughter) it's, it's--I wouldn't trade it.  I wouldn't trade it for anything.  And I saw some things that--like I said, we see charitable things here, but I saw in Switzerland things that Rockefeller had built around Lake Geneva.  And I said, "You know, it's amazing if, if they could build some of them things around one of the colleges, you know, dormitories and things like that."  I was always observing things and that's, that's what kinda--the attitudes.  I, I observed attitudes and I tried to apply them to my Christian beliefs, and it didn't fit, and that's my, my, my object in life at this point is to try to make attitude fit situation, and that's--
Story_ID: 288980
Speaker 1: So, obviously travel was and is important to you and made a difference in your development.
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: What would you say to young people now who are traveling a particular road, especially young brothers who are, are stuck on a way of life, local and not always very aspiring.  How would you encourage them to grow?  Any particular route that you'd taken that you would suggest to them?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I, I constantly say to the men, especially the young men in my community [East Point, Georgia] and in the church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] that the best thing to do is start where you are and check, take stock, take inventory of your life, see where you're at.  And if you're in that drought that seems to be heading down, then you need to change your mind.  Now, if a Christian says that, he'll say you need to repent, but I simply say--I'm a Christian, but I simply said this would change your mind, 'cause there's no way you can get out of a problem with the same mind that got you in the problem.  It's gotta change.  So that's, that's one of the things that I, I, I try to tell them.  You know, stop and take stock of your life and see where you're going.  If you're not going any place, it's just stupid.  It's all right to be ignorant and that's my key phrase, it's all right to be ignorant.  You can learn from ignorance.  But to be stupid?  No.  And to not know that you're stupid (laughter) it's, it's, it's even worse.  And, and, and you take stock and you can see from there that you can go forward.  It's gotta be something you can do.  There's gotta be somebody, and that's the point.  God wants us not to just depend solely upon him but to trust in him and to be with each other until we come to a point to where we can gel together as people.  I like this little commercial that would say "I'm gellin'" and, and it's, it's, it's a thing where if we can get together, we can share things and that's what I--that's--I guess that's my methodology in teaching in, in our bible studies.  We throw something out and we got ten people that's pretty well versed.  And sometimes we come up with eight--at least eight different ideas about a certain passage or something, and we wrestle with it until we reduce it down to no more than two.  And then we'll say, well, let's make a decision and I think young folk going have to decide early in life.  And, and, and I, I guess I have to say this.  I don't blame them altogether.  Parents are gonna have to start before they start.  You see, a kid only knows to do what he had been taught to do, and I think one of our comedians said it best, Moms Mabley, a baby is like a broke--a, a recording, a blank recording.  Whatever you say is what's recorded.  If you want that baby to come up saying father, he'll say father.  But if you start off saying dada and momma, that's the first thing he'll say (laughter), is momma and dada.  So, parents are gonna have to--I think they're saying now in the commercial, parents are gonna have to love their children more and, and what we call in--a lady in our church calls it tough love.  You train a child in the way that you go.  And even if it does depart, it'll come back.  It's like--it's--God is like a lodestone on the bottom of your life.  You can wave, but it's still hooked to the bottom, and sooner or later it'll draw it back to the top; it'll stand up.  It's--so I would--I would--I would suggest to them that they do certain things, and even when they get up in their thirties, I suggest that they take care of their health, black men especially.  Go get yourself checked out, especially your genital organs, you know, get checked, keep yourself healthy.  There--if you keep yourself healthy, you live longer.  You live longer, you carry knowledge further.  That's about--that's about how I feel about 'em.  And they--young people are--I got--all my friends are practically young, young college students that come in, they call me grandpa, poppy or whatever.  But I had a baseball team, a young boy--they all seemed to be in pretty good shape.  Out of about fifteen, thirteen of 'em is--one's dead and thirteen of 'em is in pretty good shape.
Story_ID: 288981
Speaker 1: You were selected as a HistoryMaker in the category of community activism.  For your young friends and the young men in the community who've chosen that route, that is being community--a community activist, what suggestion do you have for them in order to grow and do what's right about their community?
Speaker 2: Well, they gonna have to--they gonna have to first of all consider one of the golden rules, do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  Learn to love one another.  But in love, you do not have to take a bunch of stuff.  In love--you can love a person, and if you really love a person, you want that person to be right.  You don't--you don't shun a person because you think you dislike him.  But if you love him, you go to him and you draw him to you.  I would suggest that they take stock of theirselves again and see what--the same as I said by members leaving one church, going to another one.  If you take stock of yourself and you have to leave the second church, you ought to stop right then and look back and see it may not be the church, it may be you.  And right now to--especially to young black men to quit looking for excuses because they did this and they did that.  It had nothin' to do with you.  Get out there and do this for yourself so you can say I did this, I did that.  That's the only thing I like about Paul in scripture.  Paul bragged a lot, but what he said, I can do all things through Christ.  But he kept Christ in the picture, but he kept saying I, I, I, and that's what we have to do.  He, he was the only preacher I ever heard or read about that said follow me as I follow Christ.  Most of 'em would say don't do as do, do as I say do.  So I think the young men just, just take stock, set, set a goal.  That's the biggest thing, set a goal for somethin'.  And if you don't--if, if--even if you don't reach it, set it so high that if you reach for the moon, you at least fall among the stars somewhere and you don't--you don't--you don't drop all the way down to cloudy weather and get caught in the rain.
Story_ID: 288982
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], what do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: I think my biggest dream right now is to encourage people toward perfection and, and that's in--that's in, in all facets.  And that's--it's what everybody seem to think is impossible.  They said none--there's none perfect and there's none impossible.  But I'm saying, there again, you're reaching for the ultimate and anything you reach above where you are is an advance in life.  And somebody behind you, if you live a good example, somebody's watching you.  They'll go a little farther than you went.  And the next, somebody would go a little farther than you would.  And pretty soon, where you wind up saying--wind up being alive because the truth has been achieved by somebody younger than you.  And it just--perfection is not anything to be afraid of now.  I, I would--I would say to, especially in that side of the, the knowledge, especially young black Christian girls and boys, don't be afraid of perfection.  Perfection and holiness are two things that without you can't see God and if you think you believe in a God, then you're, you're living a phony life if you don't believe in it.  But when you do things, do it real, do it honest.  I said to the church in Savannah [Georgia], they put me out that church.  They didn't--well, they told me not to come back with that kind of sermon.  You know, if you gotta go to hell, go in style, live it up.  Enjoy life here, then go into hell and suffer, but don't go to hell through the church pretending to be one thing.  You gotta hide from deacon so-and-so and reverend so-and-so.  Be honest in your life.  Choose something.  And it took me a long time.  I mean, I, I--that's why I can--I can be kind of lenient with them.  It took a long time to--I was--I was--what do you do when you draft--graft, graft trees, you put 'em together, you put a plum tree, graft it into a peach tree and you come up with a peach plum.  I was grafted into the church.  I loved my [maternal] grandfather [James Meadows] and he was my idol, and he was in the church, so I went with him.  When he knelt to pray, I knelt to pray, sometimes because I thought momma [Jackson's maternal grandmother, Mattie Atkins Meadows] would whip me if I kept standing in back kicking up a fuss.  But I went and I grew in that thing, and I'm saying now that unless we can graft a portion of goodness in our lives, we can't make it on crack and alcohol; we can't make it.  I don't see alcohol--alcohol is only as dangerous as you make it.  The only thing that can control you in your total life is God.  Now, you making a God out of crack, you caught.  You can't get away from him.  You make a God of alcohol, the same, same difference.  But there is a God that can take you away from all of that stuff and that's what we have to see, the goodness, and whether you like--I tell a fellow at my class.  I got a class member that don't like church, but he constantly would give me ten or twenty dollars or he'll give me an envelope with some money and I, I don't even count it.  I just put his name on it and turn it into the treasurer.  He said, "I like your class, I like your philosophy of teaching, but I just don't like preaching."  He said, "Preacher get up and say anything he want to and nobody can say nothing but amen," and he just don't like it.  I said, "Well, you know, what you gotta do is adjust your life and see why is it that you don't like it?  Look back in your life.  What preacher done something to you that you don't like?  Or what service did your parents make you go to that really affected your life?"  Now, I got him pretty well.  One of 'em is coming regular and staying for service, and he didn't like no one but the preacher, but he's staying for service.  And last Sunday, he said he had the best service he'd ever had in his life.  So I guess there are some things that we can do, the children, the young people can do, but parents gotta start 'em to doing it.  It's just like a toy that runs.  If you don't never wind it, it won't never move, so we have to do some winding now.
Story_ID: 288983
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have done already that you would like to have done differently, Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson]?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  Most, most of my early life I would've liked to have, have done it different.  I, I, I left home going into the [U.S.] Army because I thought my parents were too strict on me; my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Atkins Meadows] raised me.  And I wanted to go see Count Basie and Duke Ellington and they didn't come to the the blues lot back then except one minute after twelve on Sunday and we--she--I couldn't go, 'cause I couldn't stay out after dark.  And this broke the straw when I made the football team at [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I couldn't go because they played at Friday night and I couldn't be out at night.  Some of the worst chastising I ever got or whipping, whatever you wanna call it, was about darkness catching me.  Just darkness, not night.  Just shadow darkness coming.  And I just got--I just got tired of it.  And, see, my parents had a method of whipping then.  They didn't--they didn't play.  Momma, momma drop your pants in the middle of the street and whip you.  She wouldn't beat them clothes, she'll beat you.  And I, I, I think if I had to do it all over again, I'd take that.  Not that I said I wouldn't--you know, I said I wouldn't trade this, but my thing is, now, even though I don't have a complete formal education, I think it's something that every child needs to set as a goal to look forward to 'cause it's better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it.  And I come into that kind of situation in the church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] wherein if I had had just one year of college, I could've been on the board as a board member, as a paid person on that board, and that I would've had a chance, opportunity then to have served maybe twenty years on the board, and even in retirement and with--they, they had some of the better salaries that was going then.  But I couldn't--I couldn't get the position because I didn't have--the guy that was competing with me, he admitted that I was far--I could far excel him in stewardship, but he had a master's degree and he was a high school math teacher so that, that, that killed me.  But I, I, I--continually, they put me in as chairman of this or chairman of that.  They kept me running from board to board.  I stayed on the board twenty-two years in the church.  And it's--and I say then pursuing an education is--I, I, I may well just--even if I went now, if I came back I would go ahead and, and, and take that education and complete--that's the one thing--I think that's the one mistake I made by not going on in school.
Story_ID: 288984
Speaker 1: You've already eluded to this, but tell us again, what are you hopes for and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That it would--that it would seek complete citizenship, you know?  Why are we--why are we adding to America?  If it's--if it's good enough to be me, it's good enough for me just to be it.  A guy told me, he said you're a--you're a--you're a Afro-American.  Now, I never seen Africa, not one time.  And my roots go so far back and they're split up.  They're worse than the story 'Roots' they put on television.  You got a white guy right in the middle of it and they just go right through him and go on back to Africa, so how do you do that?  So how do I say I'm African American?  I got--I might say I'm mixed up with some, some Cherokee Indians [Native Americans] or something, 'cause my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Atkins Meadows] told me that her great-grandmother was complete Cherokee, she's thoroughbred, and, and, and some white mixed in there.  They all--they all mixed up.  So my, my, my dream for, for the modern generation is they will not look at color of skin, that they will look at, like [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] said, the principle of a person's life, what a person presented.  In scripture, you never see black in there but one time and I think that's when one of Solomon's women said, "I'm a commonly black woman," and she went on to describe how he run across the field and how he'd lay her hand under--hand under her head and he'd press her breast.  It's, it's full of pornography back then, but, but never do you ever see anything related because when God started it out, it one blood and all of 'em come from dust.  You ever seen the white dust?  Dirt?  When you see it, it's usually snakes around it.  Well, and everybody changes things as it come along.  The artists come along and draw the picture of the Madonna and her child and he uses his wife and daughter as a model, and they're Italian, so Christ became Italian and his mother became Italian.  And consequently now, you go into every church, black and white, you see a big white Christ.  Why?  Why did it have to be?  What they ought to have is a flame up there saying this is a spirit and I hope to see that some day we will get away from the idea that color making the distinction, that it would be attitudes 'cause that's all God's spirit is, an attitude.
Speaker 1: I think you're right about color not playing a large role in the Bible because people didn't emphasize color.  They emphasized nationality; however, and it was not until slavery that the dominant people decided that they'd stigmatize color because they wanted to build an institution based on color.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But there's several references to Africa in the Bible, not called Africa because it wasn't named that then.
Speaker 2: It's called Kemet.  It's called Kemet.  It's called Egypt.
Speaker 1: Ethiopia.
Speaker 2: All, all of Africa was Ethiopia at one time.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: The all--the all known Africa was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Ethiopia means sunburnt people.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Kemet means sunburnt people.  So you, you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a problem.  There wasn't--everybody understood what everybody want.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Most people in the Old Testament were people of color.
Speaker 2: Well I, I saw that in France.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In fact, let me refer you if I could and then we'll get on with the question.  As early as the second chapter of the book of Genesis when they give the parameters for the Garden of Eden, the very first country in the Bible addressed is the country of Ethiopia, second chapter of Genesis, thirteenth verse, when it tells what the southern boundary was, the river that ran.  Basically, they talk about the Nile River.  And, of course, anthropologically, we know that the oldest fossils were found there in Africa as well--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so that lines up the scripture.  Didn't mean to get into all of that, but it just--
Speaker 2: But it, it--it's, it's, it's interesting to note that.  And, and, and, you see, I don't know where the word slavery come from because we didn't come from slavery.  That's what bothers me.  Everybody get up to, well, we didn't advance.  Well, quit looking at slavery and go beyond to your--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --history.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You come from kings--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: --and, and, and if you figure you come from a king, you at least ought to be a prince.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Sure.  And that's the point of your point, and I agree with you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I agree.
Story_ID: 289055
Speaker 1: Again, Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], what are your thoughts about the modern Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: I wonder do we still have one in, in the modern time.  Do we--do we--do we have any movement that--I think it has turned from being my brother's keeper to every man for himself.  And unless we can get back to the--what, what he called, [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] called non-violence--but unless we can get back to a love consideration, a love consideration is not being a fool but it's, it's saying don't fight every time you get slapped, you know?  And some philosophy of it is that turn the other cheek and if they slap that one, then go to war.  If you get two of 'em slapped, then that's, that's over in the other Islam kind, kind, kind of thinking, see?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Take one, take two, but then go to war.  Well, we've got to learn to, to love people enough to, to see a mistake, accept the mistake, then forgive it.  If you can't do no better than a person can do, why are you complaining about that person?  If you can't forgive that person, how do you expect, the God that you think will serve to forgive you, he said--and then as we pray in our prayer, forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive.  That means if you don't forgive, nobody else--you not gonna be forgiven.  So the problem is, in the movement, it has to be not concern for one.  And see, we gotta take race out of it.  Race and color has got to get out of it.  And, and my--I think my biggest problem right now is that I may be wrong, but I think we are moving towards classism.  Like English folk--English folk didn't care what color you were.  If you were in the class, you were in there.  If you was a duke in--you could be black as that sweater you got on.  They'll still recognize you.  But if you wasn't in the class, they didn't recognize you no kind of way.  You are nothing, and that's bad too, but I think that's where we are headed.  They're taking out middle class.  There's no more middle class.  You either be poor or rich now.  And most of us are living in a poor status.  And rather than be poor and can't be rich, we will be nothing.  We go in the streets and live under the bridge.  You got Ph.D.s and everything else living under the bridge, to give up on life.  Well, when you give up on life, that is to say when you've gone as far as you can go, then it's time to seek somebody else.  Seek somebody, find you somebody that you can trust in.  And if you listen to me, it will be God.  If you listen to somebody else, it might be somebody else.  But all you gotta do is remember that when young men, they, they talk about going to Islam and Buddhism, and then--or they go we're, we're hearing for everything now.  But we're, we're, we're doing what we thought we couldn't do and that's not the point of the movement.  Not just to get to do something you couldn't do.  I used to couldn't go here, I used to couldn't eat here, I used to--not doing something you used to couldn't do, but doing something that you could do in the community together.  And, and then don't be choice about who that togetherness is with.
Story_ID: 289056
Speaker 1: You came along during the era of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and many of the civil rights leaders.  What interaction if any did you have with Dr. King or any of the other civil rights leaders in the Atlanta [Georgia] area or wherever?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we had interaction with Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] here in Atlanta, but with Dr. King, the only thing I ever did was to go to the church or something.  I, I, I never had any interaction with him.  In fact, when he was in the midst of that, I was in the midst of trying to get my life together to see which way I wanted to go.  And I never was concerned--you see, I never--oddly enough, I was raised in a community [East Point, Georgia] where we were all black.  We didn't--we lived on this side of the track; we never crossed the railroad track except maybe on Saturday go to a movie or to shop.  Other than that, we didn't walk across.  They had a fine on people, black folk that got caught across the street.  But I never was--I never created the hatred for nobody.  Some of my best friends now are white.  There is something that you have to get out of, the slight mistrust that hangs in and, well, that's, that's, that's--see, you don't fight against material things.  You fight against principalities and that, that kind of spirit of getting you, say don't trust him now, 'cause remember--as long as you can remember, it just--I don't know, I, I never was interested really in like we go to the movies and, and we couldn't--we couldn't go downstairs and our only rebellion was to put water in bags and drop it downstairs because we had to sit in the balconies.  Well, finally, they eliminated that process and you could--downtown, you could go to the same Fox Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia] everybody could go, but you still was going up them stairs, going upstairs and you just didn't realize, it's just changed (unclear).  But I, I don't--I don't see civil rights to be like--I mean, I see civil rights as being a togetherness thing when--and, and that's what I admired about his movement.  He had a lot of people participate and you got your Jane Fondas and a whole bunch of people that was even better.  You see, sometimes even though Martin was there and done some things, the responsible people for the movement were the people, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] out there, them people in them little wild bunches out there.  Rather than accept somebody that was killing somebody, they would gladly patronize their person that was saying let's don't fight and let's take this beating, so we just beat these and give 'em what they want so we can stop them others out there.  And what will that do in the eventual end?  That will create a fight within the self.  You're saying don't fight and I'm saying do fight.  And I, I listen to [HistoryMaker Minister Louis] Farrakhan the week before last and I was very interested in the way he, he has changed and mellowed down.  He's still for being something and grabbing for something, but don't take it.  Don't just take somebody else's and say you, you owe me something.  Don't nobody owe you nothing.  And if you chase the principles all the way back, I don't know, I guess I'd just sooner be picking cotton, just throwing a spear at somebody running through the woods somewhere.
Story_ID: 289057
Speaker 1: What then do you say about affirmative action?
Speaker 2: Everybody that has accomplished anything that wasn't nothing has used affirmative action.  And it's, it's odd to me that once they get through it they, they deny it.  They, they--affirmative action says to a fellow, you came on the affirmative action program--me and you both go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you're, you're there on a regular scholarship basis.  You went and, and I go in affirmative action with part scholarship.  Well, it's, it's a different story.  Affirmative action puts me down but it helps me up.  And what we have to look at as, as a lift source according to how you take, what attitude you take toward affirmative action.  Me?  I take it as a lifter, 'cause it gives opportunity, but I don't think it ought to be directed at any one people.  I don't--I don't think that.  You can't correct a mistake that's already made.  You have to be sorry for them mistakes and do make them no more.  If you keep trying to correct mistakes, you're getting farther and farther in the past, and the--and, and, and my philosophy is you can't live today and yesterday looking for tomorrow.  You gotta walk away from yesterday and live today advancing toward tomorrow.  But you can't--you can't keep living in the past.  And I, I, I think that it's a great thing, but it needs to be just balanced out there.  Whoever deserves it gets it.  In fact, we have a scholarship fund here in the city, Gus Thornhill Foundation [Gus Thornhill Scholarship Fund, Inc.].  They do a great job with scholarship but they don't--they don't pick people according to color.  They, they got four high schools, and they do it according to need; that takes up a certain percentage.  Scholarship takes up a certain percentage.  And that, that--and that's the way I think affirmative action should be, not, not just to say I'm on--I'm on a quota, 'cause quotas don't mean nothing.  You got football players out there now that can't even spell their names, big running stars and, and, and we're getting away from that somewhat, but some schools are still challenging.  You'll find that they going--they going finally put take on, suspend less and getting people in and then furnishing them with tutor and car and all that stuff, trying to keep them in school.  And that's--they're not learning anything.  They get tutored for a test and then after the test is over then--very few scholarly athletes come through.  I, I guess that's why I like this boy out in Texas [at University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], Vince Young.  He, he got--a couple of them out there, one of them cornerbacks, four-point average, and one three point ten, point one-o.  But, I, I, I still think affirmative action is good, so ain't no problem with that.
Story_ID: 289058
Speaker 1: What role should religion play in the lives of African Americans in our community (cough)?
Speaker 2: It should bring on a better wonderment, 'cause God is an awesome God and it should bring on a better wonderment.  We should wonder when we start to look at ourselves, if I don't believe in God, why don't I believe in God?  I've come this far, by what?  Is it by faith or is it just by the goodness of God that you've allowed to come.  And that's what I meant a while ago when I said God brought me through an early stage in my life.  When I was as reckless as they could come, I'd run across a mine field just to shake a apple tree and come out all right, thought I was smart, just back out the same way you went in.  If you didn't blow up going in, you wouldn't blow up going out.  But it was only by the mercies of Him.  Then you gotta figure out how you got where you got and do not let it become religious.  You see, it's, it's, it's--religion is man grasping after God, but Christianity is God coming to get man, and that's the difference.  Christianity, you should fall out, but religion, it's a fallacy.  It, it, it becomes--your ritual becomes a religion.  You get up every Sunday morning and wash your Cadillac and shine it, it becomes a ritual.  That's your religion and it becomes your God.  If anybody scratches it or something, you ready to tear up at the world with him.  But Christianity is that, you know, look at this beautiful car I have.  I think I'll drive it down to the church and go in and worship and thank God for it.  And then I don't care how dirty it get, it's gonna be pretty 'cause it took you down there and it'll bring you back.  And then you say, well, I, I may clean it up.  I may wait 'til tomorrow and clean it up.
Story_ID: 289059
Speaker 1: What can we learn from sports in order to live a more meaningful life?
Speaker 2: Togetherness.  Togetherness, leadership, followship.  A good follower makes a good leader and a good leader can lead and makes a good shepherd.  A good leader can lead from the rear as well as in the front.  Now, some people have to be up on a podium.  They have to be up--upstairs.  They have to be the big icon, whatever it is.  But a good leader can lead.  And right now, we need to practice, young folk need to practice following.  It's, it's always somebody.  You, you go in any class, you'll find somebody that's gonna be popular.  And organizational structure would have organized groups to live together, to work together, and don't be exclusive in those groups.  See, we're kind of exclusive ourselves.  We, we, we do things and we exclude everybody out.  But what you got to do is learn to draw a circle and, and include everybody in.  And that's, that's, that's what I think really.  It's gonna be--it's gonna be--our, our future's gonna depend primarily on how well we can live what we talk about, not so much if you can preach it.  I can preach a sermon on anything.  I can almost flip to any page in the Bible and, and, and come up with a--with a--with a eight-minute message anyway.  That doesn't mean anything.  Attitude is what counts.  We gotta get some attitudes toward one another.
Story_ID: 289060
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: My tenure in the church [United Methodist Church] at--from 1980 through 1988, I was on the [General] Board of Church and Society in Washington [D.C.] at that--for those years.  And in between, I, I experienced a lot of things.  The March on Washington for, for Labor [20th Anniversary March on Washington], in fact in 1973, I believe--was it '83 [1983], '73 [1973], '83 [1983], whatever, '73 [sic. 1983], and we had a--they had a new commission that we all went back to remember and, and I looked at the board and that board was made up of all kind of people, and that was a rich experience for me 'cause I had lived on a local level where everything I did was either in the black church [Mallalieu Methodist Church; East Point First Mallalieu United Methodist Church, East Point, Georgia] or reporting in the major church in the--in the--in the house church, just reporting, just going in.  That's the only time we every really got together.  I have some white friends now that we only see each other at annual conference.  And I went to annual conference for maybe about twenty years or so, so I got to know all the older Christians, so, so--called Christians in that.  But that eight years was, was a lesson for me.  I, I, I met all kinds of people.  Bishop [Desmond] Tutu was on the board with me.  Leontine Kelly, the first woman black bishop was on the board with me.  And, and, and there--Theressa Hoover who had a brain operation and come out smarter than she was when she went in.  I had some experience with it.  I, I saw God at work and yet I saw--we--our prime thing was strikes, great strike, great pickets and things in California, and homosexuality.  Then I saw a, a mixture of people, an idea, lost one of my best friends 'cause I told him, "If you face up to the fact that this son is homosexual and accept him as he is, then your love won't change.  But if you gonna try to shield him, you gonna either hate me and love him or you're gonna hate the both of us."  And consequently, I, I--we lived through that and we became, you know, all right.  And then I went to New York [New York] a couple of times, one to speak to a United Nations [UN] group on the return of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan, that's what they called it in that day.  And to me, that was a, a wonderful opportunity.  I--here I am, nobody, you know, and I, I, I never considered myself to be very much.  But I was so equally balanced and, and I wanted to be so much for my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] and family 'cause I, I wanted--I wanted--I wanted everything to be--so I chose a route that I could be something in through the church, but not having a formal education.  The easiest route to go is through God 'cause that's where everything is.  And I, I chose that.  But them eight years was quite an experience.  And I--after I come out, then you realize that there are all kinds of people in the world and there, there always was.  There, there were--there were times in scripture when they said there are eunuchs for Christ sake and there are eunuchs for a cause, and there are eunuchs just, 'cause people wanna be a eunuch.  But there were always--I, I think [Baruch] Spinoza talked about it in his reading in--on causations and for everything there's a reason and for every--for every reason there comes a result when you get to it.  And for instance in the story of--what's the girl's name, Mordecai's niece [sic. cousin]?
Speaker 1: Esther?
Speaker 2: Esther.  In the story of Esther, man have a harem and have him thirty, forty women in there, beautiful women.  But the man that he put in charge of, he castrated him, made a eunuch out of him.  That's a eunuch for his cause.  Then there come people like Paul that became a eunuch for God's cause.  And I don't know whether either one of 'em is worth two cent or not, but it just--you know, I learned to take people as I--as I found and not judge 'em.
Story_ID: 289061
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why?
Speaker 2: Well, family is what I think is the most important.  Because it's there you get the basis of everything.  And if you notice, I guess all my answers will come--like I said, I deal in the vain where I can handle myself.  I deal in, in, in the Christian light of things.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: And in the family--you have to have a family.  Our biggest problem is we got too many one-sided families.  We got too many women trying to raise boys and, and, and they don't know how to raise boys.  They're a good helper with a man to raise a boy, but, like again, I say, they always make good helpers, good associates.  That's what they would (unclear) for in the first place, and I believe that firmly.  But I do believe that if the job needs to be done, they can do it.  So that's not saying they, they shouldn't do it.  They should do anything that they're capable of doing, but they should not leave their job just to do something, 'cause they said a man can do it.  An astronaut--I mean, it's all right to fly a plane, but how do you feel when you pull the trigger and see a human being down in front of here.  How does a woman feel when she get ready to mash that button and blow that person out the sky?  Man don't give a doggone.  It's exciting to him.  He, he ain't got no mind.  He just got one-sided work and the other side ain't doing nothing.  So I think basically from the family to the church, then the church starts looking to the family to help.  And then the educational system, it needs to be added in there.  You need to have an education 'cause if you don't, you're just a lost cause out here in the world.  And right now, a college education just about gets you to ringing at McDonald's cash register.  You got to have even more than that.  And still, it's hard to find a job.  And that's simply because of our problems.  If the government had an affirmative action program or if the companies had affirmative action program in the hiring and whatnot, you would have maybe a little bit more, but it still wouldn't--it wouldn't be the thing that you need.  You need people to love one another and that's the basic of it all.
Story_ID: 289062
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you when you're, you're gone?
Speaker 2: He lived without criticism on life and died and looking for an extended life.  I, I, I criticize people, but not life.  My life has been wonderful and I'm, I'm--and to be grateful.  That's the thing that--I--it's hard.  It's hard to, to thank God for something and you're hurting and, and you're--and everything goes wrong.  I'll give you an example.  When I had my hip surgery, they--I'm a--I'm a--I'm a firm believer in the healing power of God.  I had--when my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] was sick, doctor told us that--when we went to meet him, he told us, he said I'm your doctor, Christ is your physician, let us pray, and that man warned me from, from then on, and everything worked out fine.  We had our first child when we wasn't supposed to have children.  We had our second child.  But that was--that was fine.  That, that--that's a good experience for me, but I just--I, I don't know.  It, it--it's, it's hard for me to back myself in a hole and I want--I want folks to say he is somebody that tried to be somebody in spite of anybody.  And I just--I, I pushed toward that goal and I try to know what I can and what I don't know, I try to listen.  If I stayed around Scott [Stearns] and help him tighten' up bolts and nuts, sooner or later I'd be able to do this.  I went on the board [General Board of Church and Society, Washington, D.C.] and that's why I said that was my greatest experience.  I went on board with a hundred and some, one hundred sixty-six people on the board, didn't nobody know me, nobody on the board.  And I won offices and elections and, and just talked my way up the ladder, BS-ing.  But I, I was in the field where I could work.  I couldn't a done that out here in the world.  In fact, I tried it in the political arena and they didn't wanna understand in the political.  You can't be honest and be, be a politician.  You, you just have to--something is different about it.  God ordains leadership whether it's good or bad, and when he gets tired of it, he moves it one way or the other, so we--I, I, I didn't worry about that.  The, the, the other side of it is that when they look back at me and say, hey, old Jack [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson] was all right.  He lived a good life.  He lived a bad life and the bad life was good to him and the good life was better to him, and God had forgiven him.  Now, he's adjusted to eternal life.  That's what I'm looking for.
Story_ID: 289063
Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children [Ronsonn M. Jackson and Mazie C. Jackson Few], your grandchildren, and for the world?
Speaker 2: I would almost--I can convince now--my--I can tell you my son is in the ministry now.  My first advice to him was, "Son, if you go in there, remember if you're not for real, this the first step to hell, 'cause you'll be conceited, and you'll be fooled.  People will lead you down a path and if you're not strong, you'll, you'll stumble and you'll fall in that path.  But if you can make it, then make it.  But find you a leader and let that leader be Christ in your life in the ministry."  To me, I can almost say to the people around me, as Paul said when he talked to Timothy, some of his friends there, Titus and that much said follow me as I follow Christ.  And I, I hope to live to be--to the point to where I can say--it, it tickles me to death when the little kids run up and call me Poppy and hug me and kiss me and it just tickles me to death.  I feel great, if my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] smiles at me for something I say.  'Cause that's what I want.  I want to fix it so that somebody can see some good in me.
Story_ID: 289064
Speaker 1: Last question, why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, just in case you get lost on the way, history will tell you where you come from and give you another starting point.  But I'll tell you, I, I almost agree with the unknown writer in 'Leaves of Gold' that says history is a lie agreed upon by ten to twelve different important people.  If they agree on it, it becomes history.  It's history.  Like, for instance, the, the Red Ball Express you talked about, it's history and it's documented history by stories that's told.  And sometimes to a person that was in it, it gets to be painful to see it.  For instance, they were sending bodies back and I've seen 'em on the road so thick that we were running over 'em with trucks, not knowing it was bodies under the dirt, dust and stuff while the tanks are turning up.  And I've seen 'em take angle dozers that dig ditches down the side of a field and shove all them bodies in the ditch and then--and then the next thing I hear is they sending some bodies home.  How do you know what you pulling out?  Dog tags laying all in the field.  They just pick up a set of dog tags and send, send something home.  Well, I don't know.  History is all right for a start so that you know where you're going or where you come from, and then you gotta--you gotta aim at some goals.  Again, goals is the most important thing I believe in life.  You gotta set some goals out there.  And for me, I never thought I had done anything.  I never--in fact, I tell my wife [Gladys Phillips Jackson] sometimes that I've, I've, I've lived so long and done so much and none of it was never appreciated until, excuse me, these last days, everything comes in.  Downstairs, I looked night before last, I got plaques, last year I was Mr. East Point, last year I got the Birch [ph.] award from my church, last year I got the award as outstanding reconciliator in the con- in the conference.  All of a sudden, everything just pulls in and I'm in retirement.  But it teaches you one thing.  If you wait on the Lord, he'll renew your strength and you'll begin to soar, not walk and not faint, you'll be soar like eagle because everything you do is coming for.  You'll be rewarded for these things and I think I'm being rewarded.  I, I think--this is a great gesture to me.  I mean, I feel--I feel so important.  I would--if I had some high heel shoes, I'd strut.  I feel--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, thank you for the life you have lived.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you for being so gracious--
Speaker 2: Appreciate you.
Speaker 1: --with your time, sir.
Speaker 2: Appreciate you.  Appreciate your interest.
Speaker 1: And thank you for the example you have set.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People will learn from this for generations to come, hopefully.
Story_ID: 287790
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker James L. Jackson], this photo.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who's in the--when and where it was taken.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is--this is me and my grandson, Ellic [ph.].  Ellic is about a year old here.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where was it taken?
Speaker 2: And we were at--we were at his home down at--my son-in-law's home, Larry Fewe [ph.], and we both had dozed off lookin' at a game.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And I think I know something 'cause we talked about this earlier--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --that this was taken about twelve years ago--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --so that would've been--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --about '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ninety-two [1992], '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That's close.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay that's good.  No, no, no (unclear).  All right, that's good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, then we'll get description of this one, just who's in it, when was it taken, where was it taken.
Speaker 1: This is--the top picture on the left is my mother and the gentleman in the middle is my uncle, the one--the lady on the end is my aunt [Ruby Meadows], the two older people that--that's my grandmother [Mattie Atkins Meadows] and grandfather [James Meadows].  They raised me.  And I'm on the right with the X on the shirt, and that's my cousin on the other one.  And that was the total family that lived together here in East Point [Georgia] for--up until 1936 when one of 'em died.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's my mother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ed [Anderson], hold--reach over with your hand and just hold the top so it doesn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --fall.  Push your finger at the top edge.  Just do a quick hold up.  There you go.  Okay.  Oh, it's curling at the bottom now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What we may have to do is, you know, gently, you probably seen Larry [Crowe] do it, sorta gently curl it back--
Speaker 1: You can fold it.  I mean, I, I got a thousand around here somewhere.  I got more pictures of her than I got anything else.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I shoot a clip before it bends back again.  Okay, go ahead with the description, sir.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Ola [Mae Meadows].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Do you know about when this was taken?
Speaker 1: In--probably in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Gladys [Phillips Jackson], and she was fifteen when that was taken when I first met her.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's me when I come out of [U.S. military] service in 1947.  I was nineteen then, almost twenty.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.  Is that our, our next largest one?  I know the paper is large, but is that--do we have any photos that are--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes we have some.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --close to that eight by ten size and maybe another five by seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you got two or three of them over there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There.  Oh, that's fine.  That's all right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the baseball team and I'm the extreme player on the left just outside of the group.  That's our championship team from 1954, first year we signed a contract to play semi-pro baseball.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.  What was the name of the team?
Speaker 1: East Point Bears.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: This is a, a meeting at the Surf Room in Nashville, Tennessee, at the election of Bishop L. Scott Allen.  And he was about the longest tenure of a bishop in the southeastern jurisdiction [United Methodist Church].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  We're gettin' pretty good rhythm goin' here.  Everybody keep with what you're doin'.  Okay, go ahead, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a meeting at old Clark College [sic. Clark University; Clark Atlanta University] on (unclear) campus in South Atlanta [Georgia] in 1963.  That white fellow, the second from the right is the man that taught me lay speaking and carried me to Chicago [Illinois] and trained me in lay speaking instruction.  I'm in the center of that photograph and those are people from North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now, I don't want you to hurt yourself, but that, that one corner, there's a little--okay great, great.  Just hold that for a second, and got it.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting in Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Approximate?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.  Okay, what about this one?
Speaker 1: That's the Fowler House on the campus at Purdue University in Lafayette, Indiana [sic. West Lafayette, Indiana].  I met this man from this--this is a group that went on a bus from here to there and stayed a week, and some of our young--one of our ministers are there, the young man on the extreme right on the front.  You can't--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where are you in the photo?
Speaker 1: Right in the center with the shades on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And what--when, when, when did this take place?
Speaker 1: It was about the same time, '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very good.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I've been every year just about.  Every four years they go.
Speaker 2: And that's the pedestrian bridge [James L. Jackson Community Bridge, East Point, Georgia] they named for me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can it move right just a little bit?  Just a hair--okay, great.  Thank you.  Okay.  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So that bridge is located here in East Point?
Speaker 1: Right at Main Street one block below where we went to eat before.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you, you said--well, when, when you were looking through the photos, you said the date.  It was 2002?
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], April.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now, we sort of know, but for the caption.  Well, well, we should just keep going here.  Okay, go ahead with this one.
Speaker 1: That's, that's at the bridge dedication.  That's my total family.  That's the whole family that we have living now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It includes your--
Speaker 1: My grandchildren--my grandkids and all except one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's a fishing expedition.  We went down to my friend's lake.  That's where I broke my hip at.  We caught--I caught that large bass.  That was last year [2004].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's my great-grandson, great-grandson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Name?
Speaker 1: Emil.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  E-M-I-L?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  When was this taken approximately?
Speaker 1: About two months ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's when I came out of--when I first came home on furlough from service.  That's the first service picture I had made.  I was not quite seventeen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: That was a picture when I was three or four years old.  That'll tell you how long that's been.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Stand by.  We're just--okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: That was a picture in France just outside of--I think it was outside of Le Havre [France].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  All right.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's from--this is my father, R.V. Jackson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Almost (unclear) and get both cameras positioned on this.  Okay, got it.  Next.  Gettin' to the end?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There's one more after this one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now that one would be--because we're looking at the, the photo itself, not the page--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So that one would be 90 degree--there you go.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Landscape position.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's graduating class from 1941, '40 [1940], '41 [1941] class of East Point, Bayard Street School.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Spell Bayard please.
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Spell the name of the school please.
Speaker 1: East Point, E-A-S-T, P-O-I-N-T, B-A-Y-A-R-D, Bayard Street School, S-C-H-O-O-L.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Do we want the whole piece there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I just wanna make sure we frame what you want.  All right, let's see.
Speaker 1: Would it be ease--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead with the description.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Whenever you're ready.
Speaker 1: This is a--this is a--this is a write-up in the paper that they, they gave me from my job and the date is on it, November 1972, in leadership position in the church.  I was--in '82 [1982], rather.  I was chairperson of the Board of Churches Society [General Board of Church and Society, Washington, D.C.] at that time, Ethnic Minority Local Church [Committee], and we spent about $20 million every four years on ethnic churches to help bring 'em up to a, a standard.  And the, the comments in there is almost similar to what I've given you already in, in that--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's November, 1982.
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], yeah.  I was on board from '80 [1980] to '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Now, the one I was interested in is, is a family picture.  Can I move?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, sir.  He can move now, can't he?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We're really--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  One last one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  If you have any other pictures, we gotta go really, really fast.
Speaker 1: No, I think but one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: We--this is a picture taken of me and my wife and was it year before last, so that was in--that would be in 2002 right after the dedicate that for me they--I guess we was maybe--I was seventy-something and she was seventy-something.
