Story_ID: 94976
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Mathew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm Dr. George Jenkins, G-E-O-R-G-E, J-E-N-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have any nicknames or any other, or a middle name or anything?
Speaker 2: People call me "G," and I don't tell my middle name (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Sumter, South Carolina, February 6, 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a dentist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Be--oh, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 16, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are currently in Newark, New Jersey.
Story_ID: 94977
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and--
Speaker 2: Feel free.
Speaker 1: --they just require a short answer.  The first one is, Sir, what, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color has to be blue. I, I really have--it took me awhile to isolate a favorite color.  I didn't really feel like I had a favorite color, but I found myself being--buying blue shirts all over the place (laughter).  So, it has to be blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like pasta in different, you know, the various ways that you can prepare pasta.  But I'm a big fan of pasta.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say two favorites.  I like fall and spring, when it's mild weather about to get hot and then when it's relatively hot and going into the mild season.  But I like the spring and the fall best.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I haven't really had the opportunity to travel extensively.  All of my resources were, had to go into helping me become a dentist.  So now that I am a dentist, I've been traveling a lot more and exploring the, the country as well as other regions of the world, so.  I haven't picked one as of yet, but I'm working on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a, a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: One, I, I guess my favorite phrase or saying would be to just do it, you know, alleviate whatever your fears are and your hang-ups about whatever it is, or fears that you have about approaching or trying to accomplish whatever your goal is; just go for it.
Story_ID: 94978
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: That's something that's been trou--troubling me as of late.  Now that I have graduated from school, and I'm not so much concentrated on the books so much as I was before, those questions are, are questions that I'm starting to, to wonder about.  Personally, I haven't, I'm not able to really trace very far back, to be perfectly honest.  I'm from a single-parent home, so not very much contact with my father [George Jenkins, Sr.].  And so I don't really know, I don't even know his mother and father's name, you know, so.  He sent me a picture recently of, of, of his mother, but I don't know off-hand exactly where--I mean what her, any of those people, so that's my grandparents even.  On my father's side is where it really stops.  My mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] doesn't really go very far outside of her grandparents.  And, and, and that's just--it's kind of sad that we can't really trace back very far, your, your lineage and your, your, your history, but that's something that I wanna really get into.
Speaker 1: Okay, are both of your parents from South Carolina?
Speaker 2: My mother's from Warrenton, North Carolina, and my father's from South Carolina, yep.
Speaker 1: From, from Sumter?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's like Dalzell.  It's a few areas down there.  I was born in Sumter.  I think we were living in Sumter, but I really, to be honest, I don't really know very much about--
Speaker 1: You know, do you know if your ancestors were, were, were slaves, were they free, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean, they had to--oh, to be honest, I, I don't know.  I have no idea.  I would like to--maybe you can help me after the interview, give me some tips on, on how to look those things up, or, or, or go about it.  But if I don't know my grandparents, I knew I couldn't go past, you know.  I, I wouldn't know how to, how to link it up, but there has to be a way, so I'll have to get more involved with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94979
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father first.  What's his full name, and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His, his name is George Jenkins, Sr., G-E-O-R-G-E, J-E-N-K-I-N-S.  And never really remember living with him.  I, I moved from some, some--from South Carolina at the age of about two, so I never really have any recollection of living with him.  So I really couldn't tell you very much about him, except for we, we see each other during graduation, so eighth grade, twelfth grade, college and dental graduation.  I saw him just about in four-year intervals, so we never really got a chance to really know each other.  And when I, when I sit with him, and we talk and, and when we do get together, there's really not very much love lost, but when we go back to our respective states, you know, I guess he's looking for me to, to, to initiate contact, and I'm looking for him to initiate contact, and no contact gets initiated.  So, we're cordial and really cool with each other when we see each other, but it's, it's a barrier there that, that stops me from trying to create a relationship, but I don't know what his barrier is.  But I think it's his responsibility, ultimately.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what does he do for a living?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think he does, he works at the, at the like, at a military base there, but I'm not sure exactly what he does to be perfectly honest.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, do you have--can, can you tell, tell us anything about what he's like at all?
Speaker 2: From what I gather, he's, he's, he, he's a good guy, that's what I'd say.  I mean he just kind of fell short on his responsibility.  And that may have been the distance, and maybe he wasn't trained enough to, to, in terms of a profession, in order to do any, do more for me.  But he, he, he didn't, he wasn't instrumental in my development in terms of making me who I was, who I am today the least bit all, whether that be advice or financial support or whatever support that a father's supposed to give his son.  I missed out on all that, so to be perfectly honest, I'm, I'm, I'm rambling, but I don't know what he's like at the end of the day, you know.  But I know that I can call him, and there's no problem if I was to call him, and we would talk, and it would be like a father-son relationship, but it's not consistent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a story still to unfold, unless there's some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if, if at all.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 94980
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about your mother.  What, what's her full name, and do you know, the date and place of her birth, and--
Speaker 2: Her, her name's Ella Jenkins and a-- Jenkins Mack, E-L-L-A, J-E-N-K-I-N-S, M-A-C-K.  And what else did you wanna know about her?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Oh, her place, she was born on April 15th, 1948, in Warrenton, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's her maiden name (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Williams.
Speaker 1: Williams, okay, (unclear).  Okay, now, tell us about her.  What, what was she like and, and, or what is she like, and, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mom is, she's been a bookkeeper for as long as I can remember, at least twenty-five years, with Chubb and Son Insurance Company [Chubb Corporation], where she, she's like an account specialist.  And she's, she's just the thing that, that happened to me in terms of helping me accomplish my goals.  She was just a supportive mom.  She, she did whatever she had to do to allow me to pursue my education.  So if she had to get another job, she did that.  If she had to ask family members for funds to help make ends meet so I could continue to matriculate, then she did that.  She always tried to make it.  You know, when you're, when you're going to school for that long, you really need a cache of resources or a war chest, so to speak, to kind of help you get through, and we didn't have that.  So she just did whatever she had to do to make sure that I can concentrate on my studies as much as possible.  Because that can creep its way into your studying and distract you from trying to do as best as you can with your academics, because you have these financial burdens and all these other things that you're missing that you see all of your other colleagues are enjoying.  You see, you know that you don't have them, and your life is a little more difficult than theirs.  But you know, you just be resourceful, then just try to work your way through those, recognize what's going on, and, and, and try to find a way through it, as oppose to whining and complaining, and not getting anything done.  We just took action, put our heads together, and came up with a plan and just, and, and I just try--I had to hold up my end of the bargain, which was to continue to perform well.  And she held up her end of the bargain, which was to try to support me, and allow me to not have as many of those distractions.  They still were there.  There's no way to avoid them, unless you have that war chest, but she made sure that when she can step in and alleviate a stress here and there, to allow me to put that energy back into my studies, she, she was there.  She was really a, a rock for me; she was a strong support system that I needed.  I mean I needed a complete home, but she kind of created that with the way she handled everything.  It, it felt like I had a full home, household.
Story_ID: 94981
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now that sounds like a strong partnership, you know, working relationship.  Do you know anything about how your mother [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] grew up, and, and how she, how she met your father [George Jenkins, Sr.], and how she got to Newark [New Jersey] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I--a lot of that I'll try to, I'll just try to give you as much information along those lines as I can.  She grew up in North Carolina, and she went to high school, graduated high school.  Well as she was in school, you know, she's one of, of, of nine kids, and she's the oldest female so that put a lot of responsibility on her in terms of rearing the younger siblings and going out.  It was a farm scenario, where I guess she probably had to work the farm before she went to school and then when she got out of school.  She, she was really active with, with just the farm life as well as trying to go to school and, and help out the family with, with just getting by day to, day by day.  And she met my father I don't know where to be honest.  It had to, have been in North Carolina.  She moved--they got married, and she moved to South Carolina, and then, and then about after about two years, they, they got divorced and she came to Newark because she had a lot of other families members, second cousins and things like that, who've established themselves.  And a brother, one of--two of her brothers, twin brothers, came to Newark or the Newark area, and she just kind of made her way up North.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 94982
Speaker 1: Well, how many brothers and sisters do you have first of all?
Speaker 2: I just have one brother.
Speaker 1: Just one brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, so just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Just the two of us.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and you're the--
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of the two.
Speaker 1: Youngest, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so can you reflect back on growing up and kind of tell us like what, what was the neighborhood like?  What, what neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: I lived in Central Ward of Newark.  I moved--when we moved to Newark, we moved to a project building, Stella Wright Housing Projects, which was demolished last year.
Speaker 1: Can, can you say that name slower and--
Speaker 2: Stella Wright Housing Project.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how do spell that?
Speaker 2: S-T-E-L-L-A, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A housing project in Newark [New Jersey], and it was your typical housing project that you can imagine at any other in a city across the country, single-parent homes for the most part, welfare recipients, just not very well taken care of in terms of the grounds, and a lot of crime and things of that nature going on, just not a good place to raise a family.  It was just difficult living for the most part, and then we moved when I was about seven or eight.  We moved a block away into an area that was a little nicer, but you can imagine.  It's still only a block away, so it really wasn't an alleviation of, of the issues that we were dealing with, just a nicer, you know, building that's three stories instead of sixteen or fifteen stories, so--a lot of car thefts when we were coming up, and, and, and that was really, you know, drug dealing and things like that.  But, but car, auto theft was really, really happening when I was growing up.  And you know, I even lost a friend to, to a stolen car when I was, as I was--my first year of college.  So it's always been a prevailing sort of problem here in Newark.  And now as an adult I feel it because my car insurance is ridiculous.  So it's just something that plagues this area.  It's kind of slowing down, but it doesn't reflect in the, in the rates of car insurance.  It's still considered a, a pretty high-risk area.  But I, I still kind of found a way to pick a dream in the middle of all that despair and hopelessness you see around you, where you don't see very many people who made it come back.  You don't see very many people who are doing something positive with themselves, so it's difficult to think that you can.  You have people telling you how hard college is, but they never went.  And you have all these myths about pursing higher education and peer pressure that exists that, if you get A's, people are telling you, you know--not even telling you--they're laughing at you, or ridiculing you, or calling you a nerd and all of these things, which kind of discourages you from even wanting, wanting to excel because you don't wanna be an outcast to your buddies.  Everyone wants to fit and be accepted.  So going against a lot of those things as I was coming up made life, you know, challenging, but not--I wouldn't say--I, I have no complaints because I always knew how to handle myself in those situations.  And when peer pressure would surface, I mean, oftentimes you, you, you're afraid that you may become a victim or a target of those same people who are trying to get you to join them if you deny what they're trying to push you to do.  But I was just willing to accept whatever those consequences were, because I knew I wanted to pursue my education, and I knew that I wanted to go to college, even at an early age.  So I just acted accordingly in terms of what I got involved in and what I didn't get involved in.
Story_ID: 94983
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we always ask, usually older people, you know, we ask them this, a series of questions about reflecting back and telling us about the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up.  'Cause a lot of old people, if you tell 'em about the sights and sounds, they say ah, they--triggers something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, you know, the sensory thing triggers something.  But what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights, you just see, it's just like a bustling sort of area where it's just a lot going on, people just doing whatever they do in the neighborhood for the most part, people coming in and out, going and you hear the, the, the sounds.  You hear sirens constantly.  In the summer you hear pops all over the place, where you don't know if it's firecrackers or gunfire.  You assume it's gun--I mean that it's, that it's firecrackers, and you can desensitize to the gunshots, but sometimes you know, sometimes it may be a gunshot, and you don't even flinch because you're so desensitized that you just assume that it's a firecracker.  You know, so I, I always remember that going on.  And that's pretty much it.  It, it was just, I'm, I'm going with the sights that I, that I, I guess I chose to, to, to retain.  You know what I mean?  The other sights, I kind of blocked out a lot of the negative images because I had to because they really can brainwash you to keeping you trapped.  So I can't even recall 'em.  They were there.  You know, it was just, you know, the smells were--you know, across the street there was a dumpster from where I lived.  And rats used to go in and out of this dumpster, but I can see it out of my window.  If I'm walking out, these big, huge critters--I can, I can remember pitbull fights in the, in the, in the, in the yard in front of me as well, near the dumpster, but it was like an empty lot.  And they used to bring their dogs, and then they used pitbull fight.  So I can be in my room and I'd hear dogs mauling each other and just people all over the place.  I mean there wasn't a, a bell in the building across the street, so the way people let people know they were there, they got to the bottom and they yelled up.  And we would hear that constantly from people coming in and out of that building across the street, and just really hectic.  But the--I think the level of desensitization, it makes it difficult to describe because I can't describe it for what, what it was because I, I guess I've suppressed it and blocked it out so that I can navigate through it without paying too much attention to, because for me, all that stuff was temporary in my mind.  It was like none of this--I'm not resigned to any of this.  Even though I'm living in it, and I grew up in it, and it's me, I'm not resigned to it.  I wasn't genetically predisposed to be having a hard life, as long as I concentrate on my books, and that's what I was set on doing.  So all of those negative things, images that I probably could have been paying attention to I couldn't because I didn't want them infecting my mission and you know, my, my drive.  It, it can.  A lot of, a lot of young people in my neighborhood they soak in their surroundings so much that they just feel like that that's all the world has to offer them.  And I understand why, because they're not exposed; they don't see very much outside of television; and people, there aren't enough people like myself and my partners who are coming back who did discover the, the joys of pursuing a higher education, and letting them know it's not as tough as people make it out to be.  Besides, those people that are telling you never went, so how do they know?  Listen to somebody who went.  And we try to approach 'em on that sort of a level and, and let them know because, you know, the surest way to improving your quality of life is, is, is by taking your education seriously, and we all kind of took, took that philosophy and moved with it.
Story_ID: 94984
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now how did you--what kind of a, well, what kind of a kid were you?  I mean what and who--I mean it's unusual to get a dentist out of that environment, you know.  So, I mean what was different about you?  I mean what did you run into, and who did you run into that, that changed you?
Speaker 2: That's a very easy question.
Speaker 1: Or, or channeled you, not changed you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she, yep--
Speaker 1: --necessarily, but channeled you.
Speaker 2: That's, that's a good way to put it because we often say it's hard to kind of shift you once you've already got set on whatever particular track that, that you're on.  And, and in our community, oftentimes the reality of the communities get to them before a positive influence gets to them.  And then often--and, and that may not be a problem if right on the heels of, of the realities of your community there was someone coming soon after the reality start to set in.  But the young people don't have very much to balance that negative reality with; you know, they need to positivity to say, you know, to weigh it against.  But if you only have that negative, you don't have anything to compare it to, or anything, or any other options.  And at an early age my teacher got to me, and she channeled me in the third grade.  She knocked down the barriers that I was talking about in her own little way, and I, I see it now, but I don't think I realized it till I graduated dental school.  I didn't realize what, what she did for me and was able to articulate it and express it.  But at that early age, she took us, she just tried to culture us, expand our horizons, even at that early age, to help us understand that the world has way more to offer you than just what you see in, in your city.  And she took us to Broadway plays at, at that early age, had us reading "Shakespeare for Kids" and doing algebra for kids.  And she even had me take a crack at ballet, even though it only lasted for two weeks because the tights really weren't my thing.  (Laughter) But, but she had us doing all of these things to help us see that the world is bigger.  And she would travel the world herself during her vacations.  And when she would come back, she would gather us around the globe, and she would put out to where she was and make sure we knew little facts about that country or that region of the country that, that, that she was in.  And that kind of helped me understand right at that early age that the world has a lot to offer if you really go out there and get it.  And she showed it to us and then pointed to the books and said this is how you do it, you know, and all of you guys are smart.  She really encouraged us, and, and, and, and showed us what we can have, and then kind of showed us how to go about getting those things.  So from there, I knew college was the thirteenth grade, so to speak, just like you going from eight to ninth grade you don't think about it.  You're going from grammar school to high school, and that's just automatic.  It's not like you even think about it.  After she was done with me with that third grade, I mean with that year in her class, I saw college as that automatic next grade, so it became the thirteenth grade, and I just knew I was gonna go to college.  It's, it, it was just from there a matter of what am I gonna study?  What am I gonna become?  And, and, and what profession am I gonna choose?  But I just knew I was gonna be some sort of professional after I was done with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, what was the name of the teacher?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ms. Viola Johnson.  She--this was at Louise A. Spencer [Elementary School] in Newark [New Jersey].  She retired and moved to West Virginia.  But--and she's a substitute teacher down there because she couldn't fully retire I guess.
Speaker 1: Viola?
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: Johnson, okay.
Story_ID: 94985
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  I mean--so, so you were at Louise A. Spencer [Elementary] School [Newark, New Jersey] for your whole grade school or just--
Speaker 2: Just from, from second to sixth, then I went to University High School, which was a high school that you can--there's a seventh and eighth grade program.  And then in the same facility you take the test, and then if you pass, you go to the ninth or you go to the high school portion, and I did both portions there.  So I just was there from seventh all the way through.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't really think I had a, I, I never had a favorite subject really.  They were all just means to an end for the most part, you know.  I, I think some were easier than others, but I can, I can probably tell you the hardest subjects more than the easiest.  My hardest subjects were all--was always calculus, and biochemistry, pharmacology in dental school.  Those were the most challenging, but the other classes were just classes I, I just felt like I was just taking to, to, to move, move on for the most part.  But once I got into dental school, that's when the interest really kind of caught fire.  It was way more interesting than even biology.  Biology was cool, and I've, I've always liked life and how life operates.  So just that whole course that I was taking, in terms of the path that I took in terms of health care, I liked it all.  But when it came to some of the organic chemistries and chemistries, and the real, real detailed sciences, they were a little more challenging.  But in high school I really didn't have a favorite or, or least favorite class.  I just did it, you know.
Story_ID: 94986
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back to I guess grade school I guess--no, or middle school.  I read that when you were thirteen a dentist, you know, explained to you what dentistry was about, showed you some tools, and you were inspired by that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that was the next sort of turning point for me when I think back because I went to those sessions to get my orthodontic treatment with the lessons that, that Ms. [Viola] Johnson taught me.  So when I was there I, I guess I was searching for what, what am I gonna attach this dream to, this, this dream of becoming a professional.  I guess I was just exploring, and then I was just curious with what he was doing.  And I guess he picked up on that, so he took that as a teachable moment.  And he was giving me information about the teeth and the tools, and then he would quiz me in the next visit, you know, no more than five minutes each time I saw him.  And that, you know, and I think more so than his profession that interest me, it was him and how he seemed to be happy, seemed to be able to help people, and just be really, it seemed like he was just dynamic with what he was doing.  And it just really impressed me at, at an early age, at that, at that age of thirteen.  And that, from that moment on, I was like, I wanna be like him, whatever he's doing.  And it was just, he was a dentist, and not even--you know, people would think: okay, he was an orthodontist, so why didn't you wanna do orthodontist?  That's because I didn't know what he was doing.  All I wanted to be like was him, and they told me he was dentist, so I wanna be a dentist.  And I just from that day forward trying to model myself after him, but I don't even know what he looks like or his name or anything.  He doesn't even know the influence that he's had on me as well as my other partners.  So I'm sure he'd get a kick out of it if he was to know that.  But--
Speaker 1: So you don't even know if he knows--
Speaker 2: I know he doesn't know.
Speaker 1: --knows it.
Speaker 2: I know he doesn't know.  There's no way he can know 'cause I'm, I'm sure there were so many people in his seat, and--
Speaker 1: Was he in a clinic or something with a lot of-
Speaker 2: He was working in a clinic.  He was a resident in training to, to, to become a full-fledged orthodontist.  So I'm sure he didn't, he doesn't remember at all.  I don't even remember him, so I know he doesn't remember me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but, yeah, that's something.  So the third, third grade really opened up a whole world of things for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It really did, it really did.  That's, I think that, that echoes the importance of, of getting to our kids young, before--you know, it's easy--you can--like I was able to deal with the realities of my community after her lessons because I never let it get me down.  I never let any of that stuff get to me because I knew all I gotta do is this here, and just keep doing these assignments, keep doing what these teachers ask of me, and I'm gonna be fine despite what I see around me.  All I have to do is find a way to get around the challenges that are gonna come in my way and obstacles.  And if I don't get over those obstacles, and I get stopped in the middle, then that's fine too, but I had to try, and I had to see for myself if it was out there.  I could say okay, well, it look like, you know, the way the odds are stacked I'm not gonna make it so I'm not gonna try.  The odds were, did look like that, but I had to figure out for myself if I could do it or not.  I didn't wanna be a shoulda, coulda, woulda type of person.  I know that I would have been eating myself--you know, I would have been eaten alive inside if I didn't at least try to go for my dreams.  I wouldn't have been able to live with that.
Story_ID: 94987
Speaker 1: Now, I mean, just for the record here, I mean you, you grew up in a time that was full of all kinds of distractions.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And the distractions got louder, more colorful, more pervasive.  I mean music in the old days may have been a distraction, but when you came along the speakers were big--bigger, (unclear)--had 'em in their cars.  You couldn't, (unclear) you'd escape in, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --almost in the late '70's [1970s], early '80's [1980s] and stuff going on up--
Speaker 2: That's the truth.
Speaker 1: --to the '90's [1990s].  I mean things amplified to a level at--
Speaker 2: Never seen before.
Speaker 1: --and the drug activity--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --reached an all-time high, I mean everything--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --that, that was negative about being poor was escalated all the way up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so how did you, how did you manage to ignore all that?  Did you--
Speaker 2: The, it kind of, it kind of, it kind of, it kind of goes back to what I was saying earlier with, with her [his third grade teacher, Ms. Viola Johnson] lessons.  Because for one, in terms of that, in terms of the violence and everything like that being escalated, I didn't know anything else so that was my reality.  So my, as far as I was concerned when I was younger, everyone really lived like that.  You know, what I mean?  Everyone's life was like that, and I thought that that was just normal.  So once I accepted that, I didn't really even dwell on it anymore.  I'd just see it going on.  You learn your environment and where you should be and where you shouldn't be.  That still doesn't stop you from being in the wrong place at the wrong time, but I tried my best to lower my chances.  And when guys were going out to do things that were gonna get them in trouble, you know, I just wasn't there, you know.  I conveniently was, wasn't around.  So I just knew from that day forward what actions will be conducive to me achieving my dreams and what will be, you know, counterproductive to me pursuing my dreams.  So, and I just acted accordingly.  The ones that were counterproductive I didn't bot--be bothered with, and the ones that were productive I was bothered with.  So that's kind of how I dealt with it.  I mean I knew, I got a like a sense almost, almost an instinct after a while of what, you know, what would be complimentary to my dreams.  And, and getting in trouble and doing a lot of those things in my neighborhood were not.  You know, if I, if I got a record, that would make it more difficult for me to become a doctor and all these other things.  So I had to build up as I had something to build up and look forward to, and that's what she gave me.  A lot of young people--because that, that gave me hope.  And that, with that hope you keep that flicker of, of, of, of hope alive, you can really move forward and do some good things.  But if--a lot of these young people are hopeless, and that reality, once it sets in, they don't, they feel like they don't have any--the world doesn't have anything to offer, so they're open to falling for a lot of these pressure, peer pressure things, and a lot of the things that their neighborhood has to offer them and in a negative sense.  Their open for them because they don't have hope; they're not expecting to live past twenty-five anyway, so you know, let me live a, a fast-pace life now and get it all in.  That's what they're thinking because they don't think they have a future; they don't see a future because nobody came to them and let them know that they have one.
Story_ID: 95258
Speaker 1: Now did you have friends who were caught up in some of the street activity that you really couldn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had a, I, I had a whole lot of friends that got caught up because that's what the neighborhood has to offer you for the most part.  And that's what you see, and that's the thing that's pushed on you, that everyone is doing it.  It's kind of socially acceptable, and people fall into it because that's just how it is.  The great majority of my friends kind of got involved in, in the justice system in one form or another.  That's just how it is.  A lot, a lot of those guys didn't necessarily have a lot of the things that I had when I was coming up, and the small things, just influences at the right time, before other influences were there and all of these sorts of things, and having a mom.  You know, a lot of people have, you know--they complain about being from a single-parent home, but in my neighborhood I've seen, you know, where, cases where guys didn't even have a mom either, you know, so they had to make a lot of difficult decisions at an early age that I didn't have to make.  You know, you're 16 years old, and you got a 12-year-old little brother, but your mom is who knows where, and your dad's been gone, what are you gonna do?  You may get yourself in some trouble trying to provide.  Before you know it, you got a record.  Before you know it, you can't pursue a future.  Now you're hopeless.  Now you're getting in more trouble.  And it just, it's just a spiral because there's nothing really offered to our young people.  It appears as though there is, but it's not really.  It really isn't.  I mean, the school facilities aren't really up to par.  And, and we just need to really push our kids and not accept mediocrity from our kids, and, and, and just push 'em.  But they're not being pushed to where they need to be pushed today, and, and it's, and it's been like that, even when, when I was a youngster.  I just felt extremely blessed to have had those influences at an early age, but they weren't the dominating influence.  So the dominating influence took the, the, the majority of the people.  You know what I mean?  So--in terms of what was important to, to people in my community and what they were putting their importance into.  It wasn't education.  It was a lot of other things.  And, and a lot of my friends kind of fell in, into that.  But I, I--all of my friends for the--no, I can't say all of them, but a lot of them are, are restructuring, trying to get it together, and realizing, you know, the things that are really important.
Story_ID: 95259
Speaker 1: Okay, now, University High School [Newark, New Jersey], is that a special school a magnate school or something?
Speaker 2: That was a, it was considered a magnate school here in Newark.  You had, you had to test into it.  And if you tested in, then you got to, to enjoy the, the college prep, preparatory sort of courses.  But it still, to be honest, it still was lacking compared to--you know, it was good compared to Newark, the Newark school system, but it still wasn't a suburban school.  The worst suburban school was better than this one.  You know what I mean?  So it still had its challenges.  I still went to school deficient in, in, in math, you know, despite the fact that I was in all these sort of AP [advanced placement] classes, so something went wrong.  And I'm sure if the, if the curriculum was done in a, in a, in, in the right fashion, that gap wouldn't have happened.  It would have been recognized and all of that.  It would have been, you know, dealt with, but it had its, its drawbacks, you know, and we realized that the minute we got there when we were realizing how--the advantages that a lot of our other colleagues had.  We realized a lot of the, the support that they had at their high school that we didn't necessarily enjoy.  But we had each other, and we used that little special situation to offset a lot of those other things that we were missing.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you talk about we, you're talking about two friends of yours, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm talking about [HM Dr.] Sampson Davis--
Speaker 1: Tell us about 'em.
Speaker 2: I have two buddies, Dr. Sampson Davis and [HM] Dr. Rameck Hunt, who--I met Dr. Davis in the seventh grade in 1985, and we met Dr. Hunt in the ninth grade in 1987, and we've been just good buddies ever sense.  Because in our neighborhoods you were--in our school you were either a nerd, or you were a troublemaker, or an athlete, where everyone loved you, but you didn't do your work, or no one loved you on the other side.  Everyone ridiculed you as being a nerd, but you got good grades.  We were in the middle.  We loved to have a good time, but we'd also liked to get our work done as well.  So we were kind of in the middle.  We couldn't totally relate to them because we did our work.  But when it came to have a good time, we were, we were over here.  But when we were having a good time, if it, if it got to be too much of a good time where maybe we'd get in trouble or maybe it would affect our studies, we would shift back.  So we found ourselves in the middle.  It just was comforting for all three of us to find like-minded people who were just as cool as the troublemakers, but had that academic spark in them that could get flickered out--I mean could get stamped out if it was around the troublemakers because they would have been ridiculing for--you for getting A's.  So you can't really hang around that crowd too much because if you're doing well and they're ridiculing you, you'll probably fall by the wayside with your books.  So it felt good to meet two other guys, and those guys likewise, to meet two other guys that were--loved to have fun and hang out and were cool guys, but did their work, and you can tell them you got an A, and they're not laughing at you.  They're asking you how you did it, you know, and, and you're, you're, you're gonna help them do the same, as well as vice versa.  So it, it was just nice.  It was nice to, to, to, to, to meet people and to finally be able to open up and not feel like I'm getting laughed at by other guys because I'm doing well at school.  That, that used to be kind of disheartening, but I didn't have to go through that when I was with them.  So we kind of clung to each other on those similarities.  And then we just moved forward, went to high school together, college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey] together, and we all went to the same medical--it was under the same university medical--University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.  I went to the dental component, and they went to one of the medical components.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95260
Speaker 1: Just to go back to high school [University High School in Newark, New Jersey] for a minute, again.  Were you involved in the typical high school activities that people--I don't know, but people like, like the school newspaper or the--I don't know--the chorus or--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --any of that.
Speaker 2: In high school I wasn't very active I have to say, but I did participate in the band, as I, I played the drums, but I was the worst, so I didn't play too much and as well as I played on the baseball team.  I was first, and I wasn't that good at that either.  So, you know, I, I, I, I exploited my talent, which was paying attention to a lecture, and figuring out what he's gonna test me on, and passing the test.  That was my talent.  It wasn't shooting the ball, or throwing the ball, or swinging the bat, or singing or any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 95261
Speaker 1: So when you, when you were a senior in high school, now all, all of y'all [Jenkins, HM Dr. Sampson Davis, and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] are seniors at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were.  Everything was exactly the same.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We all turned thirty this year [2003] already.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, everything's pretty much the same.
Speaker 1: All right, so you, you all knew you were going to college.  That's a given.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Did--and you--did, did, did, did you know which one?
Speaker 2: None of us knew which college.  All of us had our own individual encounters with positive people who put us on track.  But it all came together once we met each other, and our dreams started to become cohesive.  We started to put our dreams together, but Dr. [Rameck] Hunt wanted to be a teacher; Dr. [Sampson] Davis wanted to be a businessman of some sort, or an entrepreneur, or a corporate sort of person, something along those lines.  But when this recruiter from Seton Hall [University in South Orange, New Jersey] came and talked to us about careers in medicine and dentistry, since I had that old dream of becoming a dentist, it woke it back up because that went to the back of my head over the years I high school because I didn't have any other influence in, in that profession besides that initial influence.  So it kind of slowly made its way in the back, and I don't even know if I replaced it with anything else, but it made its way in the back.  But that brought it right to the forefront when I sat there for that hour, because she showed me and answered every question that I might have had that I didn't know who to go to to get the information.  She laid it out and gave me a handout with all of the information in it.  So I just looked at it, and I was like wait.  You know, it just lined it right up in one hour of how I was gonna go pursue my dream, and I just jumped all over it and, and tried my best to convince those guys to switch whatever they were thinking about and let's do this, because they promised us free tuition, which folded when we got there because of mismanagement of funds.  So we didn't even get a lot of the incentives that were promised to us, but we wouldn't change anything.  We don't care because whatever it took for them to convince us to go to school together, you know, that was, that was the blessing.  Because I don't know what would have happened if I didn't go to school with those guys, the way we supported each other and offset the disadvantages that we were facing at individually probably would have took us under.  But just the fact that we were together and you know, we, we fed off of each other, and pulled the best from each other, and became better because we were friends.  We became better men because we were friends.  We became better academically because we shared.  And if I didn't feel like studying, and seeing those guys study made me want to study, so that made me better and gave me more endurance, and I got a better grade that day.  And if the other guys got a better grade than me, they would show me or vice versa.  So it was so much teamwork going on that offset those gaps and voids that we filled that it, it made it a lot easier.  But there was--
Story_ID: 95262
Speaker 1: You know, there were times when the gaps couldn't be filled, like when I learned how to tie a tie in dental school [New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey], which was a little late to learn how to tie a tie.  But it was kind of embarrassing the way it happened because I had to go to school with the tie in my hand because a professor wouldn't let anybody in his class.  You couldn't go into his class without a tie.  He was just a conservative professor.  And the first day of class I panicked, and I didn't know how to get it tied so I had to go to school and ask someone to tie it for me and show me how to do it in the bathroom before we went to class, which was really embarrassing.  But I, that's the type of person, that's the type of mode I was in.  It was like, you know, whatever I'm missing, I can't--I'm not even embarrassed; I'm not complaining; I'm not gonna whine.  I'm gonna go get it done, fight through that embarrassment and deal with it, just to get what I need accomplished.  I need to take this case, so whatever I have to do to take this class and get through to become a dentist that's what I'm gonna do, even if I have to compromise myself in, in terms of, in, in, in, in order to do that.  And that's just one of the, one of the ways where those gaps really couldn't fill because I forgot, I didn't even realize I didn't know how to tie a tie.  I wasn't paying attention because I rarely wore ties until this popped up, and I said wow, I don't know how to tie one, you know, and I had to just really--there was anxiety.  I was up almost all night trying to figure out--you know, stressing out about that.
Speaker 2: That's interesting because that's, that's something that people in the older generation take for granted.  There was a time when a lot of the older men that, that are around now, you know, their fathers wore ties all the time.  If they had some kind of professional job, that's all they wore every day (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yep, and so you'd pick it up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from osmosis how to tie a tie, but without a father in your home--I still don't know how to shave to this day.  I, I improvise.  I got, I have clippers, and I, and I try, but I don't know the lather and, and razor thing.  I've never tried it because I've never--you know, I'm afraid I may cut myself, get razor--I don't know because I, that's something I think I probably should have gotten a lesson if I had a father in the home, but I just--that's just something that I missed out on.  But that's just, you know, I just say that to acknowledge it, but I'm still, you know, I'm me, and I'm gonna kind of pick up a lot of those things that I was missing and move on with life without ver--I try not to complain at all.  I try to just live life and be positive and get through it because that energy that I'm using to complain I can use in the figuring out how to get over that, that obstacle.  So I don't even give that complaining any energy.  I snatch it right over and put it into a solution.
Story_ID: 95263
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along was it, was it, there a lot of gangs there in--
Speaker 2: No, there was just, you know, different neighborhoods and, and then the gangs are proliferating now and had been for about the last three to four years.  And they've, they've been around I've, I'm hearing for a lot longer, but they were small, little whatever.  It hasn't become, it hasn't gotten popularized and become a fad like it is to the youngsters now.  They're getting involved more so to be, to try to be cool now.  And then the more they get involved, they have to do more things, and then they become the hardened criminals.  But a lot of these kids just think it's cool in the beginning.  And, and now it's growing because it's become a fad.  Just like the hottest sneaker, they're trying to be in a gang.  Just, just as, as, as, as, as aggressively as they're seeking the hottest fashion, they're, they're trying to do these sorts of things.  And when I was coming up it was just neighborhoods, you know, neighborhood guys, group of guys.  You wouldn't call it a gang, but you know, you couldn't mess with any one of those guys on that particular block, or you go two blocks away and it was the same thing.  So, you know, it was that you couldn't just walk around, but, but it wasn't organized like multiple blocks as, as one sort of unit.  It was just, you know, you just knew which sections of Newark [New Jersey] to stay away from, and there was a lot of 'em (laughter).
Story_ID: 95264
Speaker 1: Okay, now the criminal justice system has been on a, has been on a black male focus for the last, oh, for about fifteen years or--well, longer than that, but it seems that here lately there's so many young black men in jail, you know, people from age 15 to 30.  I think, I think that they're saying now that two out of five are in the criminal justice system, and maybe even three out of five are in some-either in jail, or on their way to jail, and you know, being under suspicion, on parole or something, or--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know, did, did you have to watch yourself in terms of dodging the aggressive criminal justice system, who really doesn't know, they really don't know if you go to school or what when they--
Speaker 2: Oh, no doubt about--
Speaker 1: --see you on the streets.
Speaker 2: I mean the, the thing that I dealt with a lot, and I still deal with this today is that I'm from Newark [New Jersey].  I'm a young--excuse me--I'm, I'm, I'm a young guy from Newark who happens to be a dentist.  But at the end of the day I'm a young guy from Newark.  I live here so I'm a Newarker.  So, with that said, I don't always dress with a shirt on, with a button-up shirt, and, and, and slacks, and shoes.  When I, when I put on my jeans and everything else, I'm your typical Newarker.  And I get pulled over a lot--not a lot.  I wouldn't say a lot, but when it, when it happens, it, it feels like it's, you know, more magnified than--it is magnified to be honest because I, I remember getting pulled over with a friend of mine, Nieam [ph.], and we got pulled over and racially profiled as I was driving up the street that the hospital's on.  So I'm looking at the hospital spread eagle with my hands in my car, and this guy just ransacking my car without even asking me, looking in my car so--he was so, he was getting so happy with what he was doing that he was in my car, as he's searching, eating my gum (laughter) in my car.  Really, he's really like--I don't know what he--he said (unclear) a car--an Acura, a white Acura happened to commit a crime, and they were looking for the white Acura.  But I don't understand how the pulled over my white Mazda, you know, and, and ran, ran it like that.  And I'm looking, I'm looking right at the hospital like, man, I'm a student over here, and look at--I was just embarrassed, hoping that none of my professors or, or, or students happen to be driving by or leaving at that time.  It was just one of the worst experiences because I'm, you know, I'm trying to do right.  I'm, I'm--as this is going on it was like a paradox because I'm looking at the building that's helping me achieve my future, but I'm still standing here spread eagle, dealing with the--it was, it was almost like a, it was, it was a surreal experience to be looking at this hospital that I'm a student in.  And I think we were going, we were actually headed to the hospital to play an intermural basketball game.  And as I'm going back to the hospital, I'm getting pulled over, and it was just, it was really demeaning sort of experience, but that, that happens, you know.  The day the--we [Jenkins, HM Dr. Sampson Davis, and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] released our book ["The Pact: Three Young Men Make A Promise and Fulfill A Dream"], I came off the highway and came right into Newark and was driving around to a few people's--two--a few of my friends' place to let them know the book was--had come out, and I was excited--got racially pulled--was racially profiled on the day that we released our book, May 25th last year [2002].  I will never forget it.  And I'm excited, and, and it, and it kind of, it kind of--no, I wouldn't say discredit, but it, it takes some of the luster off a lot of the things that we're doing because--and I guess that keeps us humble and it keeps us--not that I need that to keep me humble, but I guess that's an additional source of humility because, you know, it's hard to forget where you come from when you, when you haven't left, and you're dealing with a lot of those issues.  So I think that helps us to reach our audiences also because we speak their voice, you know.  We, we, we go through the same exact thing.  We live here.  I'm behind you in line.  You might not know it until you see us three together that we're The Three Doctors.  But when I'm buy myself, you would never, you know, you would never put it together because of the way I navigate.  I, I, I don't wanna draw attention to myself or anything like that because I don't--why?  I'm just like you.  I'm a resident of the city just like you, and I'm just trying do some, some positive things and trying to get other people to do positive things also.
Story_ID: 95265
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's--tell me about dental school [New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey].  I mean, and well, college.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2: Dental school--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll start with dental school 'cause that one I, I had my most vivid memories from, from dental school.  A lot of those other schools were blurs, because it was just moving forward to get to that, to get to dental school.  So I didn't really even pay attention to it.  I just did it; whatever it was, I just did the work.  But dental school I can really give you a lot of good memories.  It was, it was unique because it was, it was such a melting pot.  Because college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey] was 10,000 students and probably 500 were, were, were minority students scattered out through the, through the school, but the rest was, you know, Caucasian students.  And the school was a majority school, so the needs of the majority were met, but the minority seems like at times were, were not as, as, as, as embraced.  And that used to be a little frustrating, but you know, we kind of turned in on ourselves and just had our own little community, because it would look like the majority of the students would look through you, like you're not even there.  Like, they walk by you and they don't even--you know.  You're looking for eye contact and some validation, and everyone's looking through you as if you're not even there.  So you learn to just ignore it, you know, as, as I do with obstacles.  I, I put blinders on, and I focus on my task at hand, and later for the peripheral things that will serve the sources of distraction.  But when I got to dental school there was 80 students, and maybe 12 are minority students.  And you know--but I would say 12, maybe 12 were, were, were African American and Latino, but you also had, you know, your Asian students; you had your Jewish students; you had your Indian students and your, your, your, your, your African students and, and things of that nature, so you had a, it was, it was a, a, a real global sort of situation going on in there.  And I, I grew more than anything because we had to interact.  It wasn't like we could look through each other, because it was 80 of us I the same year who had to get through this together and had to work together.  And I learned so much about myself.  I learned so much about other cultures.  I grew so much in dental school just with that interaction of, of different nationalities, different walks of life.  We talked.  You know, we never talked in, in, in--people who weren't like myself didn't really converse that much at Seton Hall like they did in dental school.  So I got to really, you know, go out and do certain things that I didn't do before because I wasn't exposed.  You know, they took me up to Vermont skiing and snowboarding that I'd never done before and had me playing golf with them and all these sorts of things, and then I'd bring them to, to, to whatever things that myself and my buddies are interest in.  So were really culturing each other and, and helping each other understand the, the way the other side lives.  And that was really, really enlightening for me, and, and it, it, it showed in my grades because I performed a lot better in dental school than I even did in, in undergrad.  We worked together, and it was just a real community atmosphere that, that was conducive to helping me do a lot better.  But the work was tough.  It was grueling.  It was a job.  You know, I didn't work at all.  You know, you, you, you're a full-time student.  And I just had to really concentrate on those, on those books.  And it was like you go to school for eight hours during the day, and between lab and, and, and class, and then you come home and you'd have to study all that material, or go to the lab and practice, or you may not--you know, you have like eight to like eight days, you know, for the most part; eight to eight your going, and, and you're trying to stay ahead of the game and making sure you're practicing, carving your teeth or doing whatever it is that you have to do with your manual dexterity.  You also had to, to, to concentrate on the mental and the academic aspect of it also, so it was practical as well as academic, and that made it challenging.  Because the minute you studied the principal, you had to put that down, put the book down and then pick up your drill and execute and, and practice and all of that, so it had its challenges, but there were times when I didn't know what I was, what the heck I was doing there.  You know what I mean?  Like, it's not--you know, it's just so tough, and I don't know how I'm gonna finish, so what am I doing here.  I used to ask my mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack], like, I hope this works out, ma, 'cause I don't know what the heck's going on.  It seems like everyone has that mentor there to guide them, except for me.  That's, that's the way it felt, like everyone had a--not, I didn't have to feel that way.  About sixty-five percent of the students, mom, dad, or both were either dentists or physicians for the most part, so--
Story_ID: 95266
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers [at New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey] or, or any--
Speaker 2: Professors?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just in, in the community that, that--
Speaker 2: The dentist--
Speaker 1: --stepped up and tried to help?
Speaker 2: No, I would say no in the community, but in--and I wouldn't say--no one--I, I would have to say no, because to be honest, I'm looking for a mentor still.  So if I would have found the one I'm looking for, I would have latched onto it.  So I'm not, I'm not denying myself mentors.  I just haven't found the one that is sincere.  I'm looking for some sincerity and, and someone that's really gonna take an interest in me, not some--you know, and I haven't found that yet to honest.  It's like everyone's busy for the most part with their own practices and their own families and things like, so it's hard.  You know, I'm extending myself way more than I've had people extend themselves to me in the ways that I needed.  But, like I said, I don't complain.  I'mma figure it out, even if I have to figure it out by myself, I'm gonna figure it out.  But there was a dentist, Dr. Kenneth Chance, who kind of ushered me into dental school in terms of--I met him--he was a dentist I met the year before I applied to dental school.  When I was still in college [Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey] someone introduced me to him, and he showed me which--you know, he, he, he helped me decide which schools to apply to, when to take the DAT [Dental Admission Test] and all of these sorts of things with the test to get into dental school.  But he took a dean--he took a deanship at Meharry [Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee] about, I think I was in my second year of dental school.  So I was heartbroken that my only sincere mentor that I found happened to move away, and that was the only one that I really respected, that I knew was sincere, that I knew meant it, and that I can--'cause if, if, if, if, if I don't have that from you, I don't, I'm not listening to what you're saying and taking the heed what you're talking about if I see you as plastic, you're just--you know, I have to feel that sincerity, like you really wanna help me, otherwise I, you know, I'm, I'm distracted, and I'm looking for that person who really wants to help me, and I'm not really even listening to what you're talking about.  And you get a lot of people who proclaim that they want to be your mentor, or, or, or, or, but they're not--you know, they don't really mean it, and you can pick that up; you can feel it, and I haven't felt that sincerity that I'm dying for, but I'm gonna get it.
Story_ID: 95267
Speaker 1: When you were at dental school [New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey], did, did you have the same--well, I guess you couldn't have had the same level of interaction with your two friends [HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] because they're in medical school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The interaction definitely decreased because we were living together.  And when they moved away to, to pursue their medical degrees, we were on the phone all the time.  And I was up where, where they were every weekend, or they were at my place every weekend.  So we talked every day and saw each other every weekend, so it was pretty much the same thing.  Like, everything that I needed in terms of our support system was already on autopilot.  So it just took a phone call or a visit to get these things, you know.  It was already, it was already a machine, a well-oiled machine.  It was just a matter of continuously keeping it well-oiled, you know, and just--it was--the principles were instilled in us to the point where they became instinctual.  So a lot of that stuff we had already instilled in each other.  It was just a matter of keeping each other strong to, to keep doing what they were doing so that our academic endurance holds, hold out until we get across that stage.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you all had it actually--did you all formally make a pledge to each other that you would do this or--
Speaker 2: We, we did--we never did any sort of corny blood, we didn't cut our fingers or, or sign any contracts, but when we agreed to go to school together, from high school [University High School in Newark, New Jersey] to embark on higher education, it was so many unsaid sort of rules that were made that day.  We, we knew, we, we all knew we were in the same boat where we needed, financially we needed in a number of ways.  And we all had to deal with these fears about college because it was unknown, and it was pumped to us in a negative sort of life, more so than it was promoted to us in a positive light.  So all of us were dealing with a lot of these things, and we realized that, after all of us sat and thought about it and talked about it, realized that none of us would be as afraid to go if we were to go together.  We realized that would be a--it's gonna be hard, but it's gonna be a little easier, because when we get there, we don't have to look for a support system, find friends.  We could care less if we met another a friend when you got two good buddies from high school with you.  I could care less if I meet another friend.  But that attitude drew people to us, so we had lots of friends outside of our circle, but I guess they saw how tight we were.  But we just felt good about it.  I guess it was just God's way of just working through us that time at that early age because we didn't really think about it.  We just went for it, didn't have any idea how magical that union would be, and how instrumental it would be in the pushing all of us to heights that none of us thought we could make individually; that I'm just glad it happened the way it happened.  You know, I'm just excited that it happened the way it happened.  But it wasn't very much thought.  It was really all unsaid and, and just be--maybe we said it before and didn't realize it in our conversations as we were going through high school, but we knew.  When we were gonna go together, we knew we would have to have each other's back when it came to protecting each other physically, protecting each other academically, just protecting each other.  And that was, each other's responsibility was to make sure--you know, it was like the buddy system when you swim at camp, you know.  You, you, you, you don't go out there without at least a buddy to, to alert someone if you're having trouble in the water if they can't save you.  And that's, we, we kind of created a buddy system to help us navigate through academia because it was really scary like a sea, like being stranded in the sea.  You're looking around, you don't see any horizon, and you just gotta keep swimming and keep swimming until you find land.  And we just decided to kind of use each other to help that go on.
Story_ID: 95268
Speaker 1: Now was there ever a time when you thought you might not make it, or things were just too tough?
Speaker 2: Pers--I remember a time when Sam [HM Dr. Sampson Davis] was going through some things, and I think that was the toughest time that any one of us had when he didn't do so well on one of his boards.  But in, in, in, in residency, I think I was getting tired, my second year of residency.  And I was just tired because I was having big financial problems because I was going--you know, you're going to school so long without resources that it's building up, piling up, piling up, piling up.  Before you know it, people want their money, but I'm still in the middle of school, and I don't have a profession yet.  I'm working on it, but I'm not there yet.  I can't pay you.  My mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] doesn't have it.  It was all over the place because I'm just going to school.  I'm doing well, but I'm creating a trail that you wouldn't believe.  And dealing with all that was stressing me so bad from trying to get through my residency that mentally I was saying you know what?  And this is the God honest truth.  I, I was saying you know, maybe I was too ambitious.  This is like the mind trick that, that, that, that this despair had me in.  I was like well, maybe I was too ambitious, maybe, you know, maybe I just wasn't supposed to be a dentist.  Maybe I should have shot for something lower that I could have supported financially.  Although I had the mental capacity to accomplish it, I don't have the money.  So, you know, all of this is stemming from the fact that I don't have money, so maybe I shouldn't have done it.  Maybe I overextended myself because I don't know I'm gonna become a dentist and get a practice if I got all of this money trail behind me, and all of this stuff is all over the place.  So I remember being on the phone with my mother during residency with tears dripping down my eyes, just you know, like asking my mom what am I doing this for, like I don't know, something has to reveal itself, like I don't know what all this hard work is for and what the rewards are gonna be.  But I know I'm killing myself, and I don't even know how it's gonna work out because of the way it was just going.  I mean I remember it was real--me and my mother talked about that not too long ago, because she was saying you know what, I guess you figured out what the rewards were, you know, the opportunity to be able to go out, speak to people, inspire people, and, and to reach kids and inspire kids.  And she--we were talking like a week ago about, you know, she was like, I, I bet you don't remember those days you were crying on the phone to me.  And I was like, I really do because I really was like, wondering, you know, should I--I was questioning whether I made a wrong decision about pursuing dentistry after I had already accomplished my degree.
Story_ID: 95389
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you've been through all the tough times. Tell me about graduation from dental school [New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey].  What did you all--did you all graduate at the same time, or--
Speaker 2: That's the weird, that's the weird thing about it.  [HM] Dr. [Sampson] Davis and myself graduated four times together, eighth grade, twelfth, college, and then medical/dental school.  It was under the same umbrella [University of Medicine and Dentistry in New Jersey].  And at the time we thought were, we had separate graduations.  And I'm calling [HM Dr.] Rameck [Hunt], who's Dr. Hunt, and I'm asking him when his graduation is.  And we were, had our schedules out trying to figure out if we can make each other's graduation.  Then we looked and saw it was the same day, so we were like, oh, man, I can't make your graduation.  Then we realized it was the same ceremony (laughter), because it was under the same umbrella.  So all the professional schools, the nursing school, the, the Osteopathic Medicine School, you name it, dental school, medicals, all them three medical schools, all of them graduated on the same day.  Just different schools go up at different times, but it was the exact same graduation.  So when I got up there, all three families roared; and when Rameck got up there, all three families roared.  People, our colleagues thought we had hired a cheering section because so many people were there for us under that same roof.  So it was, it was a beautiful day.  And I didn't really realize what I had done until I saw my bud--my buddies get up there, and they were there first.  They went first.  They're school was first, and then I, I went.  And Sam was first, and after I had saw Sam--he said Dr. Sampson Davis, and he walked across, and I was like, wow; like that's when it hit me that I'm going to go up there as well, and I realized that we did it once I--I got to live it through them before I went up there, and I was like, whoa, this is amazing, to have actually gotten past that.  But we still had the residency to go through, so it really wasn't too much jumping around because we knew we still had work to (laughter) do, just like college.  I didn't even celebrate the least bit when I graduated college because I knew I had to go to dental school.  So it wasn't over, so I didn't even celebrate.
Story_ID: 95390
Speaker 1: Well, what happened at the end of residency when you, when you finally got, got over, got, got past all of it?  What did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was a challenge in and of itself, how I got out of res--out of residency.  My program wanted to keep me an additional year for their own reasons, and, and, and, and I was gonna stay an additional year, but I, I did about three months of my--of that additional year.  And then I just happened to back out and, and then take a faculty position at the dental school.  But so that was troubling, to be honest.  When I got out of, when I was getting out of residency, I didn't really know where I was headed in terms of career, to be honest.  I didn't have money for a practice or the financial freedom or power to go out there and start a practice, had still the loans to look up to.  I had a mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] who, you know, she exhausted, for the most part, her retirement fund to help me get here.  You know, she sacrificed her future for mine.  With all these things in, in my head, and not knowing where I'm gonna, where I, I'm gonna exploit this dental degree, it was tough, and I didn't--I was, I was actually in a state of depression.  In the middle of me going around speaking to kids, speaking to adults, you know, doing all of these sorts of things that we do for the community, trying to affect positivity, I'm still in the dumps myself because I can't get my career off the ground like I needed to.  That's why I stayed in residence long, so long, is because I didn't know what plan to make.  So I just stayed in residency until I, hopefully, formulated a plan, but I never really could get a plan together because of that lack of mentorship and all those other things that I spoke about.  So I just said you know what, I'm gonna take a faculty position here at this school [New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey] and figure it out.  But this--that was the best thing that ever happened to me.  I get to do a lot of community dentistry.  I recruit students and, and I'm on the admissions committee, so I help them decide who's gonna be the dentist of tomorrow and things like that.  So it turned out to be a blessing in disguise, but it was almost like the path of least resistance initially because I didn't know where to go.  My goal was to graduate dental school, and that was such a daunting task that that was really all I could concentrate on.  I couldn't even concentrate on what life was gonna be like once I walked across the stage.  I just had to have blinders on and just have that tunnel vision until I got that degree.  And once I got the degree, I literally was like okay, what now, literally, until I just did a few--I did a one-year general practice residency, a two-year oral medicine fellowship, and then they wanted me to do a third year of oral medicine, but I told them no, I can't do four years of, of residency, so I backed out.  But it was basically we're gonna use me for the most part, that program.  But I backed out, and I took a faculty position and I do what I do now.  So, it's been a good thing, but it was it wasn't a smooth transition.  Like, like, like you would think it would be okay.  The residency program's over.  Now you go into whatever you chose to do.  But I had almost committed myself, but they didn't hold up their end of the bargain of what of--of what they said that made me wanna stay, they didn't hold up that end of the bargain, so I had to--you know, I couldn't give them the rest of that year if they didn't give me what I was looking for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But residency has been a challenge because I, I went to dental school.  I mean part of, part of what I liked about dentistry was that I wouldn't be on call, and that I had a nine-to-five lifestyle.  As soon as I took my residency, they stuffed a pager in my hand and said okay, man that emergency room (laughter) every fourth night.
Story_ID: 95391
Speaker 1: So I ended up being on call anyway [during his residency], and that was interesting.  I, I liked that responsibility because I liked how I was able to relate to my patients because I was from Newark [New Jersey].  So, you know, when I go home I'm driving probably past your block, the same person I'm treating.  So they feel that in the way I approach them and talk to them.  They explain what's wrong with them without feeling intimidated or talked down to, and, and shutting down because of the approach of some of those residents.  But me, I approach them like I'm from there, you know, professionally, but they know no doubt about it that I'm, I'm from your neighborhood.  And that, that gives, it allows me to treat them a lot better because they open up, tell me things that they probably wouldn't have told you if you were intimidating or making them feel uncomfortable.  And with them giving me more information, I can cater my treatment a lot better and give them a more effective and efficient treatment because they opened up more.  So they're getting better quality care because they have someone that they can relate to.  And I felt good to be the only one in that emergency room to be able to do that.  I wanted other people, but I felt like I couldn't deny my community me as a resource because I'm tired or because I don't wanna get up.  I, I dealt with it.  A lot of my other colleagues would say oh, boy, here comes this person again who doesn't have any insurance, and this is his third time in three weeks coming in here.  But I understand.  I'm not complaining.  I understand that he probably has a bunch of realities in his life that are taking precedent over insurance.  You know, who knows what's going on in his life.  It's hard in the inner city, and I know that, and I understand, so I treat him with a little more respect than I see that's coming out of a lot of my other patients.  And I couldn't--you know, I found that it wasn't, I found that there weren't that many people respecting the community as much as they should have.  And it felt good for me to know that I was there doing that, and that's what kind of allowed me also to stay another year.  Because I wanted to continue, continue to do that, but you know, there comes a time when you have to give the pager back (laughter), and I gave it back, took a faculty position, which a little easier.  But you know, call wears on you, it really does.  Getting up four in the morning is no joke.
Story_ID: 95392
Speaker 1: So, so you, you teach now at a--
Speaker 2: I do a little teaching.  I do a lot of coordinating community projects and executing those projects, nursing home screenings, homeless shelter screenings, and, and oral health promotion to youngsters, and lot of those sorts of where we're gonna probably now try to--we're, we're gonna work on trying to get some outreach programs into the ER [Emergency Room] because we wanna get some--like you have programs and, and social programs for people who are homeless and people who are battered wives and children.  But we wanna get young people who are continuously coming in their for violence to maybe--you know, give them the option.  Do you want some, some help?  We can refer to--we, we wanna create a social program where we can refer, because it, it feels like we're denying ourselves a chance to, to, to maybe intervene in some of these areas, because the kid--if these kids are coming back left and right with, with, with mouth issues and, and, and violent situations, we may wanna intervene and give them the option, not, not--you know, the same option we give to someone that we treat who came in for being a battered woman.  We would send her to a battered woman counselor, so maybe an anger counselor, if that's what their problem is.  Or whatever their issue is, we wanna try to get them help, as opposed to sending them back into the world without even the least bit of a thought about them coming back, until they come, then we wanna complain.  You know what I mean?  But we have that chance right then when they're there.  Offer them something.  So these are the little--we're trying to figure out ways to just enhance the, the quality of life in the community as best we could with, with, with people who don't ordinarily get approached.  You know, they just get ignored and, and swept away.  So we're trying to do something about that, those demographics through the community.  Like, I work in the Department of Community Health, and that's what we concentrate on.  But I also am on the admissions committee, so I fly around, I recruit at different schools, and do seminars for different people who may become interested in dentistry, as well as I sit on the--I'm one of twelve members of the admissions committee, and I vote on who gets in and who doesn't.  So that's a big responsibility also that, that I enjoy.  But I do some teaching also.  I had to give a lecture in Atlantic City at the New Jersey Dental Association's Conference on Friday.  I had to drive in.  That was my really, that's really my first real presentation to other dentists.  And I got through it, but I was nervous as I don't know what.
Story_ID: 95393
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Three Doctors Foundation.
Speaker 2: It's a non--Three Doctors Foundation is a nonprofit organization that myself and my two partners [HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] decided to, to initiate because of everything that I just spoke about.  We, we realize that young people us are gonna face the same things we faced and, and more.  And we knew what we were missing and what, we knew what lessons we learned, as well as what we wished we would have known when we were in the ninth grade, you know, and all of those sorts of little gems of knowledge that are unknown in our community.  And but they're known, but they're not made known to our community as much as it should be, which isn't allowing our young people to dream.  So we wanted to, you know, come back, do mentoring programs now because we know there's a lack of mentors.  We know there's a financial dearth when it comes to trying to pursue education, so we thought about trying to start a scholarship.  We're in the process of trying to do that.  We wanted to do some leadership programs for our youngsters and some positive peer pressure programs to get them involved in pushing each other positively, as opposed to--trying to make it cool to do well in school, trying to take that negative mystique off of performing well.  And that's not only for inner city communities.  That's for the suburb, suburbs as well, where, you know, it's just not cool to get, do well in school.  And that's like one of the stupidest things that I have ever heard as an adult, you know.  Now that I look back on it, I'm like, man, that's, that's so counterproductive to excellence, you know.  It, it just makes you feel like you're doing something wrong because you're doing well, and that's the best thing you could possibly do for your future.  If I would have known what I know now about the level of funding that you can garner from performing well in high school, in the ninth grade, if I would have known and know now with the intensity that I know it now, I would have gotten all A's, because I wouldn't have the loans that I have now and all of the financial issues that I'm going through now.  I would have gotten a free ride everywhere I went if I would have known, you know, if I would have been paying attention to know that and know the implications of--for my future.  You know, I hear--I may have heard it, but I didn't really pay attention to it like I needed to.  So we wanna help them understand a lot of these things that--you know, how college isn't hard.  Give them--we wanna give them the encouragement and confidence, as well as remove the fears and excuses.  And we're using our, our Foundation to do that through whatever initiatives we can think of.  We had our first annual--our gala fundraiser this year, and we raised a significant amount of funds.  So now we can really create a, a solid infrastructure.  Because we've, as of now, have been a hundred percent volunteer organization, and we've been operating for the last three years.  And last year was the last year where we actually gathered enough funding to actually execute some programs.  And we did it; it was a success; and we got more funding this year, had a, a fundraiser, gathered more funding.  So this summer in about two weeks, three weeks we're gonna have our, our first summer programs for this year.  So it's coming up, and we're just getting stronger, and growing, and trying to just get ourselves together so that we can do as much for our community as we physically and possibly can.
Story_ID: 95394
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about the book.
Speaker 2: The book called "The Pact," there's a book that myself and my two friends [HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] wrote, in which we chronicle our lives from very beginning up until the age of about twenty-eight.  And it's a book that, it's a kind of a, a message of hope and friendship.  It just talks about how we've--how education saved our lives, and how we used each other to give each other hope, and used each other to give each other that encouragement and that, and that stamina to move forward.  And it talks about our dynamic, I mean, just the, the great things that come from our friendship and how we used that to push us forward, and just to give people hope, because we've, we've gone through so many things that, that just about every--between the three of us, we've covered just about every issue you can imagine between the three of us.  And there's something in it for everyone to relate to, to help you get over those hard times, and let you know that it can be done, regardless of how daunting things look, regardless of what issues affect you.  It, it, it hopefully will serve as a source of inspiration to young people, as well as adults, to, to let them know that they can pursue their dreams and to, to, to, like I said before, just go for it because we want our young people to go for it.  A lot of them are failing before they even try because of these fears and misconceptions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95395
Speaker 1: Now you, you experienced--you related during one of the breaks an experience that, though you would prefer to stay in the community it's caused you to reconsider--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, it's, it's just I, I, I, I, and I currently, I currently live in Newark [New Jersey], and I, and I, I, I actually moved three days ago to another location in Newark.  But it's important for me to--I like that feeling of saying I live here when I'm talking to my, my, my youngsters because they, they--like the, the, the ice that needs to be broken when you're trying to reach youngsters, melts away, because they automatically see me as a young guy from their community committed to their community.  And I can get my message through without--it's effortless.  I just talk to them with what I--you know, with the positive information I wanna give them, and they get it.  And I don't--and I'm not ready to give that up.  I love the fact that I can say that, and I'm dealing with the same issues that they're dealing with.  But there are signs every day, you know, that, that, that, you know, if you--man, if you're, you're comfortable enough to move, you might as well go.  But I don't, you know, I never let that--you know, I think about that.  Like I was telling you during the break about how when I was living--a year ago when I was Quitman Street where I grew up, Quitman and Spruce in Newark, my car actually caught a bullet hole like four minutes after I had gotten out of my car.  There was a shootout in my old neighborhood, and the car happen to be shot.  And that was a strong message to move out, you know, because, you know, although I wanna stay and I wanna serve as a source of commun--a source of inspiration to my community and let them see, yeah, you do have a doctor walking your block, and you can do it too, you know, and give the parents something to offset that negativity with.  You know, you see that drug dealer, but you also Dr. Jenkins who lives on your block too.  So you know can, you know, you, you, you do have a choice, and I like to be able to do that.  But after that happened, I happened to move to another area in Newark, which is closer to my hospital, where they had a condominium situation for, for, for physicians who wanted to stay in Newark.  So I moved there, and then I moved, I moved out of there into another spot in Newark.  But I, I have to be in Newark right now.  Like, I, I--even when I was doing my apartment search, trying to figure out what town I was gonna move in.  My mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] was helping me, and she was like, they have some in Union; they have some in Elizabeth, but I kept telling her I wanna stay here in Newark.  Even though I'm close, and those are the outskirts, it gives me confidence and pride I guess.  I don't know.  I does something for me apparently because I had the opportunity twice to move and I found myself right back looking for a, a place in Newark because I think it makes me more effective with what I'm doing.  And, and, and even when I go to other regions of the country, you know, when, when I, when we spoke in Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan], and I let them know, listen, you know, I'm not trying to talk to you from, from the hills or, or from a safe place.  It is--you know, I'm talking to you from the same community that you're dealing with.  And I, I just feel like you gotta be a part of it to, to be able to effect change in it, in order to be taken seriously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And years ago, people did--because of segregation, they had to live in the same community as the well-to-do black people--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: The major was still poor, but those who had succeeded had to live in the black community,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --couldn't live anywhere else.  And people lament that now, that--the older people I talk to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was better?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they say it's better 'cause you could--they could see those who were poor who achieved could see somebody else who--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --did.  Yeah, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's the truth.  A lot of things were better when things were crazy, because even, even, we even patronized each other's businesses a lot better because we had to.  But once we were allowed to go in every, every store, you know, resources were, were diverted, and those small mom and pop shops folded, you know.  And that was kind of sad to see.  But I wouldn't trade segregation for that though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a double-edge--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it really is, it really is.
Story_ID: 95396
Speaker 1: Now tell, tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I hope we snap out of our daze.  I hope we snap out of our daze.  And, and that daze has, has been 400 years in the making.   And, and, and, and, and how many years were, were--was it lawful, you know?  Even when they--even when slavery was over, it was still engrained and institutionalized in, in the government, you know, oppression.  So, now that that's been lifted only less than fifty years ago, you know, we're expected to just jump on the same playing field like everyone else and just run with everyone else.  But everyone overlooks the fact that racism was serious institutionalized.  You can go look up a law about--a Jim Crow law that tells you can't--you know, that's a different story if, if--like today, racism is, is, is kind of unsaid, and someone can push it on you kind of subtly, but it's a different story when it's the law (laughter).  You know what I mean?  And, and, and for that to have, have, have happened, that kind of put us in a state, the mind state that we're in now, and it's kind of difficult to shake out of it because we don't really know anything else but oppression.  So I want us to snap out of the daze and realize that the time is now.  There's never been a better time than now to pursue your dreams and go for it, no matter how old you are.  There's never been a better time than now.  And, and, and, and I advise you not to wait until the next, you know, time where you may think it, it, it's gonna get a little bit better because it's only gonna be marginally better.  You know, go for it right now while you can.  I want us to make excellence the cool thing.  You know, just like, you know, if you're a rapper, yeah, that's cool, and that's a fad, or if you're a ballplayer, we want pursuing a profession to be just a cool as that and not be something square and corny like it's presented to you.  We need it to--you know, we're--that's what my partners [HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] and I say, we're trying to glamorize education and show these young people the good things that can come out of an education.  Just like you see all of the rewards that can come out of shooting a ball or, or, or, or making a hit song, we wanted them to see this as well, because this is a more realistic option for them.  And 99 percent of the, the athletes and singers don't make it, you know, but 99 percent of the, the academic guys who take it serious are gonna make it.  If you take it seriously, you're gonna do it.  You won't be denied it if you take it seriously.  And that's what I want our, our people to understand, our young people as well as our adults.  Like, don't except mediocrity.  You know, we are capable of excellence.  Let's pursue it; let's let, let go of these fears and these misconceptions and, and everything that can hold you back from even trying.  Because the, the, the, the greatest task was to jump in, and that's hard, because you don't know--it's hard to start building a house if you don't know if you have all the wood to build it.  Who wants to build a house, and they have to stop halfway?  And they'll never be able to complete it because you don't have the resources.  But that's how it felt, felt like we started to build a house and probably won't even be able to have a roof, but I'm gonna try to build it.  But before you know it, the people saw us building our house, and the other people had extra parts that saw us building our house.  And the added to it, and before you knew it, we had all our resources.  But those people wouldn't have seen us if we didn't start building our house on own and just went for it.  So we want our people also to jump out there on faith, and believe that it's gonna work out if you, if you--you have to be determined, and disciplined, and dedicated to what you're doing, but it's gonna work out if you just jump out there on faith and just pray that it's gonna work out, it will.  Because people have to see you.  Even if you don't have the resources, the way you find those resources is by going for it.  Because people will see you helping yourself; they'll see that you're determined and you're disciplined, and they'll add resources to you that you hadn't even met, you won't meet right now until you embark on your mission.  We met countless sources of support that we would have never met if we didn't put our foot out there and try.  And they saw it, and then they jumped right to our aid.  So you--we, we want our people to know that you haven't even met your, probably your greatest supporter yet, so don't fear the fact that you, you perceive yourself now as not having support.  Get into whatev--start, start whatever you're gonna do, and then start to piece your support together.  But don't sit and wait for 40 years until you think your support's just gonna fall in your lap.  And then you're 40 years old, upset you didn't go to school or even try, you know.  I want our young people to, to just go for it, and don't accept mediocrity, don't, don't be denied, and know that the world has a lot to offer you, just as much as anyone else.  It may be a little tougher to achieve that, but that's the reality of what you have to deal with.  You either will deal with it and, and fight through it, and better yourself, or you'll say resigned to your community, which you're unhappy with as, as is.  So, you know, you, you must not be that unhappy if you don't wanna go out there and try to change it.  You know what I mean?  So that's how I see it, and that's how I operate.  And I just want us to kind of get ourselves together where we're pursuing the proper things and we have the, the right things, and our priorities in order, and, and we're going forward, and we're using education as a way, 'cause that, that is the way. I mean it's the foundation for it.  Even sports and entertainment it's the it's the foundation, you know.  Even the thing that we glamorize, education is the foundation of that.  I would hate to be an NBA star who wasn't very articulate and, and, and, and sharp with, with, with my contract.  And you know, what's the point of being an NBA star if I'm giving half my salary to all of these other people, and I could have avoided that--you know what I mean--but I wasn't sharp with my paperwork.  You know, I'd hate to be in that position.  So we just want them to understand that education is it and that's it.  It's not a--you know, we were trying to make--stop it from being a chore and making it something enjoyable, and fun, and, and, and glamorous, and has some style to it; were trying to give a little style to education, and, and stop it from being the square entity that it's presented as.
Story_ID: 95397
Speaker 1: Just three more questions.  What, what are your big plans now, 'cause you, you had a big plan as a youth, you know, so you, you have a big plan on what you wanna do next?
Speaker 2: To be honest, I, I, I, I stopped planning because--I mean, slowly plan.  I mean I guess I plan like immediate things, but long-term plans I shied away from because to be perfectly honest, my goal was to graduate dental school, and then I was thinking okay, maybe I wanna practice by the time I'm thirty.  I had no idea about becoming an author.  I had no idea about becoming a philanthropist while I still have student loans (laughter), which is weird, but you know, that's just what's in our hearts.  And we have more, you know, we have more positivity to give than money right now, but that's still philanthropy because that's the area that we're rich in, and we're, we're giving, giving that away.  And I had no idea about are all unplanned, and they all were like blessings that fell out of the sky that I couldn't have even dreamt of my life today and the way it is, even three years ago.  So whatever my plans were, were shot.  So it's like, you know, the way it's been snowballing in, it's like I don't even have to plan it.  It's almost planning itself.  It's almost like this mission is becoming divine almost, because it's like we don't even think.  We just act instinctually.  And issues come up, we met and talk, and we just walk in that right direction.  And it feels like it's so effortless that it, it has to be, you know, it has to be spiritual, it, it feels at times.  Because these things we're so passionate about and that we're following take on lives of their own, and it just takes minimal effort for--from us.  It, it feels like it, but it really is a lot of effort and, and meetings and things like that.  But I just wanted to just sit back and let it unfold and continue being a good person, doing the things that I'm doing, and affecting other people's lives-- (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Story_ID: 95398
Speaker 1: And I kind of stopped planning because it's happening, things are happening so fast and so unexpectedly that if I plan something and I don't get a chance to do it because something new popped up, I don't wanna be disappointed.  So I'm just living life, and enjoying being out of residency, and taking it as it comes.  And slowly but sure I'm, I'm sort of, I'm getting settled into this faculty position [at New Jersey Dental School in Newark, New Jersey], so I plan on being there for a while, and I plan on continuing to speak, and I plan on our foundation [Three Doctors Foundation with HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt] growing.  So a lot of the seeds that I'm planting now are very--you know, I just planted them.  So I wanna continue to nurture those and, and watch those grow, and hopefully, you know, as they grow I'll be able to connect them and do more things, and who knows, you know?  I mean I never realized that I'd have the opportunity to, to, to reach young people, or just people, the way we do.  And now that I'm discovering that, I wanna plan something with that.  So it's all over the place to be honest.  I'm just trying to just take it as it comes and just continue to do the good things that come in my, come to me in terms of--you know, sometimes I daydream.  Sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night with an idea or, or some, some way that we can reach our community.  It just pops up in all of our heads, and we just develop those particular ideas.  So, you know, I just, you know, I, I, I, I'm starting to become a lot more spiritual because of this whole thing because it's almost like you can't deny it.  It's like all three of us started with, with all of these obstacles, all--you know, none of us, you know, had kids, or none of us got accidently killed or fell victim to anything that could have distracted us, which is kind of amazing through all of this turmoil, but none of us saw that as we were coming up.  We had to realize that af--after we graduated.  But everything that, that, that, that has come to us from, from studying has not been planned.  So it's difficult to continue, to continue to make additional plans.  We just wanna let it all--nurture the things that we've done, and continue to let things come to us instinctually and act on those.  So it's hard to plan because it comes out with whatever--however it comes out, it comes out and then that's when we take that creativity, develop it, and then it becomes something like a foundation, or it can become something like, you know, a book or whatever it is that we like to do.
Story_ID: 95399
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you mentioned spiritual.  Now when you, when you were coming up, were you part of a church or a mosque or anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was a part of a church as I was coming up, but it was all, you know, how your mom [Ella Williams Jenkins Mack] makes you go.  And it, it wasn't really like I was dying to go to church or, or that it was any, of any desire of my own.  And the messages were really always over my head.  So my mom made me sit there, but it wasn't like this preacher was talking to my issues.  It was all the adults.  So I didn't really find church very enjoyable as I was growing up.  And even today sometimes I don't really find it too enjoyable unless the message speaks to me.  But I pray a lot.  I talk a lot to, to God a lot, and, and, and I sit back and I feel, and I'll listen.  You know what I mean?  And I kind of act on my instincts, 'cause I know I'm a good person, and I just act on that, and I just--I'm very generous, and I just, I'm just myself.  And with that, you know, and all of the good things that I do it just comes back tenfold, so--like that, that, that whole good karma thing, it seems like, like just being a good person is just rewarding, it really is, whether it's financially rewarding, spiritually rewarding, emotionally rewarding.  So, you know, I'm just on track to continue to, to, to just being a good person.  My mom is, is, is trying to influence me to get with an organized sort of situation, maybe just to find a church that I, that I like.  But I really, to be honest, I, I, I, I, sometimes I think I have a better relationship with, with God than a lot of people that even go to church because, you know, in these stressed out really crazy situations I see the most vi--the people who tote their Bible the hardest are the ones who are the most stressed out during those situations.  I'm like, "All that, all of those times you're coming to me telling me I should go to church, I should do these things, where is your faith?  You know what I mean?  Where's your faith?  You're not faithful that you're gonna get through that?  You should be faithful."  So I'm, I'm always able to keep my faith and keep a good disposition about things.  So I think I'm full spiritually, but I can be more.
Story_ID: 95010
Speaker 1: All right, at this point, Sir, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I, I would like, I really--that's a difficult question because I just turned thirty like three months ago.  I guess I'm still trying to define that.  But some of the things that I just spoke about, those positive influences on our community's mentality, if I can leave that, you know, and, and see that that could spread throughout our community and started to make a positive change, I would die a happy man because I feel like that's one of the, that's one--just the mentality.  Because just what you're thinking is really what keeps you strong.  So if you think you can do it, you're gonna do it.  And if you have hope, if your hopeful and you have faith, that keeps you strong through those obstacles, and it helps you find solutions around the obstacles, as opposed to getting to the obstacle and giving up because you don't really have much hope or faith anyway.  But we have to be strong because they're gonna be in it at disproportionate amount of obstacles that are gonna come your way.  So you really have to be strong and resilient and prepare yourself.  So I just want us to be mentally prepared and mentally focused, and know that we can do it, surround ourselves by positive people, encourage each other and support each other when we're doing well, and learn from those people.  And even when you're doing well, don't think you're better than anyone.  Help those people.  You'll see that they'll respect you a lot more, you know.  And, and it'll come back to you as well, but I just want us to be mentally ready to go, and, and take away some of these mental shackles that are holding us back that we kind of put on ourselves after we did have the opportunity to go to school.  We kind of, you know, it wasn't the law that was holding us back anymore.  It was almost the mentality that that oppression created.  It's still pervasive today, and we just wanna smash that to pieces and get our people, get our people's minds right, as they say in the hip hop community (laughter).
Story_ID: 95011
Speaker 1: Now at this point too, how would you like to be remembered when all this over?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a good person, you know, just someone who really gave when he didn't have to give of his time, his money, of his, of himself.  He just extended himself to, to try to make other people better.  And that's, that's it.  I mean that, that's it in a nutshell.  And all of my specifics revolve around that, me being the best person I could possibly be, helping out as much as I can possibly help.  Because, you know, as quick as I get a blessing I'll give it away, and I'll--you know, as quick as I get a blessing I'm trying to share it because it's no fun unless, unless--you know, there are more of us up here who are trying to, you know, do something positive with, with their lives.  It's not that many.  In my hospital I wish it was someone like myself that I can talk to on a day-to-day basis, but there isn't.  So I wanna make that person by trying to get out here now and talk to these young people, because these young people from the community are the people that I'm going to relate to when they make it to that, that ivory tower.  So when they, when they do make it, these are the people I'm trying to groom.  But it's, it goes deeper than that as well, because I want other people to understand the realities that these young people are going through.  So hopefully that'll bridge a gap.  They'll understand us, we'll understand them, because we're sitting right in the middle, myself and my two partners [HM Dr. Sampson Davis and HM Dr. Rameck Hunt], because we get to straddle both worlds.  And we can hopefully serve as a liaison between both of them.  We'll hope, hopefully help our community not fear the other community as much and vice versa, as well as to be able to understand.  We want you to understand that they're--they want help.  They may not--they may give you attitude when they come in here because of what's going on in their community, but they want help, so don't give up when you see that attitude, or run away, or be intimidated.  That's their way of crying for help.  Help them out.  You know, so we want them to understand us, and we're gonna help us understand them so that hopefully we can meet in the middle and one day be prepared to help each other out.  And because if we're gonna be in this country together, we're gonna have to learn to work with each and not be so pseudo segregated as we are now.
