Story_ID: 9120
Speaker 1: Julieanna Richardson.  I'm slating it now.  And I'm the interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm George Ellis Johnson, G-E-O-R-G-E, E-L-L-I-S, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 18th of December, 19--2003 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 16th, 1927.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: I was born in Richton, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And your, your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your occupation before.
Speaker 2: Before that I was the chairman of Johnson Products Company, founder and chairman of Johnson Products Company.
Story_ID: 9121
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I guess chicken would be my favorite food.  I eat chicken more than anything I suppose.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would have to say Jamaica, many--so many years we spent there.
Speaker 1: And your--do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite would be what I base my career on, which is "do unto others as you would have others do unto you".  That's the golden rule, and I think--I credit that with the success that I've enjoyed in my business.
Story_ID: 9122
Speaker 1: Now, I want to start, do you have memories of your father, sir, 'cause he--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have memories of my father from about ten years old.  Prior to, to that, I--my father was a--well, I had a picture, I had some photographs of him.  But my real knowledge of him was really what I read in the letters that he wrote over the years, but two years old when I, when my mother [Priscilla Dean Howard] took us to Chicago.  And I was about ten years old when I saw him again. And I spent about a year with him, and I, I learned to love him--I mean I loved him before, but I really learned why I loved him 'cause he was a wonderful person.  And it was a, it was a joy to spend that time with him.
Speaker 1: Can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Charles David Johnson.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about his growing up at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or his family?
Speaker 2: Only what I can remember.  My grandfather and grandmother, I, I--the year that I, that we went to visit or to, to be with my father was 1937.  I think it was the month of May or June, and we spent that summer with my grandfather and my grandmother on their, on the farm that they were sharecroppers on.  And then in September we went to the city of Laurel, Mississippi and entered school.  I, I spent the fifth grade in Laurel, Mississippi.  My oldest brother, John [E. Johnson], graduated from grammar school while we were there.  And, of course, my younger brother [Robert Johnson] was, I forget, maybe he was in third grade, second grade or something.
Speaker 1: Do you know why you spent that year in Laurel?  Was it to help, your mother was transitioning or was there?
Speaker 2: No, no, my mother wanted us to know him.  And she, I think--well, first of all, I think she wanted us to get a chance to get to know him.  I think she also would have--did enjoy that respite of a year away from us.  And, and it was good for her.  We didn't--it wasn't so pleasant for us, but we learned to really enjoy being with our father.
Story_ID: 9123
Speaker 1: Your mother, can you give her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Priscilla Dean Howard, at her death.
Speaker 1: And can you tell about her background and what you know about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that she, she was born in Heidelberg, Mississippi.  I believe she had, I believe five siblings.  I don't know much about her father or her mother.  I think her father was a railroad man, I believe--I remember when she said that she spent, she spent some time with him, he--in St. Louis.  It seems that her mother died in childbirth, and she was about four years old when her mother died, four or five years old.  And she was next to the youngest of, of her mother's children--and father's children.  I really don't know a lot.  She never, she didn't talk very much about, about her father or her mother.
Story_ID: 9124
Speaker 1: Did either of your parents or your grandparents, do you remember them talking about sharecropping?
Speaker 2: I don't think they talked about it.  They demonstrated it.  We were out in the fields every day when we, when we got to a little--this, this place was Runnelstown, Mississippi.  And we were up mighty early at, at the break of dawn, out in the fields.  I can remember picking, picking, first of all, I think I picked peas, string beans.  And then we picked cotton.  I will never forget picking cotton in Mississippi, with the sun beaming down on me, and I--it was just miserable.  But we, we were inspired to do, to, to do it because we got paid for it.  We got paid for it, you know, very little, but we got paid for it; not when we were picking the cotton that was on my grandfather's sharecropping ranch--farm, but when, when that was over, we went out and picked cotton for pay, from, for other people.  And I remember picking a hundred and four pounds of cotton one day.
Speaker 1: That was pretty good, not as good as B. B. King said he picked.
Speaker 2: Oh, but it was, it was, it was tough.  I was, I think I was ten years old.  And it was, it was tough.
Story_ID: 9125
Speaker 1: How would describe your mother [Priscilla Dean Howard]?  Can you talk about what type of person she was?
Speaker 2: She was a tremendous woman.  She was one of--I would say, one of the bravest women that I've ever known.  She had tremendous courage.  And she was really very intelligent.  She didn't have schooling.  She, I think she told me she went to sixth grade.  But my mother was, she was a very wise--she was a tough woman too, and I, I think I have to say that here's a woman that was, I would--she was eighteen years old when she came to Chicago [Illinois].  She had three children by the time she was eighteen years old.  She left her husband [Charles Johnson], who she couldn't convince to come to Chicago with her.  She had brothers and sisters in Chicago, and they had been writing her for some time and telling her that she should bring her family to Chicago, that it was a much better place for her to live.  She tried to convince my father that he should come, and they should, we should all go.  But he wouldn't leave his family.  He wouldn't leave Mississippi.  I also think that people had been telling him something, telling him something that made him afraid of coming to Mississippi.  But my mother had the courage to take the three of us, with the money that was sent down to her from her brothers and sisters in Chicago, and, and take us out of there.  And I thank God that she did that.  I, we came to Chicago in August of 1929, and I think a week after, she, she got here, she got a job at, at Michael Reese Hospital.  And she kept that job, and she worked all during the Depression.  Well, we came in 1929 at the beginning of the Depression, and she had this job all during the Depression.  It didn't pay a lot, but she had a job, and, and she, and it, it almost took care of us.  It didn't quite, but it almost took care of us.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have memories, 'cause you were about three at the time--?
Speaker 2: I was two.
Speaker 1: Two, okay, when you came.  So you don't really have memories of you arriving?
Speaker 2: You know, I, believe it or not, I do.  I really do.  The first place we lived was on 29th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue], and I have some--I can remember being really frightened there because it was a very dark hallway that I'd, I would have to go through that hallway in order to get to our quarters.  And it used to scare me to death to go through that dark, dark hallway.  So I remember that.  I remember, I remember a few things--I remember things as far back as 1930, '31 [1931].
Speaker 1: And what other things do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, we moved a lot.
Speaker 1: You did move a lot.
Speaker 2: We moved a lot.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you come and stay with relatives or you were--was she on her own with these--?
Speaker 2: Well, she was on her own when she first got here.  She had this, this one room, I believe it was, one room in this place at 29th and Ellis, which was a, just a, a block from where she was going, where she was working at Michael Reese Hospital.  We moved with, in with relatives, I think first with my uncle, John, John Thigpen.  And then we moved in with my aunt--we went from one--place to place, and we finally got, I guess settled, maybe in the middle '30s [1930s] and at 440--448 East 34th Street.  And most of my upbringing was in that neighborhood, 34th and, and Vernon [Avenue].
Story_ID: 9126
Speaker 1: Can you talk about what that neighborhood was like and even what your, you know, what the street was like growing up [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, this was really a very, a kind of a mixed area really, a lot of poverty.  We lived in a court way building, which looked very nice.  It was probably one of the nicest looking buildings of its size.  I think there were forty-eight apartments in this building.  And there were, there were single-family homes or rather structures, and there were kitchenettes.  But I would always, I always remember that the people between Rhodes [Avenue] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] on 34th Street in that little enclave, there were a lot of professional people.  There were doctors and lawyers and ministers and, and nurses, I--just professional people who were living a lot better than we were a block away at 34th and Vernon [Avenue].  And that used to, and that, I think, impressed me because I had an--I had an idea that we weren't all the same, that things were not all the same for everybody, that there was, that there was a better life that, that you could, you could achieve because I saw the children of these people.  They, they had skates, they had bicycles.  They had all the things we didn't have.  And another place that I remember, at 32nd [Street] and Vernon, there was a house that had a tennis court on the corner.  And I used to walk down there and watch the people play tennis, and they were all black people, you know.  And it was, it was just, it was just fascinating to me to see these people bouncing that ball back and forth and having a wonderful time.  Well, these things I, I think impressed me.  And also, I mean I had a lot of friends who were, you know, in dire poverty, I mean in dire straits.  We weren't much better off.  My mother [Priscilla Dean Howard] told me very early, told all three of us that if we wanted the things that, that she couldn't buy, we'd have to get them for ourselves.  And if we wanted show fare, if we wanted to buy candy, if we wanted those things, we'd have to find a way to get them.  And we did.  I started right there, in the building that we lived in, my oldest brother and I, John [E. Johnson], we started a little--we, well, it was our hustle.  We would go up and down the back stairways, and, and get in the garbage cans and pull out the newspaper, pull out the milk, the milk bottles, all the things that we could.  And we called that junking.  And we would take things to the junkman that was in the alley.  And we, I think we got a penny for four bottles of--I forget what it was, for every pound of paper.  And we'd, we would certainly look for the cigarette packages, and then take the, the silver out of cigarette packages, especially Lucky Strikes and all those.  They were, all had the tin, that foil, that silver foil.  And that took a long time to get any quantity of it, but when we did, we got paid better for that than anything, than any paper or any of the junk that we were collecting.  Even rags, we used to sell everything.
Speaker 1: What was the paper in the, the tin, what was that used for?  How did they--?
Speaker 2: To keep the cigarettes fresh.
Speaker 1: Right, but what, you were junk--?
Speaker 2: We would separate the--the tin foil, the silver, the tin foil or the silver foil from the paper.  And then get it into a ball until you'd get a ball big enough, like a couple of pounds.  That would, that took a long time and a lot of cigarette packages, but that was worth--the, the junkman had a high price that he paid for that.  And I guess it was recycled.  I mean we didn't know it, but (laughter) they were recycling that, and I'm, I'm going back to the early '30s [1930s].
Story_ID: 9127
Speaker 1: Give me your brothers' names?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother was John Edward Johnson.  He's late, he died in 1979 at fifty-three years old.  And my youngest brother is Robert, we--Robert, Junior, Johnson.  And he is seventy-four years old.  He lives in Olympia Fields [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, your brothers and you--you were close.  Were you close?
Speaker 2: We were very, we were very close.  We were very--especially, my oldest brother, John and I.  I mean everything that, that John did, I did.  If he got a job, I got a job right there.  If I got a job, which was very seldom that I got one, that he didn't have already, and if he liked it, we'd, we would go where my job was.  But we started out selling, delivering newspapers together.  He started first, and I started a paper route, I guess I was about, maybe nine, ten years old.  And I think I kept that paper route until I was in high school, probably a year after I was in high school, I kept the route.  He also, he also got a job at a cleaners.  So we would have the paper route in the morning, and we worked at the cleaners in the afternoon and on Saturdays.  And we made money.  I, I can never remember not being able to do what I wanted to do.  I've always had the funds to do whatever I wanted to do--all, all of us did.  But we didn't get it from my mother [Priscilla Dean Howard].  We got it from our, from what we had, what we could do ourselves.  And she let us know that she could keep a roof over our head and some food on the table.  And, and, and we'd have to do the rest.  I don't think my mother, except for my brother, Robert, who was the youngest, I don't think she had to buy anything for John and I, from the time we were about nine years old.  I remember buying all my clothes and John buying his clothes.  It was, you know, that was the inspiration to go out and, and work.
Story_ID: 9128
Speaker 1: How did you differ from your brothers?  What were, what was the young George Johnson like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is almost embarrassing, but I think I had an attitude early on that--to give you an idea, they called me the rich man, or the white man in the family.  They called me the white man.  And the reason is because I didn't do, I didn't, I wanted things that we didn't want, that we, that wasn't common among kids my, my age.  I, I tried to do a lot of things, for instance, I, I got a riding habit.  And I used to go out to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and ride horses.  I liked the theater, and this is, of course, later on.  But I don't know, I, I guess it was, it was an attitude I had.  And I remember my mother [Priscilla Dean Howard] trying to make me come to reality, and she told me that, you, look, don't you know you're poor?  And I told her, "No, I'm not poor."  And she, and she made me explain that.  I said, "I'm not poor.  I got money to do whatever I want to do.  I give you money, so I don't consider myself poor."  And I didn't.  Now, whether that was foolish or not, that's what, that was the way I felt.
Speaker 1: Were you, were you well-mannered?  Were you rambunctious?  Were you mischievous?  What were you?
Speaker 2: I don't think that any of us were mischievous.  We, I think we were pretty--we had a pretty good routine.  My mother expected us to take care of the house, which we did.  We had to do the dishes, we had to do the laundry, had to iron the clothes.  We had to make the beds.  We did all the housework.  And then we would have, we would, we would, we would never idle, except for my youngest brother [Robert Johnson].  He was too young for the--to, to keep up with us, but my oldest brother [John E. Johnson] and I, I think we were, we were, we were certainly well mannered.  And my mother would listen to the, to the neighbors.  If we were out of line with anybody, and they told her about it, she, she would straighten us out.  And, and she didn't mind bending us over.
Speaker 1: Now, your oldest brother was two years older than you, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then there's the--your youngest was two years younger, so it was stair steps?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, stair step, that's exactly right.
Story_ID: 9129
Speaker 1: I want you to describe any other sights, smells and sounds that remind you of growing up [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing you could, you could, I could--comes to mind right away is that in the summertime especially, if the wind was blowing in the direction of where we lived, you could smell the stockyards.  The stockyards at, at forty--whatever, 43rd [Street] and Halsted [Street] or over there, would just come over, and, oh, you would have a miserable day when that wind was blowing in that direction.  I guess that would have been a, a wind blowing northwest--northeast, rather, from the stockyard.  Boy, and, so that's, that's one odor I can get, I can, I can definitely remember.  As far as sights are concerned, it was a pretty rough area.  You know, they called 31st Street at that time the bucket of blood.  And, and, and it was kind of rough.  You would very ill-advised to go walking down 31st Street between State [Street] and, and the lake [Lake Michigan] at night.  We--there were gangs, of course, you know, that, that you had to contend with, not only in that area that I lived, but everywhere that I went, even going to school, walking to Wendell Phillips [High School], you had to walk through the territory of other, of other gangs.  And that wasn't that easy.  You had to be ready to, to really move.
Speaker 1: So were these black gangs, white gangs?  You said it was mixed area, right?
Speaker 2: Not, well, it was not as--it was mixed, but not a great deal of mixing.  The mixing was over on Cottage Grove [Avenue], I think Woodland Park and Groveland Park was probably all white during these years I'm talking--we're talking the, the '30s [1930s] and the, and the early '40s [1940s].  There also were, on my paper route, I had some white people on Lake Park, I think between 31st and 33rd on lake, on Lake Park; some between 33rd and, and 31st on Cottage Grove.  But only in that east, that, that far eastern edge.
Speaker 1: And did you, what about sounds?  Any sounds that remind you, that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Yes, the grey, the Greyhound bus station was between 33rd Street and 33rd Place, between Rhodes [Avenue] and Cottage Grove, and you'd get a lot of sounds from that.  Plus, there was a, there was a laundry on the corner of 33rd Place and Rhodes, and behind that was the, was a Greyhound bus maintenance garage.  And you'd get some sound, a lot of sounds from, from that laundry.  Not a lot of industrial places in there, other than what I'm, I'm mentioning here.  It was basically residential.  I can't recall any other sounds.
Story_ID: 9130
Speaker 1: Who were the big people in the community [Chicago, Illinois]?  Do you remember, you know, anyone who was sort of a big deal or, you know, you--?
Speaker 2: Well, there was Reverend McGee in the, in the thirty--between Rhodes [Avenue] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] on, on 34th Street.  Mr. Simmons was a, was, I guess the first black executive that I, that I ever knew.  He was in, he was a, a manager of the Peoples Gas at, I think on 39th Street, it was his office, 39th and Wabash [Avenue], somewhere like that.  There were a number of, oh, a number of doctors, Dr. Shaw, Maurice Shaw, I remember.  And basically--but as I said, the, mostly those were professional people.  Across the street from me were people who, at the time, it was a big job when you worked at the post office.  People who worked in the post, in the post office, they had very nice homes, and their children dressed very well.  They seemed to be, you know, much better livers than the most--than the rest of us.  I remember some of those people.  And, of course, the people who were in policy, (laughter) and the people who were in policy, that, they, that was reflected in the, in their children.  They, they, they looked very well too.  They , they lived very well.
Speaker 1: Do you know who--do you remember some of the names of the policy, you know, heads at that time?  Who was (unclear), do you or were you aware of them?
Speaker 2: The, the Jones Boys were the most prominent that I knew, that I can recall, the Jones Brothers.  They were, I guess, the prominent people in the policy business.
Speaker 1: Now, you went to Doo--was it Doolittle Elementary?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you--how would you describe yourself as a student and, and--?
Speaker 2: I think I was a good student at, at Doolittle.  I was very interested in, in my, in my school work.  I think I got a good basic education there.  I don't think I was outstanding, but I think I did well.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I Mr. McAllister was, was one of the favorites.  I guess he was a lot of people's favorite too.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: He was very personable.  He was black, and he was very light-skinned, but you would--but he was black, and you related to him.  You know, he was, had a good sense of humor, and you--and he was, he was strict.  He wasn't a pushover.  So you could appreciate him.
Story_ID: 9131
Speaker 1: Can you sort of describe that period and, you know, even sort of any anecdotes about things that you may remember, maybe around holidays or, you know, or special events or, you know, sort of an average day.  I know you said things were structured, your mother was working, but things were sort of structured.
Speaker 2: I was delivering papers then.  Well, I always had a wonderful time at this time of the year, Christmas time.  It was always wonderful.  And I looked forward to it, I think all children, young, young, young kids, small children or even bigger children look, look forward to Christmas.  And Christmas was always a pleasant time.  I think the, the neighborhood reflected it.  There was a lot of excitement in the neighborhood.  And I really don't recall any speci--any special events or things during that period, that I could really point out to you.  And then Easter time, we always looked forward to Easter.  That meant you dressed up.  You got, you know, you, you tried to look your best on Easter and, and we usually did.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you churchgoers as a family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what denomination?
Speaker 2: Baptist church, and we went to Olivet Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Who was the minister at the time, sir?
Speaker 2: I think, I--I'm not certain.  I, I know that Jackson, Reverend [Joseph H.] Jackson was the minister for, almost forever, but he might not have been there when I was, when I was in high--or rather graduating from grammar school.
Speaker 1: Now, what about your friends?  Did you have any friends there that you would sort of hang out or was your brother your best friend or?
Speaker 2: Well, I, my brother and I had a, had a great relationship, but we weren't buddy-buddies.  He had his friends, and I had my friends.  I had, you know, I didn't have time either.  I got to tell you, I didn't have time to have a lot of friends because when, when kids were playing in the afternoon at the school, I'm delivering newspapers.  And I used to pass them while I'm delivering my newspapers, watching them play, shoot marbles, and I wanted--as much as I wanted to stop and play marbles, I had to keep, keep going and deliver my papers.  But I had a, I had one, just one particular friend, and, oh, I had a lot of people I knew.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you knew a lot of people in the neighborhood, even just delivering papers--.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you met a lot of people in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew almost everybody, the adults.
Story_ID: 9132
Speaker 1: Now why was 31st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] called, you said the--?
Speaker 2: The bucket of blood?
Speaker 1: The bucket of blood.
Speaker 2: 'Cause a lot of, I guess a lot of taverns on, on 31st Street, a lot of drunks, you know, people drinking and carrying on.  That's what, well, that was, that was what it, that was, you know, that was the designation given.  And that neighborhood I lived in was really, it was, it was really a, a ghetto.  I mean although we had those little enclaves that I mentioned, and it was the first choice of this land clearance, this, this whole program that started.  Now, that was the first place where they condemned property and, and then tore it down, and I think they sold it to New York Life [Insurance Company], and New York Life built Lake Meadows.  And that's where Lake Meadows, all along that area.  I--and I remember the, the big uproar that people had because they, they were gonna be forced to sell their property, whether they wanted to or not.  They were given, you know, warning, but they got to go.
Story_ID: 9133
Speaker 1: I remember walking to the World's Fair.  I can see, I was walking across the 31st Street bridge that, that goes over the tracks, because that's where the fair was, up and down the lakefront.  I remember Fort Dearborn.  I remember, oh, my goodness, I remember a lot of the, a lot of--I guess one of the things that really hangs in my memory is the, one of the feats that was there was a, a man walking on nails.  I think it was an Indian, walking on nails.  I just couldn't believe, you know, that--and, and walking in fire.  And, you know, there were all the big Ferris wheels, I mean those things stick in my memory.  But, but the most specific thing is, I guess, is that, that man walking on nails (laughter), just amazing to me.
Story_ID: 9134
Speaker 1: What was the area [of Chicago, Illinois] that you would sort of exist in?  Was it, I mean was--how many block, I mean, did you go and what?
Speaker 2: I guess you could say that it, we, we lived at 34th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue].  My paper route took me from--the, the branch was at 37th [Street] and Vincennes [Avenue].  And my paper route started around 35th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  And I delivered papers on both side of Cottage Grove, Lake Park [Avenue], all the way down to 31st Street.  That was my route.  So I spent, that, that's where I circulated.  I would basically say that we really traveled between 35th and 31st, between what was then South Parkway and the Lake.
Speaker 1: Now, what paper were you delivering?
Speaker 2: The '[Chicago] Herald-American', that was a [William Randolph] Hearst paper.
Speaker 1: It was Hearst, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Herald-American'.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn?  Were there things that you learned during those paper--you know, your time you were delivering papers that sort of, you know, you took and used in the rest, rest of your life?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: I didn't realize it until much later that, that was a great benefit in, in starting out to be a, to be a paper boy at such a, at a young age.  I remembered every name of every person that I delivered newspapers to.  And I knew each person by name, and I also knew what they owed, and I, and I might, might say I never collected what they owed me either, not, not in general.  Some of them would pay, and it wasn't that, it wasn't--it was disappointing the way that people paid the little paper boy at that time.  And the, and the newspaper, of course, didn't, didn't have to suffer because when I collected, I'd have to pay them first, pay the newspaper off first, and then after that, my, mine was on the, on the end.  And those who didn't pay, that was the one that, that, that would belong to me (laughter).  So I didn't make any money really delivering newspapers.  The way I made money, and I'll have to say this, they had a lot of incentives for me to go out and, and prospect for new subscribers.  And they paid, I think seventy-five cents, after a subscriber had been two months receiving the newspaper.  Then they would pay off.  And it would be seventy-five percent--seventy-five cents for each new subscriber.  And I would go on my route and just write up a lot of subscribers and after about two months I'd get that money.  And I made money from the new, from what I, from the new customers that I, that I had solicited.  And that's when I got paid when my, when those checks came in, that's the money that I took home.  Plus, there was a lot of prizes.  I can remember at Valentine's Day, for instance, they'd, they'd give seventy-five cents, plus a box of candy.  Oh, and I'd go out and really write up some--not, my mother [Priscilla Dean Howard], my mother had so many boxes of candy.  Then they had silverware.  They had dishes and things, all that.  I just got a, I just got a lot of those things, plus, the seventy-five cent check.  And that's the way I made money on the paper route.  And, and I made good money.
Speaker 1: And how long did you have your paper route?
Speaker 2: I think about four years.
Speaker 1: From what age to what?
Speaker 2: About four or five years, from about nine years to about fourteen, so about five years.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 9135
Speaker 1: You went on to Wendell Phillips High School.  That was--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --okay, that was the high school in the neighborhood [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a, Wendell Phillips was a very, very good school.  I think Maudelle [Brown] Bousfield was the, was the principal at that time.  And she had great staff.  The school was great.  My problem with, with, with high school was I was so tired because after I had got into high school, I, I got another job.  And I got a job down through, at the Sherman Hotel in the, in the College Inn of the Sherman Hotel.  And I would work, I think get to work about 5:00 and get off about 11:00, sometimes midnight and get home and have to be at school at 8:30.  I mean a lot of times I missed that first class.  So that was a problem.  But, but one of the things, you know, I had to work.  I really had to work, and I did, I did my very best to hang in there with my grades and what not.  I didn't, and I would say that I did fairly well, under the circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now, you had to work to help support the household?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had to support me.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: I had to support me.  I, I mean that was, that was it.  And I, I did very well at that too.
Speaker 1: Now, were there other people that we would know who was, who were at Wendell Phillips when you were there, 'cause I know that, who was, I think that was earlier--later, 'cause John [H.] Johnson had gone there, but he was, he's nine years--.
Speaker 2: I didn't think he was there.
Speaker 1: Oh, he went to DuSable [High School]?
Speaker 2: He went to DuSable.
Speaker 1: He went to DuSable see they--okay, okay, but he's, he's older than you.  But who, who was there?  Who also was there?
Speaker 2: That you would know? Wilson Frost, Wilson Frost was there. There was a guy named Pat Patterson who was, went into the theater.  Who were some of the others that you would know?  Raymond Ward, he was the son of a minister that lived down on 34th Street in that nice enclave.  Right at the moment, I can't think of too many people that you might know.
Speaker 1: What were you like then, though, you know, in your teens?  What are you--I mean, you know, you're a young boy at that time, but I mean what, what were you like?  What were you--would you dream or think?  Were you introspective?  Were--I mean you were working and working was, you know, making a living was important to you, but I'm just saying, what, what was, what were you like?
Speaker 2: I think I was serious.  I, as I told you, I, I--at this time now, I, I think I was trying to be cultured, trying to develop a culture.  And, and I did.  I, I remember going to see plays and, and that's something that was unusual.  I'd take a girl out.  I didn't take her to the movie, I would--we'd go to movies, but I'd take her downtown to see a play or a musical.  And I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any plays and musicals that you saw?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1944, I remember going, I remember seeing Etta Moten [Barnett] in, in 'Porgy and Bess', 'Oklahoma!', "Dark of the Moon", oh, something with, with Zero Mostel, I saw a wonderful play with Zero Mostel, and I took Joan [B. Johnson] to see that.  Oh, I can't--.
Speaker 1: Well, what, what age were you when you met Joan?
Speaker 2: When I met Joan, I was seventeen.
Speaker 1: You were seventeen, okay, by that time, you--okay.  Now, why did you end up, you, you dropped out of high school.  Was it because work had more appeal at that point or you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you, I was, you know, as I told, said, I was a, I think a fairly good student.  It wasn't difficult for me to really catch up on subjects.  But, yes, I was working, and I think at the time I, at--I was, I was making a lot of money when I quit school.  In fact, I was working at the Drake Hotel, and I was working in the, in the washroom at the Drake Hotel--this is my last year of high school.  And I think I made more money than the teachers because I would count out, at the end of the week, at a hundred and fifty dollars in change, that I'd made brushing off the back of these people and wiping their shoes, sometimes shining their shoes 'cause we had a shoe shinestand in there.  And they'd give me quarters and nickels and dimes.  And that would add up.  So that was, that was, you know, I, I was probably the most well-dressed boy in the classes because I didn't wear the same--I never wore the same thing twice (laughter).  I was very clothes conscious at that time.
Story_ID: 9136
Speaker 1: My oldest brother [John E. Johnson], as I said to you before, whenever he got a job some place, and he'd, he'd try to get me to come in.  And he went to work for Fuller Products Company.  He, he was working for Mr. [S. B.] Fuller, Fuller Products--sell, selling that--we called it carrying that bag, and that little black bag full of cosmetics up and down the stairs of the neighborhoods.  And he was doing good, very well with it.  So he talked to me about coming to work for Fuller Products, and he asked me--told me I needed to come and listen to Mr. Fuller.  So I think one Saturday morning, I decided I would go and listen to Mr. Fuller and attended his Saturday morning meeting.  And I, I, I heard the most dynamic person that I've ever met in my life, when I attended that meeting.  And it, I, I got excited about it.  I got, I was, it was so inspiring.  I went back to another meeting, I think on another Saturday morning.  Then I decided that this is what John is gonna do, this is what I'm gonna do.  And I decided to, to work for Fuller Products Company.  And, of course, you're really working for yourself when you, when you go to Fuller Products.  That bag that you carry, you buy all that, and you go out and sell it.  And, of course, that's, that would require my full time, and, and especially during the daytime.  You, your, your sales are gonna made more during the day, more so than at night.  And in, and you don't, and at that time, you weren't gonna, didn't want to be out in the neighborhoods at night with money--with, carrying a bag which is a, hey, that's a guy that might have some money on him, you know.  It would, it would be dangerous.  So I went to work for Fuller Products in 1944.  And, and I think that, what I did when I went to Fuller Products from Wendell Phillips High School, I went from one institution to a great institution.  And the education that I received under Mr. Fuller was the most rewarding of I think any education I could have received, I could have gotten anywhere.
Story_ID: 9137
Speaker 1: What he made me aware of--first of all, Mr [S. B.]. Fuller said to me, you know, do you want, what, what do you want to do?  He asked me what did I like?  I want to make a good living.  First of all, do you want to be rich?  Yes, I want to be rich.  And he says, "You have to take your fate in your own hands."  And I didn't quite understand what that was, but he said, you have to be, you have to be the master of your fate.  And then I began to talk to other people that were in the company--that, that was in Fuller Products [Company], and I began to realize that Mr. Fuller was indoctrinating people with some great ideas.  And every morning, it was--he had a meeting every morning that lasted an hour, hour and a half.  It all depends on how he felt, if he--how inspired he was.  And you would, you would call him a preacher, but what he was espousing was, was the truth.  You know, and it all came from, it--I think all of it came from the Bible.  Mr. Fuller didn't have much of an education.  I think he went to fourth grade.  He learned to read, and I think the Bible is what captivated his imagination.  And he had the, the, the ability to understand it, and to interpret it, and, and he espoused it.  I think he was a, he was a great--he sold it very well.  Mr. Fuller had me reading the Bible at seventeen years old.  And, and that's, you know, that's a quite a young age, especially, if you're gonna get into, as I went into Ecclesiastes, which is a mind boggler if you, if you don't have the background to understand it.  And, and I didn't, but, but I wrestled with it for a while, but it start me to open the book.  And, and all the things that he, that he, I think taught me, basically, I said to you at the beginning, the golden rule, that was, that was his philosophy, do unto others as you would have others do unto you.  And that's the philosophy that I, I founded Johnson Products Company on.  I knew that when I started the company, that if I followed that, I'd be fine.  And I never had any doubt--it's amazing that, that after all you--I, I had been ten years in Johnson--in Fuller Products when I started Johnson Products Company.  And he had so indoctrinated me that I had no fear, absolutely no fear.  I did not think ever about not, not making it, not being successful.
Story_ID: 9138
Speaker 1: I think the thing that really grabbed me was, he [S. B. Fuller] said God did not intend for you to be poor; that he gave, that he had, he, he gave you all that you need.  He is providing you with everything that you need to overcome poverty.  And if you are poor, it's because you, you decide to be poor.  But if you decide that you don't want to be poor, you don't have to be.  And Mr. Fuller went on to, I mean he expounded on that--what Mr. Fuller was doing in, in 1944 was taking people off of welfare and making them independent.  People were--were leaving welfare, in a short time, buying homes or buying, or getting into better apartments, buying cars.  It was a amazing what Mr. Fuller was doing with people, people who were, were, were just not going anywhere.  He gave them a focus.  He, he inspired them, and he, and he told them where to look to find the inspiration.  It was amazing what Mr. Fuller--Mr. Fuller was--you know, this, all this should be about him.  Somebody needs to really, there needs to be a movie made about Mr. Fuller and what he, what he did.
Story_ID: 9139
Speaker 1: Can you talk about, just a little bit about the start of [S. B.] Fuller, how he started Fuller Products [Company]?  Do you know that history?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I know.  He started with twenty-five dollars, which was a refund from an insurance on his car that, and Mr. Fuller had a car in 1936.  And this was, this was an insurance refund.  He took that twenty-five dollars, and he bought soap.  And, and he had, he, he made labels, hand labels, hand-made labels, put on the soap, and started selling soap with, with the money that he got from that, from that he turned it into soap, and he turned the soap into, into money, just turning that over.  And eventually he added other things, and eventually, he, he--that's, that was the start of Fuller Products in 1936.  But he had been convinced, he had been convinced that, that he could do it on his own.
Speaker 1: Now, when you joined him, the company had been in business over, a little over what, ten years?
Speaker 2: About eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years, okay, okay.  So how large was the sales force and where was, you know, where were his office located, and--?
Speaker 2: His office was located at the corner of 35th [Street]and Vernon [Avenue], upstairs, over a grocery store, some other stores.  I estimate that Mr. Fuller might have been doing around $300,000 in business.  But that was a lot of money, that was a big business for a black company.  In fact, I think Mr. Fuller, Mr. Fuller was the first person I saw with, with, with what appeared to be, wasn't quite a brand, brand new car, but it was, it was, it looked like a brand new car.  He had a Buick Century, I think, great look--great, impressionable looking car.  You know, it was, it was a small company, and how many people he had, I would estimate that in that branch alone, and that was probably, at that time, his only branch, he probably had a hundred people.  I'm just estimating it, I--maybe a hundred people.  But Mr. Fuller began to quickly branch out.  Ultimately, I don't know how many branches he had, but ultimately, he had about five thousand people that were making a living in Fuller Products.
Speaker 1: Now, talk about the products too.  What were the product lines and, you know, and what were the re--I mean were you assigned your own territory or did you, you know, you just decided who you wanted to go after?
Speaker 2: The, probably, he had, in the product line, he had household products like, you had flavors, like vanilla flavor, pineapple flavor.  He had face powder, all, cosmetics in all, in all directions, hair care, lipstick, facial cream, deodorant and bath salts.  One of his biggest sellers was bath salts, oh, he may have had, at that time, he may have had thirty-five, forty products and expand--and eventually, the line went a hundred different products.
Speaker 1: Now, this door-to-door sales, was that big at that time too?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, before Mr. Fuller started, there was a Fuller Brush Company, which, which, which was, became a problem for him.  But he resolved it because Fuller Brush sued him for using Fuller Products as his name.  But he, he resolved that by, I think giving them some assurances that he would not make it confusing and by--he wouldn't, he wouldn't sell brushes and things like that.  But Fuller Brush also sold other things like what Mr.--like separate cosmetics.  They sold flavorings and, and stuff like that.  What was your question again?
Speaker 1: I was saying, were there, was door-to-door sales very, was it, you know, common, more commonplace?  Was it commonplace then?
Speaker 2: Well, that was, I think Fuller Brush Company was big in the direct selling business.  And, and Fuller, you know, direct selling has been, is, is ancient, you know.  That's not new.  A lot of people have in--had been involved in directed sales even before, before Fuller Brush.  But, and I think it's probably one of the, one of the eas-easiest ways to start a business is, is with direct sales.  And you cut out a lot of, of costs going direct.  But he was the first person, first black company to really go in, in big for the--with sales people in, and that were out selling direct to consumers.
Speaker 1: Now, where is he getting his product?  Did you know that, and what, I mean what were--?
Speaker 2: For the most part, he was, he was making his products.  Eventually, you know, I, I liked sales, and I, and I sold for a while.  But I realized, oh, I was, I was timid in, in so many ways.  I could sell when I needed the money.  And then I would be, I would allow myself to be influenced by the circumstances that I would encounter when I went into a house.  If I went into a house, and I saw a baby on the floor in a, in a diaper and, you know, and then looked around and the place was shabby, and I put some Honeysuckle cologne under this woman's nose, and she wanted to buy the Honeysuckle cologne, want to go and scrape up and find all the pennies she could to come up and buy the--that was hard for me to do, to sell her a Honeysuckle cologne and look at that situation.  So it, it, it affected me.  And I just, I just wouldn't push, I wouldn't push.  I'd find a way not to sell that lady, but eventually, I realized that I knew I couldn't, I couldn't keep doing that.  Now, I, as I said, when I needed, when I needed to make, to make some money, I could go, I could push that out of my mind and go out and, and make the sales.  And I did well.  But I was also attracted by the, by the lab, where we, where the products were made.  And I spoke to Mr. Fuller about going, coming to work inside and work under the, the people who were working in his laboratory.  Eventually, he, he agreed to do that, and I did, and I came inside and started learning how to manufacture his products.
Story_ID: 9140
Speaker 1: Now, what year was that, 'cause you joined him in 1944, and--?
Speaker 2: 1946.
Speaker 1: So two years after you were there.  Now, you're--before I get into the lab, your, your--how did you go about getting your, you know, your customers?  Did you, did you have a region you worked or?
Speaker 2: You mean for Fuller Products [Company]?
Speaker 1: For Fuller Products.
Speaker 2: I, you could go anywhere.  You could go anywhere, and you would think--and what we do is, well, you know, where did it look like the best prospects were?  And I usually, John [E. Johnson] and I would go as further, go further south because further south were more affluent people.  And, and, and, you know, it was no point in, if you, you don't, you don't--although a lot of sales are made in the poor, in the poor neighborhoods, but we thought the prospects would be better, and they were.  And we would go out, 41st Street, 43rd Street, 47th Streets, just, just work, just work south.
Speaker 1: Now, so you're doing it, but you didn't--so you go into the lab, what is that whole process, you know, like, when you go?  So you, when you go into the lab, you're not selling anymore?
Speaker 2: No, I, I did, I did continue to sell on a part-time basis, but I spent, I, I put most of my concentration in the work, in working inside and working in the lab.  I, in fact, I, I was happy to get there and happy to learn.
Speaker 1: So what was that whole prospect--what did you learn and, one, where was the lab located?
Speaker 2: Well, the first lab was at 35th Street and--.
Speaker 1: And Vernon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not for long.  I think that--it might have been '47 [1947], 1947, I believe, Mr. Fuller--and this was kind of groundbreaking.  He was able to, to rent a building at 6245 S. Cottage Grove [Avenue], and, you know, there wasn't a lot of black people out there in 1947 at that, at 63rd [Street] and Cottage Grove.  Most of those businesses were white, although, the, the community was, was fairly well mixed, especially west of Cottage Grove.  East of Cottage Grove was a lot of white people.  Anyway, he was able to rent a building out there, and he moved the plant because it was growing so fast to 6245 S. Cottage Grove.  And, and then we had a really adequate and, and well-equipped laboratory out there, and manufacturing facility.
Speaker 1: So he manufactured all of his products?  All of them or did he source something?
Speaker 2: He, he manufactured most of his products, practically all of his products.  I think--what did he buy in bulk?  I can't think of very much that he, that he bought in bulk that he didn't manufacture.
Speaker 1: So you're working in the lab, and are you working--did he have, was it just the lab or were there, you know, different labs for different products or was it--?
Speaker 2: No, he was, it was, he didn't departmentalize it like that, no.
Story_ID: 9141
Speaker 1: He [S. B. Fuller] made a lot of vanishing cream, eyebrow vanishing cream, cold cream, powder.  I think that, you know, across the board, his, his products [Fuller Products Company] sold well.
Speaker 2: And what did you learn during those, you know, that, that--those days working, you know, in the plant?
Speaker 1: Well, the first chemist I worked under was Mr. Morgan.  He was a black chemist that Mr. Fuller was able to hire.  And, and he taught me a lot.  He taught me a lot about the composition of, of products and how to, and how to really produce them.  But the real, the biggest--the, the man that really, I, I would have to say, gave me my, my best education in, in that area was Dr. Martini.  And Dr. Martini came to work for Fuller Products in 1949.  I guess Mr. Morgan was there a couple of years, and then Herbert Martini came.  Martini had been looking for a job.  He had been interned during the war.  And like a lot of Japanese were interned, a lot of the national--German nationals were interned in concentration camps.  And Martini had been because he was a German national.  And, and after the war, he, he didn't have a--there were not a lot of opportunities out there.  They, he, he didn't get, he wasn't able to find the kind of work that he really wanted.  When Mr. Fuller bought Boyer International Laboratories in 1949, then he had, he had the good fortune of hiring Herbert Martini.  And Dr. Martini came in, and I think we both had good chemistry.  We, immediately, I, I liked him.  He liked me.  And he sort of took me under his arm, under his--and, and really taught me an awful lot about emulsions.  He was a, he was a great chemist.  See you--this man was a wizard, really because it, he never would, he would never be defeated by anything.  If, if he didn't have the, if he didn't have the equipment, he would find a way to do what he wanted to do.  He could, he could analyze, he could analyze products with probably the crudest equipment you, that you would ever, you would ever expect, whereas when I set my laboratory up, I mean we had everything that science could provide.  And, and he did it without it, but he did a good job.
Story_ID: 9142
Speaker 1: This whole purchase of Boyer [International Laboratories], by Mr. [S. B.] Fuller, that was, that was sort of the thing--?
Speaker 2: That was groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: It was ground, it was a thing of legends.
Speaker 2: That was groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: You know, being, actually, being in, on the inside, it was not--I was surprised when Mr. Fuller decided that he was gonna buy Boyer International.  He didn't really make an announcement.  I think he was at, he was, he was trying to get it done without arousing a lot of--a lot of talk or giving out a lot of information.  I think he really did it covertly, except that he couldn't get the financing.  And he went throughout the community borrowing money from people at higher interest rates to be able to, to buy that company.  And he raised the money, and--not bank loans, on his, on his own personal signature with, with people that he knew, and, and bought Boyer International Laboratories which was a, really a, a very well-known, old, white company.  They had a, they had a, one very well-known brand, H. A. Hair Arranger, that was, that was sold, that, in fact, was about, probably the biggest single item in the whole line.  And this, and they, and they advertised it extensively.  In fact, they, they, the H. A. Hair Arranger used to bring the, the 'Batter Up', the program that would be on the, on the radio, and I guess in television when television started, before the ball games, the warm up was sponsored by H. A. Hair Arranger.  And, and Mr.--you know, Mr. Fuller had an idea, and he announced this long, long before he bought Boyer, that he was gonna build a hundred million dollar business.  And that was one of the, that was one of the steps along the way, towards building a hundred million dollar business.  That's the kind of, that's the kind of, of concept he had.
Speaker 1: But that's even amazing when you think back about it, a black person thinking to make a hundred million dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and--.
Speaker 1: I mean that, that's pretty--.
Speaker 2: --in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: In the '40s.  That's a lot of money today, so right.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, but what, how did he come about getting, I mean even getting Boyer, it was Boyer Inter--how, how did he come about even getting that opportunity?
Speaker 2: I really don't know the details.  I really don't know the details.  I don't know how it was offered to him or how he came about the, the opportunity.  I suppose that they were, they were trying to sell the business, and he must have found out about it and, and saw a--and, and decided he wanted to buy it.
Story_ID: 9143
Speaker 1: What I read about Boyer [International Laboratories] is that it had a lot of, a presence in the South, but in the South, they didn't know that a black man owned it.
Speaker 2: That, and, and especially, the Hair Arranger was very big in Texas, and, and you're right.  And that was one of the things that the people too--when he bought the company, he kept, I think, most of the personnel.  Certainly, he kept all the people who were in the manufacturing end.  And he kept the sales manager.  And as many as--he didn't keep everybody, but he kept, kept as many people as he could, as many white people as he could.  And it, and, and it was a, it, it became aware--became obvious that some of these, the white manager--sales managers were using the fact that he could not be known, and, and they kind of, they, they sort of put themselves between him and that market.  And he could never, ever be out there exposed as the owner of hair, of H. A. Hair Arranger.  And, and I, and somehow they, they worked that to their advantage.  I remember one of their sales managers that Mr. [S. B.] Fuller used to always have some contention with him.  And I think that, that when, when Mr. Fuller would get, would, would be pressuring him, he'd bring up the fact that, you know, he, he couldn't himself go out there and run that company, especially be visible.
Speaker 1: But this, at this time, you know, cause you said when you joined, you know, he was about three hundred thousand, you know, in sales.  So with Boyer, did his, did his market, his revenues went up?
Speaker 2: He was growing at--I think by the time that he bought Boyer, he probably had ten or twelve branches.  My brother, John [E. Johnson], I think opened a branch [of Fuller Products Company], a (unclear) branch, in 1949 in Brooklyn, and, and he had a branch.  There was a branch in--in fact, by, by '46 [1946], he had a branch in New York because John went to work in New York in 1946.  He had a branch, branch in Philadelphia, he had a branch in Memphis.  I think about '49 [1949], he probably had a branch in, in Los Angeles, California.  I don't know exactly how many branches Mr. Fuller had all together in his heyday, when he was at his peak, but he had--and, and these branches were, were, were doing a lot of business.  My brother, John, did a lot of business.
Speaker 1: So your brother, John, stayed in sales?
Speaker 2: He stayed in sales.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then got in management?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, into--and now, how did the network work?  Was there a way up, sort of the ladder, I mean for people who typically, you know, if you, you know, became--how, this--I was trying to understand the sales organization?
Speaker 2: Well, well, John, the, the progress that John made.  He was a good salesman, very loyal and smart, and ambitious.  And the next step for him was to, was to do, was to get a branch and, and build it by bringing in people.  That's what, that's how you'd build a branch.  You go out and you get people to come in and sell, and, and work with you, and go out and sell.  That's the, that's the--that was the job of the branch manager.  And there was a relationship--my brother has, you know, he had a, he had a special commission on their sales.  And that's how he earned.  I don't think it was, I don't, it would--I'm certain Mr. Fuller gave him a basic salary, but that's not what they were after.  They were after really building, building the, the volume in the branch and, and getting the overall commission from the, what the, what the branch was taking in.
Story_ID: 9144
Speaker 1: How did that, those products differ?  Was there, did any of those product lines become part of what Fuller Products [Company] was selling or was it sort of always--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was separate, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, the other, the, the Boyer [International Laboratories] lines that existed, I think, after Mr. [S. B.] Fuller bought it, they began to gradually--they were already on the, on the way down.  They just continued to go down.  The thing that really survived in the whole Boyer, Boyer purchase was the H. A. Hair Arranger, which was making money.  Mr. Fuller kept a lot of those employees, I mean it, as, as it went down, and he didn't need them, some of them were let go.  But he kept a number of them for years.
Speaker 1: And H. A. Hair Arranger, what were their, what were their products or was it?
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a hair cream oil.
Speaker 1: It was a hair cream, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a hair oil.
Speaker 1: But primarily for white hair or black or it didn't matter?
Speaker 2: It was for white hair.
Speaker 1: For white?
Speaker 2: Actually, and it was, it was targeted to the men's market.
Speaker 1: And, but now, was, Fuller Products, was it more, your base was females, though, right, mainly selling?  With Fuller Products, was it mainly--?
Speaker 2: It was focused, yes, Fuller Products was focused toward female and family.
Speaker 1: Now, and so--.
Speaker 2: Now, he had, he had a few items for men.  But most of his items were really for the women.
Story_ID: 9145
Speaker 1: When [Dr. Herbert] Martini came [to Fuller Products Company], you said it was, you know, an automatic chemistry.  Now, and that he was, you know, a genius in many ways, and that he could make things happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So were there certain products that he developed, you know, when he was there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did.  He developed a number of products.  He improved a lot of products too, and I think that was one of the biggest benefits.  He, he was able to improve products, cut costs and expand the line.  You know, what--if he, if, if it's a new, it would necessarily be a new product, except that it would be a different product that Fuller Products would, was already in the, in the, in the hair care, face, facial care, and that sort of thing.  And, and he just improved those things.
Speaker 1: So what things do you think you learned from him though?  I mean you said that he was good in the whole area of emulsions, right, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, I mean what things did you learn, you know?
Speaker 2: I think I learned better processes from him.  We were able to do, we were able to make products more stable and, and that was a need too because there were a lot of the formulas that Mr. [S. B.] Fuller had that were not very stable.
Speaker 1: And talk about, but when you talk about stable, it's how long the product will last before going bad?
Speaker 2: Well, before it separates, yeah.  And, and, and Mr.--and Martini was able to, to trade out some emulsifiers that were not working well for ones that really did, that were good.  And, and kept the products emulsified, in other words, when you see them and, when you, when you see a cream or, you know, it looks like it's all blended, but the emulsifiers break down the molecules so that they are--the water and the oil stand side-to-side, but they're, they're so fine, you just don't see it.  But then they don't really, they don't really blend because they don't really immerse within each other, but it looks that way.
Speaker 1: So when you were in school, had you gravitated to the sciences at all?
Speaker 2: I had chemistry in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did you, did you like it?
Speaker 2: I liked it, oh, yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Now, so you're working with him.  Are there any during this, like eight-year period, that you work with Martini, what, what is--you know, what are you--?
Speaker 2: I think it wasn't an eight-year period.
Speaker 1: It wasn't eight years?
Speaker 2: No, I worked with him about five years.
Speaker 1: Five years, okay, okay, okay.  Oh, that's right, I'm sorry, 'cause that's right, okay.  He came in later.  So during that time, what would you say your, you know, was significant about that period, you know, in, in the factory.
Speaker 2: In the, in the business?
Speaker 1: In the business.
Speaker 2: That was significant was the fact that, I think we were growing fast.  And, and we were keeping with it, and new methods of manufacturing were developed, and, and which we, which we had to do.  And the batches, where, where you used to make a hundred fifty pounds, you were now making a thousand pounds, and then two thousand pounds.  So it was a, it was a great expansion.
Speaker 1: And were there, do you have any sort of anecdotal stories about products that didn't work or, you know, or, or, you know, feedback from clients or were there, you know, were you ever sued, was, you know, Fuller Products ever sued, you know, for--?
Speaker 2: I think, yes.  I've mentioned that this, one of the bigger sellers that Mr. Fuller had was a product called B-Sweet (ph.).  And some people were sensitive to that product.  And that was a problem.  And to make that product, and it was not--it was very difficult to make it effective and still not, and, and still not 'cause some--some sensations in certain people.  And, yeah, he had some, he had some, some legal problems with that.  But I don't think it was really serious.
Story_ID: 9146
Speaker 1: I married in 1950.
Speaker 2: 1950.  So that was--and how did you meet, you know, your wife?  How did you meet Joan [B. Johnson]?
Speaker 1: I met her in high school, and--I met her in high school.  I used to pester her in high school, and she used to hate me because I'd pull her (laughter), I'd walk behind her and yank on her pigtails, and she just couldn't stand me.  And what, and she, she had a boyfriend who was one of the stars on the football team.  And he would, he would--she lived at 3415 Vernon [Avenue], which is just a half a block from where I lived.  And this boy would come by on his bicycle, and sometimes I'd see him talking with her.  He would, she'd go, they'd be standing on the curb talking, and one day I just walked up to them and said to him, "Hey, you're talking to my wife."  Then he couldn't stand me (laughter).  He said, "You'd better get out of here."  So I, that's what I told him.  And it happened that, I think a few days later, she was on, she, she had a flat on the, on the back wheel of her bicycle, and she, and she was trying to, to, to fix it.  And I happened to come by, and I fixed it for her.  And my hands were so dirty that she invited me to come upstairs to her, to where she, her, their apartment and wash my hands.  And I met her mother, and, and I talked to her.  And the next time the guy came by, I was sitting on the, on the stoop with her.  And we were talking, and that was about the, that was the beginning of the end of him (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you moved in quietly.
Speaker 1: Moved in quietly.  And, and we courted for five years, and in 19--that was 1945.  And we got married in 1950, in March.
Story_ID: 9147
Speaker 1: I want to ask a few other things about Mr. [S. B.] Fuller.  I, I was told that, you know, he had some sort of favorite sayings like the only race is the human race.  And a man doesn't have to have a lot of degrees behind the name to earn ten thousand a year or anything the white man can do, so can you.  But he had mixed sales group [at Fuller Products Company], right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He did not.  Okay, it wasn't.  Okay, Boyer [International Laboratories], maybe they were talking about Boyer.
Speaker 2: Well, Boyer was, Boyer was never--
Speaker 1: A part.
Speaker 2: --Boyer was never a door-to-door, not a door-to-door.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember Mr. Fuller having a, a mixed, not during those years that I was there.  But Mr. Fuller had a lot of sayings, and one of the things that he used to say that served me very, very well, he used to say, take what you have and make what you want.  And that, that stuck in my mind because when I started Johnson Products Company, I didn't have any money.  But that didn't bother me.  I was, I found a way, I, and I, I took what I had.  I had two hundred and fifty bucks, that I borrowed.  And I had the two hundred and fifty bucks that Orville Nelson put up.  And I made that stand up, that, that five hundred dollars.  I had a dollar left after the first day of trying to operate that company.  And it stood up.
Speaker 1: But I want--what was the motivation to start?  What was it?  You had been there for ten years?
Speaker 2: Well, let me, let--I, you know, I have to tell you.  Here's what happened.  I was coming down the elevator at Fuller Products Company, and I, the elevator stopped on three.  And this young man gets on the elevator, and he looked so disgusted, so downhearted that I said to him, "What is wrong with you?"  And then he says, "I came out here because I thought I could get this company to help me.  I have a product that's been giving me some trouble, and, and it's hard--hurting my business, and I thought because this was a black company that I could get them to, to do something that would, to make a product that would be better for my business."  So I said to him, I said, "I don't know anything about what you're talking about," but he had been in to see Mr. Fuller.  And Mr. Fuller had sent him out, and didn't--turned him down.  So I said to him that I don't know what you, what you're doing, but, you know, if it's, if it has to do with, with a product, you know, give me a card.  Maybe, and I'll come out and see what you're talking about, and maybe I can help you.  And he gave me his card.  And I put the card in my pocket, and I think, when I got home, I put it in a drawer.  And I didn't even, I didn't think about that guy for at least six weeks.  And I think about six weeks later, on a Saturday morning, I was looking in the drawer, and I saw the card.  And I thought about it, I said, "Well, maybe I'll go over here."  So I said to Joan [B. Johnson], I'm gonna take a street car and go over to 64th [Street] and, and Cottage Grove [Avenue] and see this guy I met and find out what's going on.  So she said, okay, and I went over.  And when I walked into, to his shop, I was just shocked.  I was amazed.  It was about 10:00 in the morning, but there was not a space the wall.  Every--there was people standing around the wall, all the chairs were filled.  The place was just jammed.  And I observed what they were doing, and I hadn't really--I didn't know anything about straightening hair.  I mean we, we straightened hair, Fuller Products gave you, sold, sold pressing cream, pressing oil.  And we straightened the hair with a comb, with a hot comb.  Now, that's what I, I was aware of.  I never knew about this chemical straightening.  And, and I saw what was going on, and it frightened me.  You know, I went over, and he, and he said, this is what's, "This is what I'm talking about.  This is what my problem is."  And I looked, and he had a big gallon jar, and there were three levels that was, that was the, the, the oil, the water and the solids.  And they were all, none, nothing was, nothing was homogenized, nothing was emulsified.  It was just all separated.  And I said, "Well, how do you work with this stuff?"  And he says, he, he takes a big stick.  He stirs the jar up.  Then he takes some out and put it in a smaller jar, and he keeps stirring it.  And he spreads it on the hair, and works real fast to try to get the hair straightened and get it off before it really burns the scalp.  And, and I looked at that, and I said, "My goodness, this is really unbelievable."  But it was, seemed to be a simple solution to me because I was, what it, it was crying for an emulsion.  It needed to be emulsified.  So I told him, I said, "I think we can do something about this."  And, and I, I asked, let me take some of this.  And I took some of the product he had, and I asked him were there other, anything else out there on the market that was, was any better or what, what was out there in competition?  And he gave me a list of products, which I purchased at, at the drugstores and took them into the lab.  And [Dr. Herbert] Martini and I went to, went to working on them.  And, and it was--you know, when we, when we tested the pH, the pH was so high that we, we realized that what, the trouble was that the pH was breaking down whatever emulsifier, no emulsifier could tolerate that pH.  And what we, we said, well, the solution is to find one that will.  And that was the key, and that took about six months.  And it didn't--we really didn't solve it until Martini wrote to some people in, that he knew in Germany.  These companies had been turned back.  The, the U.S. government turned these companies back to the previous owners, the ownership before the war [World War II] took place.  And, and they were doing some fantastic research.  So he wrote to one of the principals of a company that he was, that, that--who this individual he knew, and gave him the perimeters that, that--of what we were up against.  And they began to send us some samples of emulsifiers.  And eventually, we got one that would really work, that would tolerate that high level of--of course, we didn't have, we didn't--the product that we made did not have the high, the pH as high as that.  And, but it worked.  And it was the process of, of tune--fine tuning it in, in Nelson's shop, where we found out that, that, you know, it would, it was at the right level, and it did the work.  And it was like making a better mousetrap.  There was nothing like it out there, and, and this was-- you didn't have to sell this.  All you had to do was, get someone to experience it because people who had been using these, these un, these, these crude formulations would immediately see that this product was gonna do as good a job without the un--the discomfort and the potential of breaking the skin and burning you.  So that's what, that's, that's what started Johnson Products Company.
Speaker 1: Now, you were proud of this find.  Did, you went to Mr. Fuller?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I, I let Mr. Fuller know exactly what I was doing.  Mr. Fuller had told Orville Nelson, when he came that day, that he had no interest in barber business, that barbers were some of the worst pay in the, in the world.  He knew that he wasn't gonna get involved with barbers.  And so that's why he sent him out, that he didn't have any interest there.  So when I, when, when I got the basic products together that we needed to start to do the job that was--this, this thing was called--I don't know, you may have heard of it, they called it the "process".  And this would process in the, in the '50s [1950s].  Actually, it had been going on for thirty years 'cause most of the, the entertainers were using that old stuff, you know, and straightening the hair with that.  But anyway, when I got the basic products together, I, I went into his office and showed them to him and told him what I was doing.  And, and he said, he told me that, that I wasn't gonna get anywhere with barbers, that barbers--told me, that barber's the worst pay in the world.  So I said to him that I'm gonna try it.  And if, if it goes, I'll let you know.  If I, if it looks like it's gonna have anything to do with my position with you and the work that I do for you, I'll give you ample notice, and you can put someone with me and I'll train them so that they will be able to have the benefit of all the techniques that I've learned so that there will be no difference in the products.  There won't, there--everything will--because I took a lot of things and, and improved them.  And it was just all up here (points to head).  So, he said, okay, and I went, I left.  But he didn't put anyone with me.  Actually, I didn't, he--I didn't expect him to do it at the time I just had my conversation with him, but I did send him a message that I thought that the time was coming, the time had come for him to give me someone to start training.  And he didn't.  I think I sent him that message in June.  I went to see him, I believe it was in, it was in, which, I started, it must have been, must have been March.  I started the company the 15th of February 1954, and I think I saw him in March.  And in June, I, I sent him a message, but he didn't do anything.  He didn't--incidentally, June was, it was an eventful month, when, when I made the deal with, with Nelson that we should start this business, the agreement was that I would make it, and he would sell it.  And he had Wednesdays off because his shop was closed on Wednesday, and his commitment was that he would get out and sell all day Wednesday, and he would travel on, during that period, like leave on a Tuesday night to be somewhere to, to--if he was going out of town, so he could, he could do a big selling job on Wednesday.  And by June, he'd only been out twice.  And the company was, was, was really suffering.  The sales that were being made, were being made by me.  I was not only making it, I was going out selling it, especially in Chicago.  And by June, I told him, I--that if, you know, if he didn't--I couldn't afford this, the progress that, the slowness of the progress that we were making.  And that it was way, it was far behind the schedule that I had envisioned.  And he didn't respond.  So I said, you know, we need to, then, then I, then I want to, to dissolve this relationship.  And I took him to court, and it didn't take very long, about the middle of June, we had a settlement.  And he went his way, and I went my way.  But I had named the company Johnson Products from the beginning.
Story_ID: 9148
Speaker 1: You had named it Johnson Products [Company]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Orville Nelson, was he, he stopped, started his own company?  Was--?
Speaker 2: After we separated, yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After he--after we separated, (laughter) that's a funny thing.  As I told you, I was impatient, and we weren't moving as fast, and, and actually, all of the revenues practically that was coming in, that was on the basis of my efforts, plus, I made a very silly agreement and that--to give, to supply his barber shop with all the products that they needed at cost, without adding overhead or anything.  So actually, I was giving all of my energies and labor to him for nothing, you know.  So he was benefiting to a great extent and, and I wasn't.  Plus, what revenues were produced, I was really producing them.  And so I told him I couldn't go on with that any further, and he wasn't moving, he wasn't going out and doing, and, and, and carrying his weight.  So, and I guess he had other things in mind too, which I wasn't aware of.  And so we had a--we, we had a very quick dissolution of this partnership.  And I think that was about the middle of June, and about the second week of July--and this I had absolutely no knowledge of, the August issue of 'Ebony' magazine came out and here he was on the cover of 'Ebony' magazine with Nat 'King' Cole sitting in the chair, and he was, he was, he was Nat Cole's personal barber, and he was doing Nat Cole's hair.  And the subject was beauty shop for men, and there was a big article in there about men and, and this process, and he was the number one guy in the country with the process.  And so they started bringing mail to his, to his shop in sacks, (laughter), in sacks.  And so, you know, he, all of a sudden he was way out there.  He was, and I'm, you know, like the little, like the turtle, you know, I was just, just jog, just trotting along.  But, yeah, that was, that was a scary time.
Story_ID: 9149
Speaker 1: At this time, you--had you taken out the loan at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had taken--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So can we talk about that?  What--I'm, your wife was, you--the two of you, had you discussed the start, you know, and you, you wanting to do this and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me tell you what happened.  We had to, I had to, to--in order to start the business, I was working two jobs.  I was working Fuller Products Company, and I was working at a restaurant downtown as a bus boy from 5:00 until about 11:00 at night.  And I had two incomes.  My wife [Joan B. Johnson] wasn't working.  And we had two children, the youngest, I think Eric [Johnson] was three, and John [E. Johnson] was, was one year old.  And, you know, I needed that income in order to pay bills.  So, but to start the business, I had to, I had to leave the, I had to leave the restaurant job which brought in seventy-five, probably seventy-five, eighty dollars a week.  And that was setting me back.  So I had to discuss with Joan that I had to, I definitely had to do that.  And, and I would, I would want her to go out and, and try to, and earn some money.  I was, I was a precinct captain at the time, and I'd been a precinct captain since I lived in, in Park Manor.  So I said--about four years.  And I'd never taken any of the things that I was entitled to.  For instance, I never had a job myself.  I kept my job at Fuller Products.  The jobs that were, that, that my precinct was entitled to, I gave to people in the precinct.  So when, when I, when I made this move, I went to the ward committeeman, Doc Whitty (ph.) and told him that I needed a job for my wife.  And he sent her to work at the criminal court at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue].  And she started out with a very nice salary.  So that kind of took the pressure off of me, but that took about--I mean I started in February, I quit that job in February, and she got to work, I guess about the first of April.  But I'm behind now, you know, and, and I really did, I really needed her to work.  But she, she went along with that very well.  And, and her income sustained us until the company--I could start taking money out of the company, which I did not do probably until maybe September, October.
Speaker 1: So now you, you tell the story about even getting a loan, that you couldn't get a loan.
Speaker 2: Right.  I, when, when, when we realized that we had made a better mousetrap, we made product that never had been--no one had ever had.  It was a new--it was, it was really, it was a new revolutionary product; should have patented it.  I didn't.  I didn't have the money to you know--wouldn't have, hardly had the money to start the business.  So I knew that I could borrow $250 because I had borrowed $250 from the, a loan company.  And I didn't owe them any money at the time, so I knew I could get that.  And when we decided that we were gonna go forward with this, I, and [Orville] Nelson said, "Well, how much will it take?"  I said $500, 'cause I knew I could get 250, and his 250, that was 500.  And I went to the, the loan company I had been doing business with and asked them to, first of all, I told them that, I sat down and I was very excited about it.  I said, I'm, I'm about to go into, into something that I think is gonna really be the answer to all my problems, that I think I can--that, that we've got something here that's gonna build, and we can build a great big business.  And I need is the, is 250 bucks.  And, you know, give me the 250 and I'm on my way.  And the guy looked at me, he said, "I'm gonna do a favor," being very paternalistic.  He said, "If you, if I loan you that money, and your boss finds out that you are, that you are in the same business that he's in, he's gonna fire you.  And you're not gonna be able to pay this money back.  So I'm not gonna loan you this money."  And I was shocked.  And I, I was, yeah, I was just numb.  I've told this, this story and with all this enthusiasm and this man says he's gonna turn me down.  So as I was leaving there, I began to realize that, that he was--that, that was his one branch of that company.  And I also calculated that there was a central place where they cleared credit.  And I waited, and I just decided, I, I formed a plan.  I'll wait a little bit.  I'll wait a couple of weeks, and then I'll go back and try it.  So I did.  I waited a couple of weeks, and I went to another branch in another area.  And I told him I had a vacation coming.  I wanted to take my wife to California.  And I walked out with two--with a check for two hundred and fifty dollars.  And that started Johnson Products [Company].
Story_ID: 9150
Speaker 1: When you're doing this [starting Johnson Products Company], are you manufacturing, where?  In your home?
Speaker 2: No, I, I knew--you know, I got to tell you something.  I, everything that I've done, the, the hand of the Lord has been right there, absolutely.  I can't think of anything that I got into that I couldn't--can't see God's hand.  I had befriended--[wife] Joan [B. Johnson] and I, actually, both, had befriended some, a fellow I knew, who had been at Fuller Products Company.  And he and a, and a partner were gonna try and start a business in competition with Fuller, similar, direct selling thing.  They opened around the corner from where we lived.  We lived at, I think 6136 South Evans [Avenue] at that time.  And he, they were at 62nd [Street] between Evans and, and Cottage Grove [Avenue], had a little store front.  And they were trying to get this, their, their business started.  I was never disloyal to Mr. [S. B.] Fuller.  I, I, I--what I did for them, I, I just, I compounded their products with their formulation.  I never gave them any formulation, nor did I ever try to improve the--but Joan and I would put their stuff together, bottle it, label it, and we never got paid.  They never paid, they never paid us anything.  And I knew they, you know, they were struggling, trying to get their, their thing started.  Anyway, we were living at 6136 Evans in a room.  And there were four other people in that apartment, that we shared that apartment with, with one bathroom and one kitchen.
Speaker 1: And two kids?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any children.  We, see, this, this, this is, this is when we first got married.  We got married in, in 1950.  This is, this is 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew she was pregnant.  We, we married in March, and by June she, she was pregnant.  She was gonna have the baby in the next March, we think, the next, yeah.  Anyway, I knew that, that we couldn't stay in that place.  And I, and I was trying to find an apartment.  I went to KnightRealty on 64th [Street] and Cottage Grove and walked in and told them that I'm looking for an apartment.  And he just laughed at me because in that, in 1950, this was just five years or so after the war [World War II], but you could hardly find a, an apartment.  Apartments were at a premium.  And you, and what you could find was probably a, a kitchenette, that, one apartment had been cut up and made two or three out of.  But I, so I told him, I, I said, I want a, I need an apartment.  And he said, and I told him, I said my wife is expecting a baby.  And then he really laughed when I said, my wife is--he said, "Nobody wants children, and you come in here thinking, asking for an apartment."  I said, look, I'll--whatever, whatever it costs, I'll try to pay it.  And he said, and so he just dismissed me.  And I wouldn't leave.  And I asked him, "Well, at least let me make out an application."  So to satisfy me, he, he, he gave me an application, and I made the application out.  And where it said references, I put down his brother, I put his brother's name down because I was working for his brother.  And I put his brother's name down anyway.  Long story, short, I didn't hear any more from him until one day at the, at Fuller Products I get a call, just before noon.  And he says, "Mr. Johnson, you still looking for an apartment?"  I said, "Absolutely."  He said, "Well, if you go out to 69th Place and Indiana [Avenue], at 2:09, my wife will be there, and you can take a look at this place.  But you have to go now."  And I left immediately and went out there and, and got an apartment.  And it was amazing.  It was a front door and a back door.  There was nobody else involved.  It was (laughter), it was just perfect.  And it was because I had put his brother's name down, and I guess he talked to his brother and his brother told him what I had done for him.  You know, it's, it come around--it goes around, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, so, in the--so your wife is supporting you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You and Orville [Nelson], you know, have this sort of break up.  Orville shoots, you know, his career shoots up based on 'Ebony'.  You're chugging along.  You decide, but where you, I mean at that point, are you--where are you manufacturing?  And what are you--?
Speaker 2: All right, to, to get the business started, I had to have a place to work.  Leon Cooper was a, had a, had a, a little beauty supply and little manufacturing operation in the back of his beauty supply.  And I learned about that.  And I went to him, and I knew that--I didn't know him.  And he didn't know me, but I went to him, and I talked to him, and I told him I was, I, I need to, I want to start a business.  I need a place to operate.  I don't remember how I found out that he had a, a stove in the, a, a real, a heater that I needed.  And he had, he had the tables where I could put the jars out.  I don't know where I found that out, but anyway, I, I must have gotten it from someone.  And I went to him, and I told him that I, I would, I would do his work.  I would take over his manufacturing of his products that he, the things that he did there.  And a lot of this, it wasn't manufacturing.  He just, get--he would get stuff in a whole, in a big fifty-five gallon drum, melt it down and then pour the jars.  So I did that for him.  And I told him I would, I would give him that service if he would let me operate in the, in, in the evenings after I'd--'cause I kept my, I wasn't quitting Fuller Products Company.  But I would operate in the evenings and would never be in his way.  And I'd keep his place clean, and I'd pay him what I could pay him.  And I, I could only pay him $35 a month, but I'd pay him $35 a month, and I did all of his work for him.  And, and he knew who I was.  He knew I worked the--he knew Mr. Fuller.  He knew who Mr. Fuller was.  So he let me, and, and, you know, he, he let me use the, that place.  And, and it was, it, it had the things that I needed, plus the things that I bought when I, when I was equipping the company.  It, it all worked out.
Story_ID: 9151
Speaker 1: After I started making the product, waiting for, for [Orville] Nelson to go out and sell it, we weren't moving anything.  So I, I started, I started going out.  I'd get my--I got a, I found out where the guys were that, that used products, and I went out and sold them.  And all you had to do was use it to find, just, just use one jar, and they would put down what they had.  And it, and I developed, you know, I developed some income.  Plus, the word was going around.  The word was going around fast that something was happening in Chicago and was happening with, with, with, with Nelson, the House of Nelson was the name of his barbershop.  Something was happening with the House of Nelson, and it was new and it was exciting.  So the word was spread--it was going around.  And people were, were looking for it.  And because he had a, because Leon Cooper had a, had a beauty supply company, a lot of people who were in the business would come and buy there.  And he was telling them that, that, that we had--in fact, he started selling the product out of the, out the door.  The products that I made, I'd sell to him, and he'd sell out the door.  So it would--that was generating income for us.
Speaker 2: Now, how did the name--was that, is this product that we're talking about, what is it?  Was it Ultra Wave?
Speaker 1: Ultra Wave Hair Culture.
Speaker 2: Now, how did, how did the brand come, come into being?  Who came up with that name?
Speaker 1: I did, and it was just--it seemed like what they were doing in this process was they, they would the hair, and then they would finger wave it.  I don't know where--I, Ultra is a word that I, I think brought into, into, into vogue in the hair care especially because I named that ultra--in, in '54 [1954], I named Ultra Wave Hair Culture, and then in '57 [1957], I named Ultra Sheen, and, and, and ultra, too, is the highest, the best.  So it's, anyway, the wave is what they were after.  And now they're getting the best wave in a hair culture, called it the hair culture because we didn't want to call it a straightener.  So we called it a hair, hair culture.  And that was a hot product in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  It was really, it was amazing.
Story_ID: 9152
Speaker 1: Are you competing with [Orville] Nelson at this time?  Were you--I'm trying to understand--.
Speaker 2: Nelson, Nelson started his company almost immediately.
Speaker 1: But does he, but you had developed the product.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: So then I'm trying to understand what--?
Speaker 2: How did he get the formula?
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: I didn't give it to him.  I, his, his wife paid the bills.  And she was aware of the, of the chemicals that she--that I was, I was purchasing.  And, and so that, it wasn't too difficult for them to, with the knowledge he had--because I never tried to hide anything from him--with the knowledge he had, he was able to come up with something, but not, not really where I was with it.  He called his product, Wave-O, and it was always a difference in Ultra Wave Hair Culture and, and Wave-O products, but he was immediately selling.  He was selling his product like nobody's business.  And he was in demand all over the country.  As I told you that, almost immediately started bringing, from the individuals that read the magazine, trying to buy a jar.  So he had one of the biggest mail order operations going (laughter), almost immediately.  In fact, he was doing so well, by September he, he came by in, in a, in a brand new nine--I think it was a 1955 Cadillac convertible, Cadillac convertible, yeah.  He, he came by where were at, on 63rd Street where I was, and showed me the car and told me he was, he was on his way.  I said, "That's great.  Keep going, keep doing it."
Speaker 1: So, now, how were you then developing your market share then?  I mean you, you--?
Speaker 2: He helped me develop my market, he did, he actually helped.  He, he, he gave me my, he gave me my formula.  What happened, he was in, he had, he was in such demand that he, he could--if you wanted him to come to Memphis, he'd make a deal.  I will come down there for X.  And he'd go down to Memphis.  He'd demonstrate one day, and he'd leave, but he'd make you a buy a lot of product to get into Memphis.  And then you'd have to, if you didn't catch on in that, in that one day, then you, then you were gonna try to use that product without the proper technique.  And you weren't gonna be too happy with it.  And I saw that immediately.  And I realized that I couldn't do that.  Plus, it's not my style.  I want people to be happy with what I give them, and I wanted them to love to, to, to really like the product.  But I also realized that if they didn't understand it and know how to really use it, they wouldn't, they weren't gonna be happy with it.  So what I did, I took the market one at a time.  I didn't go here, there and everywhere.  I took, and concentrated on one market.  I can always, I could tell you that St. Louis was one of the markets that, that probably taught me the most because it was the most difficult to really develop.  People in, in the business were making--barbers just cutting hair in St. Louis, even in Chicago, barbers cutting hair was making a, you know, just a nominal amount of money.  They were there making seventy-five, eighty dollars a week.  But this, this had the potential for giving them the opportunity to make, make some real money.  Nelson was charging five dollasr a head.  And I had no idea how much money he made at that shop, but, but it was full, almost every day, all day.  We started teaching barbers in St. Louis how to do the process, and that took a number of weeks.  I had a barber that I had to fly down to St. Louis.  First, I had to get a barber shop where the barber, owner was interested and willing to let us come in and let other barbers who were even his competitors, to come in and, and watch the demonstrations that the barber I sent to St. Louis would give.  In fact, he even, he did a, he did a seminar.  He didn't do a demonstration.  He did a seminar.  He taught them, and had them try--had them to perform right along with him so that he, so that they would know, and they would learn the technique and they could do it and do it well.  That went on for maybe five or six weeks.  Out of that, we probably had maybe two dozen guys who knew what they were doing, so that you had at least two dozen people in St. Louis giving a, a reasonable service, doing a, doing the process and giving a good result.  So that the, the reputation of Ultra Wave, it was a, it was good, and it was a lot of positive behind it.  As, as Nelson was moving along as he was moving, and leaving those people without the information, they were not having good results.  And that was hurting.  Eventually, that, that caught up with him, and eventually, when you multiple that market, say, St. Louis, by a dozen because we did the same thing in every market.  We didn't turn it a loose, we didn't sell anybody in St.--in any market until we, until there was a nucleus of people who understood it well enough that we knew what, the buddy system would help the others to get the right information, cause if we train one good enough and somebody in his shop, say, one guy at a shop would come, and there were two or three others in the shop, and he would train those two or three others.  That expanded that way.  And as a result, little by little, market by market, we took it over.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your key markets at the time?  And what, why was St. Louis so difficult?  Why--?
Speaker 2: I picked St. Louis because--.
Speaker 1: And was it East St. Louis or St. Louis?
Speaker 2: No, St. Louis.  Well, you've, you've heard the saying, in, in St. Louis is the show-me--Missouri is the show-me state.  Well, that's true about St. Louis.  You had to really--it was a, it was a tough.  It was really tough getting that information over.  But it worked.  We didn't have nearly as hard a time in some other places.  I think, first it was--that was our, that was not our first market, but that was our real test market.
Story_ID: 9153
Speaker 1: I started in Chicago first. In fact, the barber that I used, he had a shop on 43rd Street. His name was Miller Frazier. And he was really good, and he was dedicated.
Speaker 2: You know, I could--he would go anywhere, anywhere that we had to go.
Speaker 1: Was that sort of revolutionary, the training program? 'Cause that was--that's--I mean, that's very unusual.
Speaker 2: (simultaenously) Yes. Yeah. And we stuck with that too.
Speaker 1: Throughout your whole--it was an integral part of Johnson Products?
Speaker 2: (simultanouesly) We stuck--yeah. Absolutely. And the same technique we used when we started the relaxers for women. I had a big experience that showed me in Houston. I guess the first real money I ever had in my hand was--came from Don Roby. Don Roby was an entrepreneur in Houston. He owned two record companies. And in fact, he owned the rights to 'Blue Suede Shoes'. He had some--he had some, some very hot--Bobby 'Blue' Bland was one of his guys. I think he bought--the first company that Bobby 'Blue' Bland recorded for was Duke or Peacock [Duke-Peacock] Records, which was Don Roby's records. And--give me--oh gee, what was his name? It'll come to me in a minute. Johnny--Johnny Ace I think it was. He had a big hit, and I remember Roby calling me up just before Christmas, and he had--he expected Johnny Ace to be one of the biggest acts in the country. And Johnny Ace was in a club in Houston, and in the back room after he--after his performance, he had a gun. And he played--he was playing Russian roulette for, for a lark. And blew his brains out. End of that. But anyway, Roby was quite a guy. And he found--he found Ultra Wave Hair Culture in Memphis, and he called me up and said, "Man I got to have this, and I want the whole state of Texas." So I said to him, "Well, I don't know if I can give you Texas, but you know." He said, "Well what do I have to do?" Anyway, I think I gave him something like about $2500, maybe you need to buy that kind of merchandise, maybe, you know, we'll see how you--how you move it. And--but I have to send some guys down to show you what to do. So I took $2500 worth of merchandise, Miller Frazier, and another fellow, Jerrell Rogers (ph.), and we drove down to Texas. And we put on demonstrations and clinics in Texas, and started him out with Ultra Wave for barbers.
Speaker 1: He gave me $2500 in cash. I don't think I'd had $2500 in my hand in cash in my life (laughs). But I had to get back to Chicago, and--because you know, I couldn't stay away. But I left those guys down there to teach the people how to use the product. I think a couple years later--that was in '54 [1954].
Speaker 2: In '57 [1957]--'56 [1956], I started experimenting with the relaxer. And he wanted me to use Houston as a test market. And so we did. And when we--what I found out about Houston, with the--even though we were trying to do a clinic and a seminar to teach, the girls just wouldn't pay attention long enough. They would come, they'd see us, see what we were doing, and not come back.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't come back for a--for a, you know, additional information and additional and--what we all wanted them to do was
Speaker 2: to do a performance in front of our technician so that we knew that they could handle it. But they didn't.
Speaker 1: And Roby was anxious to sell the merchandise. So he started--we--incidentally and I--I had a--I put a name on this product that ultimately we didn't use. We called this product Silk-A-Cess. And--tying it in with the process, Silk-A-Cess. But I was discouraged by the experiment, because the hairdressers would not come back, and he would sell them the product.
Story_ID: 9154
Speaker 1: In '56 [1956], we were not in the beauty salons.  We were in barbershops.  And it was a, it was obvious to me by 1956 that I wasn't gonna build a big business with barbers.  It was obvious.  And it was also--and I, and I'd observed that every time I'd go to a barbershop, I was passing a beauty salons or maybe two beauty salons, every time I passed a--or went to a barber shop.  So I started to develop a line for hairdressers for the beauty salons.  And in '58 [1958] introduced Ultra Sheen.  I think we came out with, with a conditioner and hair dress, with a shampoo, a cream shampoo, and what else did we have in '58 [1958]?  I think the cream satin press was also introduced in 1958.  I think it was three products.  It was cream satin press, the conditioner hair dress and a shampoo, liquid shampoo.  It was not a cream shampoo cause we had a cream shampoo already in the Ultra Wave line which eventually we put in the Ultra Sheen line, but we came out with a liquid shampoo under Ultra Sheen in '58 [1958] and, and began to introduce those.  And, and they went very well, conditioner hair dress really took off good too.  So I was con--I was literally occupied with marketing, getting into the, into the beauty salon business and marketing these products and getting them into the, into the beauty distributors.
Story_ID: 9155
Speaker 1: I put off the, the introduction of the relaxer until I really had the, enough of an organization to really do it the way that I thought, that I learned I needed to do it.  And a lot, and, and as a result, you know, of my delaying it, a couple--Hair Straight, for instance.  Hair Straight was a product that got out there ahead of me.  And it's a, and it's a product--it's, basically, it's what we designed in 1954.  It was basically that because the relaxer by the way is just a modification of Ultra Wave Hair Culture.  And it, I think through some dishonesty among Orville Nelson's employees, the technology got, got out of there and got into the hands of the people who developed Hair Straight.  And, and what they did was what, you know, I, I knew not to do.  They even had a great big demonstration and had a--invited a lot of hairdressers, had them come and had a lot of--you know, a lot of entertainment and excitement.  And the idea was to show them what the, what the product would do and then sell it to them.  And, and that's, that's, that was their marketing approach, which I knew was not the way to go.  And, but they were doing okay, doing that.  They were selling a lot of merchandise.  And they were out ahead of us, but I, I didn't let it rush me.  When we got, when we were--and as a result of getting into the hairdressing business, I had to get a, I had to really get an organization together because--that would, could really address hairdressers.  So by--it took a couple of years.  And by 1960, I felt that we, we had the organization, and that we had enough people.  And, and in the market that we were gonna open up, we could handle it.  And what we did, in Chicago, for instance, I had more than one distributor.  At the risk of making other, some distributors unhappy with us, I had to select one distributor that would handle the Ultra Sheen relaxer.  And I, I, I tried to explain to the other distributors that when the market was, when, when there was enough education in the market that could handle the products properly, then I would open it up to those distributors, that this would be a limited exclusive.  That wasn't, that didn't sit well with some, but I had to go, I had to let, let, we would--I had to let them know that that was my plan.  And I stuck with that plan, and I selected, and usually, I selected the most important distributor to me in that market.  And what we did, we held clinics on a Monday because hair, most beauty salons are closed on Monday.  We held clinics on Monday and we invited the hairdressers to come in and work in these clinics and let us teach them how, how to use this product.  And we, we gave them a certificate when they had performed to the satisfaction of the technicians that we, that we had, that we employed.  Then we'd give them a certificate, and only those who held a certificate were entitled to buy the product.  And I had--the reason we, we confined it to one hair, one distributor, we had to know, and that distributor had to know that we could trace who was selling the product that, if they--to people who didn't have certificates because if anybody got it, they had to get it from him, cause he was the only one that had it in that market.  And that worked out.  That worked out.  The clinics were great.  The hairdressers came in.  They learned, they, they, they used the, they learned to use the product.  As a result of that, they, they were successful with their customers.  As a result of that, the product had a good name and a good reputation.  Ultra Sheen was actually, it didn't take long for it to capture the, the market.  It was, it was--here again, it was slow.  We had to move from, from a few customers.  Over time, we built and added and added and added.  But that worked.
Story_ID: 9156
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was the main--we're talking, see, 1960 the company [Johnson Products Company] was only, what?  Six years old.
Speaker 2: Now, you're making money, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm making, well, I, I'm doing okay.
Speaker 2: And your family has moved to, you've moved to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], no, not yet?
Speaker 1: 1960 we were in Chatham.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we moved to Chatham in '57 [1957].  I bought my first house in '57.
Speaker 2: Now, is your wife working with you or is she still with the, in the court?
Speaker 1: She's working, no, she actually, she only kept, she kept that, she kept the court job longer than I wanted her to, but she left there I think in October of '54 [1954].  So, she was working with me.  She was, you know, she was doing the shipping.  She was labeling.  She was keeping the books, all those things that I, I couldn't afford to hire somebody to do.  She, she was doing that.  So that, and, and, and we were growing, we, well, how was--what was I doing?  I was trying to build an organization, and I had always felt that I had to--the only, the only way I could really build an organization was to--well, Mr. [S. B.] Fuller taught me this, you got to build people.  If you don't build people, how you gonna be a company?  And my, my focus was trying to build people and trying to inspire people to do the things that we needed to do.  And in 1960, how many salesmen did we have?  I think I hired my first salesman in 1956, probably, probably, we had twenty, fifteen, something like that in 1960.  But we, we used a lot of people that didn't, that weren't on our payroll, like technicians.  We would, we would hire a technician on a day rate.  And those that, that we trained to run the clinics, they worked on a day rate.  Our sales people worked in conjunction with that, and we also utilized the distributor and his staff cause even on, on a Monday, they, they didn't have anything to do either because all hairdressers were closed.  But I was spending my time, I guess doing a lot of--a lot of everything, but mostly trying to, trying to build, open markets and, and build people that I had to send to those markets to develop the markets.  And I, I think that, I think that we did, we did a good job building people.
Story_ID: 9157
Speaker 1: How did you come up with this because I, even I can't remember who I talked to, but, you know, your training program was--they said you trained people very, very well.  But I'm just wondering where that came, I mean where did that forward thinking approach come from? Or what, the, the methodic approach or what?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I, I think, I patterned, I patterned a lot of what I did with what I learned and observed at Fuller Products Company.  Mr. Fuller--Mr. [S. B.] Fuller was a very org-organized man.  He was very organized, very--and his thinking was way out there.  His vision was way out there.  And, and I tried to, I tried to emulate him.  I realized that training was very, very important.  I, I think I started out with that, how important training was.  And by nine--by, by 1960, I was absolutely convinced that that was the way to go.  We were the laughingstock of all, we were the laughingstock of the market because people were saying, well, let him go, you know.  He, we're gonna, he, he's just gonna--whatever he's doing, we're gonna benefit from it.  But that didn't bother me.  That didn't bother me.  I was concerned about what was gonna happen with what we--the golden rule says this, you don't give somebody a product that you won't, that you don't want to use yourself.  You don't want to give a service that you don't appreciate yourself.  That's, that's what you got to measure against.  And that will make you do things that you, make you do things right.  It was not, it was, it, it was not--it was almost natural, the process that we used.  We had to, we had to train people.  And thank goodness, I got a lot of good people that came in and worked with us.  The, the sales people that we had, and I tried to instill it in them.  First of all, you know, you got to want to do what you're doing if you're gonna--if you're gonna do anything and do it well, you got to want to do it, not because you're paid to do it.  I never felt I could pay people to do what I wanted them to do because I wanted them to work with their heart, their mind, their body, every--all that they had, I want them, I wanted them to give all to this.  And what I said to them, if you give that, I'm gonna give it back to you because if I, if we, if you help, if you help us to grow, you will, you'll grow.  If, whatever we benefit from, you will benefit from.  And, and in 1960, 1960 we had twenty, we had twenty-seven employees all together.  And I started the profit-sharing plan.  In 1960, we had a total gross sales, I believe of that year of about $650,000.  And Internal Revenue Service says that you can give 15 percent before taxes into a profit-sharing plan.  When we put 15 percent of pre, of pre-tax profit in the profit-sharing plan in, in 1960 and every year, every year until we began to have problems in the late '70s [1970s].  But every year, we gave 15 percent before taxes.  I remember one of the problems I had with the, with the underwriters--not the underwriters, but the, the, yeah, the underwriters that took us public.  They wanted me to cut out the profit-sharing plan because that was taking profits that we, that, that, that would go to shareholders that would boost the stock.  And I said, I, I made them understand from the beginning every year we would still be, we would do the same thing we'd been doing.  And if they didn't think that was going to be adequate or that would be allowable, then we would forget about going public.  But every year until I think about 1978, we gave fifteen percent of taxes--before taxes, profit into the profit-sharing plan.
Story_ID: 9158
Speaker 1: Here you have, in the '60s [1960s], you have twenty-seven employees [at Johnson Products Company].  Now, are you selling still primarily, your market is beauty shops?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's still primarily--.
Speaker 1: Barbershops?
Speaker 2: Hair, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when does--so, but you introduce in 1960--?
Speaker 2: '58 [1958].  We started, we had started the introduction in '58 of Ultra Sheen, expanding it in '60 [1960] with the relaxer.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide for the retail market because that product also, you were training, but it was also a product women could take, you know, and, and, right?  And use themselves?
Speaker 2: Right, here's what, the, the first retail experience we had was with Ultra Wave in drugstores with Ultra Wave.  And that probably started, that started about '59 [1959], '58, '59.  And it took off.  It began to really take off.  The retail for, the retail products for Ultra Sheen, I don't think we put the, we, we put a retail product until about '62, I think about 1962.  We put the hair, the condition hair dress.  Now, we had a retail size which was, which we would have wanted the hair dressers to sell.  Hairdressers, it's amazing how they have a captive audience for one and a half, to two, to sometimes three hours, and they don't sell anything.  And we would have a tough time getting the hairdressers to even buy the retail products to sell.  So we had, we had to, to go directly to the, to the retail outlets to get that product on the market.
Speaker 1: Now, that, in and of itself was, I mean there're, are there a lot--there're not a lot of products in the, on the, in the retail area, right, at that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Black products, black products, were there?
Speaker 2: Not--.
Speaker 1: The hair care?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, there were.  Listen, it began to build.  It started, there weren't, there weren't many before, say, the 1960s, when you had, you had Murray's, the cans of Murray's for men.  You had, you had all, you had hair conditioners or hair grease in the retail stores, and even then in the '60s, they were behind the counter.  They were not out.  They were behind the counter. Some, and most of them were in drawers.  I think we got them to take out of the, out of the drawers and take them from behind the counter.  And it was Johnson Products Company did that.  And to, and we had to convince retailers that, that even if they were afraid of, of pilferage, that the volume that they could get out of, out of selling these products would more than offset the losses.  And they were just, they were just holding themselves back from making some real money by trying to keep these products under lock and key.  Just put them out there and, and, and they'll--believe me, you'll, you'll sell them.
Speaker 1: And people saw that that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, it happened.
Speaker 1: So you had to really, you had to establish your right for shelf space?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there wasn't any shelf space out there.  We had to really create it.
Story_ID: 9159
Speaker 1: Who was your team in those early years that were important to the company [Johnson Products Company]?  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, the first guy I hired was Hilton Tregg, and one of the fellows who went to high school with me, Pat Johnson, was, was one.  Andrew Bright was another.  Ed Hughes, he was Louisville, Kentucky.  Oh, oh, there was another, right now, he just won't come to my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was advising you legally and who was part of, who was your accountant at the time and?
Speaker 2: Okay, when, at Fuller Products Company, Mr. [S. B.] Fuller in 1949 hired a Haitian, who had, who had come to the U.S.  I think Mr. Fuller met him in, in Birmingham [Alabama].  A. G. Gaston had him.  He was, he was in, in a school down there, teaching in a school down there.  And Mr. Fuller brought him to Chicago.  I met him when he first came to Chicago, and he be--he and I became very good friends.  His name was Ernest Lafontant.  Ernest was brilliant, absolutely brilliant.  And while he was working for Fuller Products Company, he decided to go to law school.  He went to law school, and graduated, John--I think he went to John Marshall Law School, graduated.  So when I started the company, I was one of his first clients.  And, and he was my legal advisor.  So he, I don't--he was, in fact, Ernest actually became an officer of the company in the--when did Ernest come in?  I guess when I went public, when I went public in 1969, he had already been working with me, but I made him, I made him vice president of, of purchasing.  And, and he did an extremely good job.  That's what he did for Fuller.  He organized Mr. Fuller's purchasing department, and, and he did a great job for us.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he, did he, is he the one who envisioned the, you going public at the time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I had been, I was, I was hounded by brokerage firms--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay.
Speaker 2: --for several years.
Story_ID: 9160
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s] also, you were getting, which, I was--you became, you were also--well, you had been politically active you had said, even as a precinct captain.  But you start getting involved in the, in the Civil Rights Movement.  So you weren't too busy to get involved, right?  That's what I'm trying to--?
Speaker 2: In the '60s?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, it--who wasn't involved?  Who wasn't involved.  It, we couldn't have been in the black community, almost anywhere, and not get involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  I think I started out, I guess I got involved with the Urban League in the '50s [1950s], I guess about '59 [1959].  And I went on the board of, of the Chicago Urban League.  And, you know, Edward C. Berry was executive of the Chicago Urban League and, and Bill [Berry] and I had a great relationship.  He, he was, he, he was very fascinated with Johnson Products Company.  He, you know, he saw our growth, 'cause when I went on the--I will never forget.  He came to Johnson Products Company when we were 5831 Green [Street] and, and asked me to--he had just got to Chicago, and he was trying to reorganize the Urban League.  The Urban League had just fallen way down, and I helped him.  I guess I gave him a--I gave him a contribution.  And he didn't forget.  He didn't ask me to go on the board then, but he didn't forget me when--then he got it together.  He got the organization going again, and then he came and asked me to come on the board, and I did.
Speaker 1: How would you describe him?  He, you know, he was very well respected.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Bill Berry, Bill was a, a great guy, a straight shooter.  He had a great heart, and, and really he, he believed in what he was doing.  He believed in equality, and he was, and he was gonna make, he, he was demanding equality.  Bill was, Bill was just a super guy.  I think he and I made a good team.  So I took the--the presidency of the Urban League in 1968.  And I think I concluded my term in '70 [1970].  And he decided to leave with me.  So he retired and came to Johnson Products Company and, as assistant to the president.
Speaker 1: And what, what, then what was his role there?
Speaker 2: He represented me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, he was able, he gave me--he, he gave me an opportunity to participate even more so than I was because he would be accepted.  Anything, any, any organization that wanted me to, to come, if I couldn't make it, Bill would go.  And Bill was always accepted.  So--.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he had stature.
Speaker 2: He had stature, right
Speaker 1: So that was, so it was--.
Speaker 2: And I could get involved with him carrying the ball that I never could have gotten involved with, and, and participated.
Story_ID: 9161
Speaker 1: You're busy building the business [Johnson Products Company], but the business pretty early on starts making money--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it, it was taxing during those years, I would say.  You were on the road a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to, you know, I was, I was--it was really taxing.  And one of the solutions that I thought would help me was to try to get my brother, John [E. Johnson], to come to Johnson Products Company.  And that took a long time.  I started talking to him, I would say--.
Speaker 1: Cause he was Fuller's.
Speaker 2: He was at Fuller [Products Company].  He was at his own branch.  He had his own branch in Brooklyn, and he was, he was, he had, what, seventy-five or eighty people that he had, that were working for him.  And it was, you know, Johnson Products in 1960, I guess when I started talking to him about it was, it was not very attractive because, you know, we were a small business.  But as, as we, as we got, as we, as we started really growing, I kept letting him know that I, that I needed, I needed him to come work with me.  What convinced him, I think, to come work with us was when we had that fire in 1964.  And the company, the whole--the company, in effect, we were burnt out.
Speaker 1: So talk about that.  Now, your--you were at, was that when you were still on Green Street [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in New York that day, talking to a company about representing us internationally.  And I--[wife] Joan [B. Johnson] had, Joan knew my schedule, and she reached me in that office and told me that she just got a call that flames were leaping at, at eighty--at 5831 Green, and, and I immediately left that office and went directly to--I didn't check out of the hotel.  I went directly to the airport, got the next flight and made it to Chicago.  And when I got to the plant, it, the fire had been struck, but one of our employees was killed in the fire.  And the fire had gone from the basement to roof.  In fact, the, Pat Johnson, the--we had our sales meetings on the third floor in the front of the building, and he was trapped up there, and they had to come, he had to go out the window on the third floor by the ladder.  The firemen came up and got him in a ladder and took him down.  But it was, we were out of business.  We were out of business.  That was, that was, that was done.  A lot of the machinery didn't, didn't get damaged, but our inventory--we couldn't operate there.  And the next morning, I got a call from Mr. [S. B.] Fuller.  And Mr. Fuller said, you know, he started quoting something from Job and told me, "Well, come on down, let's talk."  So I went down to his office, and we were sitting, we were talking.  And I was in shock.  I was half listening until he said to me that, that they were not as busy as they used to be and that, there was a lot of room in the, in the building.  And if there was any, anything that I could use that they had in place, that I was welcome to use it.  And I could bring my people down and produce my products.  And I woke up when he said that.  I mean I, I was all attention, like, and it was--and then I realized that, you know, we had a chance.  And what I did, I brought my people into Fuller Products Company after they, after hours, after their shift was over.  And the equipment that they had that we could use, we utilized it.  And we had people coming at different--some people at, at 5:30, some people came at 10:00.  We had them working all kind of hours.  Some people worked during the day, and, and, especially if we had poured some product and they had to be, the shelves had to be cleaned, they would work in the daytime in between.  And Mr. Fuller was very generous about that.  So as a result of it, we survived.  And to the, to the chagrin of our competitors who just knew they would--we were, that, that we were, we were gone, that we were out of it.  We never, we, we never lost shelf space.  I think it, it was only an interval of about maybe fifteen days before we were producing again.  Our, our suppliers went overboard to get the, to get any, any and everything we needed, jars, caps, raw materials, whatever we needed.
Story_ID: 9162
Speaker 1: Surviving the fire was something really.  But--.
Speaker 2: Now, who were your competitors?  You said, you got started in fifteen days, but who were your competitors at the time?
Speaker 1: Well, we had a, we had a number of competitors.
Speaker 2: Hair Straight had gone by the wayside.
Speaker 1: No, no, Hair Straight was still out there.  [Orville] Nelson was still out there, with, with Wave-O and Posner, Posner was out there.  Even, oh, who were some of the other people, just--.
Speaker 2: [Joe] Dudley was working still, but, wasn't he--?
Speaker 1: Dudley was--my, my brother hired Dudley.  My brother developed Dudley.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Dudley was hired, Dudley was hired in Brooklyn after he graduated from school.  John [E. Johnson] hired him in, in Brooklyn, and, and his wife [Eunice Moseley] also.  John hired his wife, and John introduced him to his wife.  And, and they were both working in that, in, in John's Brooklyn branch.  Dudley, Dudley is quite a story.  He was, he was really 100 percent--he, he fell in love with Fuller Products Company.  He fell in love with, with the Fuller, with Fuller system and did very, very well.  I think he was probably one of John's best recruits.  And, as you know, he, he came to, he came to Chicago to try to help Fuller Products when Mr. [S. B.] Fuller was really in, in real trouble.  Ultimately, he took the presidency of Fuller Products Company.  But I think the, it was too, I think it was too late.
Speaker 2: And that was in the mid-'60s [1960s] too, right?
Speaker 1: No, no--.
Speaker 2: No, that wasn't.  That was later.
Speaker 1: When Dudley, when Dudley--I guess it was.  It was in the early '70s [1970s]. I think it was in the early ;70s.
Story_ID: 9163
Speaker 1: He was put on probation by the SEC [Securities Exchange Commission] in 1964 for five years.  Was he--?
Speaker 2: You're talking about Fuller, Mr. [S. B.] Fuller?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fuller, Mr. Fuller.  So was that afterwards?
Speaker 2: No, I, after [Joe] Dudley came to Chicago? Yeah, it was after that.
Speaker 1: After, after he got off of probation or while he was on probation?
Speaker 2: I think it was--Dudley was with him all that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think, I, I'm really not certain of this.  See, I don't think he was in Chicago working that closely with Mr. Fuller in the '60s [1960s],--.
Speaker 1: But so--.
Speaker 2: But, you know, it's amazing what, when you bring up about at the SEC and Mr. Fuller, you know, it's--when you, when you think about it, what the government tried to do to him.  And they did break him, you know.  But he was a victim of circumstances.  Mr. Fuller could not borrow money in, in the proper channels.  And the reason, one, you've mentioned Independence Bank.  My involvement in, in Independence Bank was a result of my own experience as, as a businessman.  I would, as my business was trying to grow, I went to the bank that I was banking with and tried to borrow some money to buy, to, to buy a piece of equipment, a machine that would help me to make more money.  And I couldn't get a loan.
Speaker 1: And where was your bank at the time?  Who was it?
Speaker 2: South Side Bank.  And I took my money out of that bank that day and put it, I think I put it in, in Citibank.  But that day, I took my money out of South Side Bank because when I went in, and, and I told them I'm--I was a, I had a bank account there, a business account there.  I never was overdrawn.  I would, you could tell from my, the activity in my bank account, my, my business was, was progressive.  When I asked the, I told the loan officer I wanted to sit down and talk to him about a, a business loan.  And he just laughed at me.  And I took my money out of that bank that day, and, and I left that bank.  And, of course, when I--I didn't borrow any money from, from--I borrowed the money from Mr. Fuller, that he didn't, that the bank didn't loan me.  Mr. Fuller loaned me $500, which is what I needed to buy this machine.  And I think that was 1950--that was 1957, '56 [1956] or '57, maybe it was '56. In fact--anyway, Mr. Fuller loaned me the $500 in June, and I paid him back in September, the money.  But that machine was worth every penny.  And it was, it was just terrific.  I, I multiplied my production and it just paid off greatly.
Story_ID: 9164
Speaker 1: With Independence Bank, what--who were the people, how did that get started?  What was the idea?  Did someone recruit you?
Speaker 2: Well, well, here's what happened.  Chatham Bank, which was the bank that I did business with and was a central bank, the best, it was the major bank in the neighborhood in, of Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] at 7936 South Cottage Grove Avenue.  The FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] closed it.  They had, there was some hanky panky going on in the bank, and they closed it.  And I had money in the bank, and so going--and I was one of those people who had to get paid out over a period of about four years.  And that's what happened.  And the, the FDIC closed it, and anybody that had anything over, I think, it was ten thousand dollars at the time, they didn't, they, they had, they had to wait for their money.  If you--up to ten thousand, the get, the FDIC paid you off.  But what you had over, over ten thousand, they gave you a payment plan as they collected the money, they, they would pay out.  And so, whereas the loans that were outstanding in the bank were paid off, they paid off the, the depositors.  But by this bank not being operated there, it was like a big void in the community.  And I think that we felt that, that the community would begin to decline.  If there was--a bank is a very important institution in any community.  So there was, a group had already started to try to form a, a group of people to start a bank.  I think it was Henry Hervey that was carrying the ball on this.  Henry Hervey was the president of, of Savings and Loan Association, I forget the name of it.  But it was Savings and Loan Association on 47th Street that he was president of.  What was it?  I can't remember it now.  Anyway, I met him in a restaurant on 79th Street, and he was telling me that, that this was something that he was, he and another couple of guys were--so I got involved in it.  And I said to you, I got it involved in it really because I knew that it needed to have a bank.  And the idea that it was an opportunity that we, that a group of black people could start a bank, was really appealing to me because we had not had a bank, a black bank in Chicago since 1932.  And this is 19--.
Speaker 1: What was then, that was the--was that?
Speaker 2: That was the Binga Bank.
Speaker 1: Binga Bank.
Speaker 2: Binga Bank, yeah, on 31st [Street] and, and State [Street].  And so this opportunity of opening a bank, black-owned really appealed to me.  So I joined with, I joined in it and I became, you know, a major producer, major sponsor.  I think I put in the most money, and I had the most shares in the bank.  So we opened the bank.  We tried, of course, another group started too.  Stu Collins and a group of guys was, started--and I tried to get those two together.  And we did have a meeting to try to make it one group, one bank.  But I think we were sort of, we, we was--we were too loyal.  We were too loyal to Hervey.  Hervey was their issue, and, and we wouldn't give in.  They didn't, for some reason, they didn't want Hervey, and we wasn't gonna go without him.  So they went their way, we went our way.  And we opened Independence Bank in, on December 5th, I think, 1964.
Speaker 1: And who is the we in that?
Speaker 2: Who is the we?  Alvin, Al Boutte, Henry Fort (ph.), Henry Fort, Al Boutte.  We had one white fellow, oh, two, two.  We had Morrie Polk (ph.) and we had Phil Kunstadter (ph.).  We had Andy Swish (ph.), who else was there?  I think it was six or eight of us.  Cirillo McSween might not have been at the beginning, but he was very close to the beginning.  I think those were about the, the major.  It was another fellow who, who died not--or shortly after the bank was started.  I can't remember his name at the moment, but, oh, boy, what's his name?  Well, anyway.
Speaker 1: Now, Stu Collins was he at Sea, is at Seaway [Bank]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was the, the prime mover--.
Speaker 1: In Seaway?
Speaker 2: In Seaway.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: He was the biggest shareholder.
Speaker 1: And that was before--and then it was later that Jacoby [Dickens]--that was much later.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, much later.
Story_ID: 9165
Speaker 1: You were saying, you know, in, in fifteen days, they had you back up [after a fire at Johnson Prodcuts Company] , you know, the people--.
Speaker 2: As a result of being able to use the facilities at Fuller Products Company, yeah, that was amazing--.
Speaker 1: Which is pretty, I mean when you think about what he did.
Speaker 2: Amazing.  It was amazing.  And, but that was Mr. [S. B.] Fuller.  Yeah, and it didn't hurt that, that I had been--you know, Mr. Fuller, by that time had been, he was having some rough spots.  And he had, I guess on several occasions had come to me and I had, would--you know, I've never been able to refuse Mr. Fuller anything.  And I think about, by, by '64 [1964], I had loaned him more than a hundred thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: So how much were you making back then in those--because, you know, last I heard, we were making three hundred thousand a year.  Then I, I heard that it was six hundred and fifty, at about six hundred and fifty thousand.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we passed the million mark in, in gross, we passed the million mark, I think in '64, the first part of '64.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of money back then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We passed the million mark.  I was making a lot of money.  And it was no doubt about that.  The company was very profitable.  And that's one of the reasons that I, these guys kept, were after me to go public.
Story_ID: 9166
Speaker 1: So Detroit was--?
Speaker 2: Detroit was a very good market, Cleveland--.
Speaker 1: Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Kansas, well, Kansas wasn't a big market.  Kansas City wasn't a big market.  Chicago's a big, was the biggest market.  New York was, was, was a lagging market always, but, I would say that it came in, after were really moving, but Detroit, Cleveland, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Memphis, Little Rock, Houston, Atlanta, Miami, St. Louis, Missouri and, and Kansas City, Missouri were fair markets.  I had a big distributor in Kansas City, Missouri.  Kansas City, Kansas is not a very strong market.  We, Los Angeles was a very strong market, not--I guess you could understand San Francisco was not, but Los Angeles was a good, strong market.
Speaker 1: How long did it take you to develop that distributor base?  I mean what came on--?
Speaker 2: I had to--.
Speaker 1: And how much of it did you do--that's what I'm trying to--.
Speaker 2: We had to, we had to establish most of our distributors.  When I started the, when I started the company, the black distributors were very limited.  We had a black distributor in Detroit, Melvin Jefferson.  We had Joe Bailey in, in Cleveland.  We a big distributor in, in Kansas, in Kansas City, Missouri.  They, and they were, they were the major black distributors.  Indianapolis, we established a distributor there.  Cincinnati, we establish, established distributors there.  And we had to put people in business in order to grow our business.  And we did that in a lot of places.
Speaker 1: So, when you say you put them in business, you're saying you actually helped finance them or what?
Speaker 2: Yes, I helped finance some of them.  In Chicago, I had, I had, I did that with, with Chico Foote (ph).  Chico Foote got started actually on a shoestring just like I did.  And I helped him along.  He, he was working for a distributor.  He and the distributor fell out, and he wanted to go on his own.  He didn't have any money, came by 5831 Green [Street] and I let him have enough merchandise on credit to get him, to, to produce some cash for himself.  And he paid me after he sold, and I gave him more, and that way, he just built up, and eventually, he opened, he opened a beauty supply company.  And he became one of the biggest in the city.
Speaker 1: So, now, with your, with what you did, you focused on the training first, sort of, I mean you, you said that was critical, the training.
Speaker 2: It came natural though.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then, but, then you focused on your distributor network or you sort of did--I mean were those done simultaneous?  I'm just trying to--.
Speaker 2: In some instances, that's the only way we were able to get things going at all, was to start a distributor ship of our--to set somebody up.  In Louisville, Kentucky, for instance, there wasn't a distributor there.  So we had to establish it.  We had to establish with somebody there to, to get our products going.  And the, the sons of a guy who was working for me, put them in business, the Bright Brothers.
Story_ID: 9167
Speaker 1: You're saying basically, between--so you've all--you've eclipsed your former partner [Orville Nelson] at this point?  You're--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, back, yes, in the '60s [1960s], in the '60s [1960s], actually.
Speaker 1: You eclipsed him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What, you know, what happened is what I, is what I told you.  You know, you--he was moving so fast in--I, I should say he didn't take care of business.  And as a result of it, it, it affected the reputation of the product.  And once that happens, it's the kiss of death.
Speaker 1: But you had, you were moving quite fast, though, too.  I mean--.
Speaker 2: It, it--.
Speaker 1: Doing more--.
Speaker 2: --it, it really, it built up.  It didn't start out fast.  It built up (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: But those, would you say those two years, '58 [1958] to '60 [1960] were sort of critical years in terms of building or?
Speaker 2: They were, I'd say, I'd say from '54 [1954] to '60 [1960]--.
Speaker 1: Fifty, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --were critical years and, and built and gave us the foundation to go forward.
Story_ID: 9168
Speaker 1: When did you feel that advertising was sort of critical?  At what point were you thinking, okay, we've got to do, you know, more promotion or we've got to, you know, advertise?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw that immediately.  And the only reason I didn't do it immediately is I didn't have the money.  But when I began, when, when, as we began to make money, the first thing we did was put, invested in poster and streamers, we called them, that you could, you could, you could hang on your, put in the window of a, of a barbershop or a beauty shop, poster.  And that's what we did.  We put posters out, streamers.  I began to start, I began to advertise in 'Ebony', I think about 1960, I believe, maybe '59 [1959].  I'm trying to think who was handling my advertising business.  By that, in 1959 when I first started advert--there weren't any black guys in advertising.  And, oh, I can't remember the name.  It was a, I had like a very small white firm that started out with me.  And then, then I went to a larger white firm, but I guess that was down the road, down in--up in the '60s [1960s].  I did, I--we, we did what we could.  We did what we could.  I, I think the real advertising came with, started with the posters that we, we put out.  I think one of the big, one of the first successful big ads that we had was a girl on the, on the conditioner and hair dress.  It was a magenta background and Agnes Morris was her name, and she, she was our first model.  And, but really did a lot to popularize the conditioner and hair dress.  Ultra Sheen conditioner and hair dress is one of the biggest sellers we ever had.  Anyway--.
Speaker 1: Number one it is now (laughter).
Speaker 2: And we knew that advertising was absolutely critical and you had to be, we, we did all kinds of creative things, I think, to advertise.
Speaker 1: Give some examples.
Speaker 2: Well, we--I can tell you some real good examples, but this is, this is not in the, in the very beginning.  Well, I don't think it's creative to use 'Ebony' 'cause 'Ebony' was the only, that was the only thing.  But what I did, I, I tried to, I tried to develop other avenues.  There was a, there was publication that came out produced by blacks, called 'Tone', and I think this was about 1959 or '60.  And I tried to support them because that was a, that was a means of, of advertising.  'Beauty Trade' was a, was a book that was out that was always in financial trouble.  And I tried to--in fact, we carried it, we carried 'Beauty Trade' on our back for many, many years.  What I did, it's something I did with others.  I just prepaid the advertising to keep them with, with money to, to stay in business.  And that helped me because 'Beauty Trade' was the only, it was the only instrument that we could reach hairdressers with, at the time.  Leonard Evans, I don't know if you remember that name, Leonard Evans was a guy that was one of the first black guys to work in a major advertising agency.  He was with Meyerhoff.  And he was a very creative guy, a very smart guy, and he started a supplement called 'Tuesday', and this is in the, in the early '60s [1960s]--oh, excuse me--we'll go back to it.  'Tuesday' was a supplement that was distributed through newspapers, which, which had a, you know, this was another avenue to try to reach our market.  And it was on a shoestring, so we supported that.  I even stood for a loan for Leonard Evans to, to keep it from going under and, which eventually, he paid, but it was, it would--and this was from a black bank, by the way, Universal--University Bank.  I think we got him twenty-five thousand dollars from that bank.  They wanted him--we didn't, we didn't give it to him out of, out of Independence Bank because I wanted it to be separate, didn't want it to be involved, you know, my business was involved there.  But anyway, it was--that was 'Tuesday'.  Even--even 'Essence'.
Story_ID: 9169
Speaker 1: 'Essence' was started, and it was faltering.  Jonathan Blount and, I think it was [Cecil] Hollingsworth, who started it, got into a fight.  And, and it wasn't going well.  But I thought 'Essence' had, it was a great, was a great idea, and that it really needed to live.  When they came to me, I--well, I helped them.  I, I paid them for, I think, either two or four pages, I'm not certain if it was four or if it was two today.  But I paid them two years in advance for--I gave them that kind of money to sustain them.  And it, and it, it helped them.  Eventually, the Hollingsworth broke out, and I'll tell you, I made a big mistake with him.  He came to me, and he wanted to sell me his interests in 'Tuesday'--in, in 'Essence'.  And I had been fighting with Jonny because I found out that Jonny had a hair care product company, and that--when I found that out, I, I told him about it.  I told him I didn't like it, and I took my ads out of his magazine.  And I stayed out of his magazine for about nine months, but I had challenged him for hiding--you know, he said that, well, he told me his mother owned it, that he didn't own it, his mother owned it.  But I had challenged, and I punished him by taking my ads out because I didn't think, I didn't think that was ethical.  So when Hollingsworth came to me and asked me to buy his interests, he had a 19 percent interest that he was gonna, that he would sell me.  I told him that I didn't think I had the, that I should be in the publishing business because I had taken the an--this issue up with Jon.  So I turned it down, and I think, I think Hugh Hefner bought that from him, that 19 percent interest, which ultimately, Johnny [John H.] Johnson, I think, I think that's how he got his 19 percent.  It was that interest that Hollingsworth had that was sold to Hefner that John bought from Hefner.
Speaker 2: Now, how long did he have the hair care products company, not--?
Speaker 1: He, he had it, at that time, and I guess he was using little small ads in this magazine to promote it (laughter).  But anyway, I got upset about it.
Story_ID: 9170
Speaker 1: I want to go back to Afro Sheen and the start of Afro Sheen because that was--were you, how did that happen and what?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, let me tell you what.  Afro Sheen, the whole idea was a threat to, to, to our company [Johnson Products Company].  You know, we had, we were heavily invested in relaxers.  We were heavily invested with the hair straightener.  Ultra Wave was the fastest thing, fastest selling product out there.  And when doctor, when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] started saying black is beautiful and be yourself, you know, and people started cutting off these, cutting, cutting off their, their relaxer and their processes, it was a, it was a big threat.  And I had to switch gears real fast.  So I realized that this was, that this was a thing that was, this was a--this was coming.  And it was gonna be real.  So what we did, we shifted into what would serve the, the natural, because that's what they called it.  They called it the natural.  And, and what, what would it need?  You need some shampoo, you need, you need a hairspray, you need a, a very light hairdressing, and we had that.  We had, all that we--we didn't have the hairspray, we, we created that.  But we already had the other things that we just modified and, and put under that brand, Afro Sheen.  And by that time, I had a good advertising agency, Vince Cullers was our advertising agency.  And Vince came up with the name Afro Sheen, and he said, "I'm gonna give this to you 'cause this belongs to you."  And that's what--and we came, and Afro Sheen was it.  And we named it Afro Sheen, and he designed, he, he designed the, the label for the Afro Sheen.
Speaker 1: So were you one of his first clients then?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I think we were eight--one of his very first clients.  Here's a, here again, I went to bat for him to help him get financed.  He didn't, he didn't have money.  I stood for a loan for him at Citibank to help him get his--and, and Vince was a very, very creative person.  He was a good guy, and, and most creative.  We, we did some good work.
Speaker 1: So how did you know that the--you know, the sheen--I mean?
Speaker 2: It was--I wasn't the first out with that--Afro Sheen, we got the first product out.
Speaker 1: It was not, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we didn't, we didn't just flip.  But we saw the threat to these--we saw what was, what was going down, the sales of these other products going down.  And to offset that, we had to, we had to respond.  So we responded with Afro Sheen, a full line with a lot of advertising, and, and it worked.
Story_ID: 9171
Speaker 1: When you were traveling around, you know, a lot in your car, you were not able to--you know, at that time blacks couldn't stay--.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Right, at a hotel, I mean, or you could only--it was hard staying in places?
Speaker 2: That was another creative, that was another creative area.  Not only did I have problems.  I, it was, it was a problem for all of, all of my sales people that were going from place to place.  Yeah, we, you, you know, it was, it was really--I can give you an example.  Going, on my way to Houston with these fellows, we were trying to, we, we knew we couldn't make it, and wouldn't, shouldn't try to make it all the way from Chicago to Houston.  So we decided we would try to break, we, we'd break the trip at, at Little Rock.  And the only place, and I think then it was summer, the only place in Little Rock that we could find was in the dormitory at one of the colleges.  And that's where we stayed, at the dormitory.  I can remember even trying to get gas, the attitude was--with the attitude of the, of the gas attendant was terrible.  And they'd look at you and saw the Illinois license plates, you know.  So we, we're there on the pump waiting to get gas, and cars come up and they, they're served--that's when you didn't pump your gas.  They, they had the station attendant to do that.  And then finally he'd get around to pumping the gas for us.  And, of course, we'd just politely thank--you know, pay him and, and leave.  But I mean the attitude was just awful.  And where was there to stay?  There was nowhere to stay, no public place to stay in Little Rock.  So we had made some contact, I don't know--I can't remember now who it was, but anyway, maybe it was someone that Miller Frazier knew in Little Rock that had something to do with the, with the college and the, and the dormitory was available to us.  However, when we got to Houston, there was a black motel which a friend of Don Roby's owned.  And, and so we stayed at, naturally, at that black hotel.
Story_ID: 9172
Speaker 1: The night that B. B. King at the reception, and I was so thrilled that he remembered.  And he remembered it in his book, and I knew that he'd remembered, but he really, he really expanded on it that night.  But, yeah, I ran into him, and I think it, it was in, in Florida where we ran into him.  And, and the way he--and, of course, he has a better memory maybe than I, that we had car trouble.  I, I don't remember it that way.  I remember that we, that this little place where we found to stay, that they were staying there.  And Miller Frazier had known, had met him before.  And so we had, we had quite a few words with him.  And I, we put a case of, of Ultra Wave on his, on his, on his bus (laughter).  And, but it was, it was, it was just wonderful that--that was a long--that was 1956--
Speaker 2: That was in the early--.
Speaker 1: And he remembered that.
Speaker 2: See, but there, there's another part of that story I'd like you to tell, but who were some of the other entertainers that you met during that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I wasn't very, that involved with entertainers.  Let me see, well, you know, we, we hired for the first Ultra Sheen dinner, first annual Ultra Sheen dinner, which was held in 1960 at the, was it the, the union hall of the 48th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue], what's that called?
Speaker 2: Oh, God,--okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway, so it was, it's a, it's a ballroom or hall there that's owned by the union.  And we had a, we, we rented that.  We had six hundred hair dressers.  We had a catered dinner.  We put a lady in business, Mrs. Jackson, and how she managed, but she did.  She fed six hundred people on a catered basis there, and we had Louis Armstrong and Joe Williams as the entertainment (laughter).  And that I really, that was, that was a great day.  I think in the next annual, this is not entertainer now, the next annual, the second annual Ultra Sheen banquet, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] spoke.  Dr. King was our speaker.  And we held that downtown at the, what was it, the hotel across the Congress--?
Speaker 2: Not the--the Congress Hotel?  Not the Hilton, no, the--?
Speaker 1: It's, it's, whatever it is.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway, that was a, that was a great, great, great.  I, I, and I just recently saw, ran across that picture of Dr. King and I.  I had my hair straightened.  I didn't look like (laughter)--.
Speaker 2: You were using your product (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was, yeah, I didn't use my product at the beginning now.  I would--listen, a guy shamed me.  A guy came from, from Kansas City, Missouri and, and he came all the way to Chicago to buy some Ultra Wave.  And we, I was at 517 East thirty--East 63rd Street at C and W Distributors, and he said, "Wait a minute, what's wrong with this stuff?"  I said, "What do you mean what's wrong with it?"  He said, "You don't use it."  That day, (laughter) that day I went down and Miller Frazier gave me a process.  And I wore that process until, until 1970.  I sure did.  And, boy, he, he said, "Wait a minute, there's got to be something wrong here."  That was a big lesson for me.
Speaker 2: You had to wear your product, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right, you got to practice what you preach (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right (laughter).
Story_ID: 9173
Speaker 1: Did you use B. B. King in your first, or was it--?
Speaker 2: Not at the first one, the second one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the first one was, was it called--?
Speaker 2: 'And Beautiful'.
Speaker 1: 'And Beautiful', yeah, 'And Beautiful I' and then 'And Beautiful II'.
Speaker 2: 'And Beautiful II', right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were experimenting, you know, we were trying to find a way to make television work for us.  Being a black company and, and marketed and targeted to the black consumer market, television's a very expensive proposition because when they sell time based on the, on the viewing area, that they cover, and being, you know, being a, a black company, I'm not interested in the entire market that television covers.  So that's makes it very much more expensive to me.  If I had a product that was, everybody was using it--of course, everybody could use anything that we ever made, if they wanted to, but I knew that we couldn't, we, we wouldn't be successful trying to sell to everybody, and I'll tell you about that experience too.  But anyway, it was so expensive that we had to find a way to target the market and hit the market and, and make it work for us.  So I, I tried this, and I tried this, this one-hour special and, and syndicated markets.  'And Beautiful I' was a, was a, was a great show, and, and I can't say it was successful.  It was successful to this point.  It wiped out all of the inventory at wherever it, wherever it showed.  And I think it showed in something like twenty-five markets, maybe, maybe even--the first show, the second show might have showed in twenty-five.  We maybe had twelve or so markets the first show.  And it really wiped out.  We could not convince the, the retailers, and our, our sales force tried a lot of things to try to get them to, to expand the shelf space and bring in a, a lot of extra inventory.  They, they couldn't conceive the fact that we were gonna do a television program that would be effective to the extent that it would wipe them out.  And, but that's what it did.  And, and, and that wasn't great.  It was, it was great in terms of it, the, the notoriety of it, the idea of it, I mean it was so novel.  It was the first time that, that Redd Foxx was on television was in, 'And Beautiful', the first one.  That was 1969.  And he, the, the show was, had--Redd Foxx was the father and Wilt Chamberlain was his son.  And he was taking him, and he was, he was walking in through the, the skit that the show was, was built around, and that was going from one, from one--one thing to another.  And, but that was Red Foxx's first exposure, before he started 'Sanford and Son'.  And, and it was a really good show.
Speaker 1: So what, was it a drama or was it a comedy?
Speaker 2: No, no, a variety show.
Speaker 1: It was a variety--.
Speaker 2: Variety show.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had, so they would do skits and--?
Speaker 2: They would do, there were dances.  It was great dancing in it.  In fact, I, I have a, I got to, I've got to see it again myself.  I haven't seen it for many, many years, but I have clips of it.  And 'And Beautiful II' was--.
Speaker 1: Now, who produced it, sir, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Multimedia in Los Angeles.  And I was out at the taping of most of, of the first one, which was taped at a, at a theater in, on Sunset Boulevard.  'And Beautiful II' is where, that's where B. B. King was prominent in that, in that show.  Anyway, we had a, we had a lot of fun doing it.  It was--I can't tell you that it was financially as rewarding as I would have liked it, but it, it, it taught me the power of television.  I did--and my problem was to get, being able to convince--now, we did a better job the second time around, getting them to, to lay in inventory.  But even then, we wiped the, the stores, the, the shelves in the shows--in the areas, the markets where the show was, was shown, just wiped them out.
Speaker 1: See, in the, in the commercial breaks, you had, you were promoting Ultra Sheen--?
Speaker 2: Ultra Sheen and Afro Sheen.
Speaker 1: And Afro Sheen.
Speaker 2: Ultra Sheen and Afro--all our lines, Ultra Sheen, Afro Sheen and Ultra Wave.  We, we had everything.  So those two experiences made me realize that that could work for us, if, if it was handled right.
Story_ID: 9174
Speaker 1: When Tom Kuehn (ph.) who was the executive on our account--we were with a, we were with an agency, at that time, Allen, Anderson, Niefeld.  I think Allen, Anderson, Niefeld and Paley, Tom Kuehn was familiar, was friends, actually, with Don Cornelius.  And he brought the, he brought the idea to me to, what--this, this show, "Soul Train", was something that was, that had been on as kind of a copy of 'Bandstand', 'American Bandstand', and it was Channel 26, which is a black and white UHF station, which everybody didn't get, and if they got it, they didn't get good reception.  And it was never, it always in black and white.  And in, and, and Tom's idea was to put it in color.  So I agreed to back, bankroll a pilot.  We did a pilot, a thirty-minute pilot with the same concept that the show had.  And, and Don was part of the show then, although he didn't start that.  He didn't start 'Soul Train', but he did, he was, he was doing it.  He was a disc jockey in Chicago at the time.  So, and, and quite a, and, and quite a wild dresser.  When I met him, I almost backed out (laughter) because he had them, he had, wearing high green boots up to here and real loud clothes, oh--, but, you know, he was right for the show.  And so we did the pilot and Don was the, the host, and it looked good.  It looked very good, and I said, we'll, we'll got with this.  And what we did, we went out to Multimedia, Multimedia out in Los Angeles, and to make it economical, we taped four shows on one Saturday each month, which meant we had thirteen tapings to do cause it was very expensive.  I forget what we spent.  It was over a hundred thousand dollars, I think per day of taping.  And so Johnson Products Company put the money behind it and put 'Soul Train' on TV.  And 'Soul Train' was terrific.  'Soul Train' went on October of 1971.  I think we did around twelve million dollars that year.  In 1975, we were doing thirty-seven million dollars, five years later.  'Soul Train' worked for us.
Speaker 2: So you're credited for 'Soul Train' because that was your advertising, besides your distribution--.
Speaker 1: It's no doubt about it.  No, 'Soul Train' brought a lot of things, not only was it, was it effective advertising-wise for consumers, it brought us a lot of distribution.  People, it made it easier for us to expand distribution.  Yeah, 'Soul Train' did a lot for Johnson Products Company.
Speaker 2: Now, talk about your arrangement that you actually owned the show--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we--.
Speaker 2: Can you talk--and that all the commercial--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we owned 50 percent of the show.  Well, we, we, without any investment, Don got 50 percent because he was the personality, yeah.  And all on a whim, now, let me tell you.  In 1977 or '8 [1978], I can't remember what year, I gave him my half without any investment.  I didn't give, I didn't ask him for a dime.  What he had done, what, what the show had done was for us was well worth it to me, I only had asked--the only thing I asked him to do was to keep us on.  I wanted my ads kept on that show for ten years with, with, without any compensation.  So he kept my ads on for ten years.
Speaker 2: And then he ended up owning the franchise, though?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I gave it to him.  It, it, it didn't bother me a bit.  Now, that was his show.  It is, and, and he's done really well with it.  I mean what is it, thirty-two years now?
Story_ID: 9175
Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit to 1968 when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated and, you know, talk about that because you had been, you had gotten to know him.  You know, you had been active like you said with the Urban League, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, and with him.  He, he--I first met him when he came to Chicago, you remember when he came to Chicago and he lived in Chicago.  And he paid me the greatest compliment, one of the greatest compliments I've ever been paid.  He came to Johnson Products Company, we had just opened the building, and this is '66 [1966]. We, after Fuller Products [Company], we stayed at Fuller Products like about three months.  I had a temporary location during that three months.  I worked towards outfitting so that we could get out of there and have our own operation where we could really, had plenty of everything convenient.  So we had a temporary location over on South Chicago Avenue at 72nd [Street] or third [73rd Street].  And then we started building at 85th [Street] and, and Lafayette [Avenue].  And we built that building and opened it in '66 [1966], and Dr. King came by.  And he came up the steps with, with several of his people--Jesse [Jackson] wasn't with him that day.  Reverend Bevel, James Bevel was with him and a couple other people.  But when he got to the top of the steps, he stopped, he looked at Francine Hirsch, who was a receptionist who was sitting in, at the reception desk, which was a little distance from the--and he looked around and he said to his, to Bevel, he said, "Now this is black power."  That was the greatest compliment I've ever been paid. When--he could conceive that--because black, black power was a, was a, a cry out there, you know.  Everybody's like black power.  He said, "Now, this is black power."
Speaker 1: And he was talking about economic power?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, yeah, and we got, we got to working with him.  He announced the Operation Breadbasket in our cafeteria later that year at Johnson Products Company, and introduced, he had me to--he asked me to get the, and I got about fifty guys, fifty businessmen that came to the--and we had the meeting in the cafeteria.  And he, he, he presented this program that he wanted to bring to Chicago and call Operation Breadbasket.  And he explained what it was gonna do, how it was gonna help the entire community, even get shelf, get shelf space in stores, get jobs at-- where we, you know, where we spend our money, we got to get something for it.  And, and, yeah, and he, and he introduced Jesse Jackson as the executive director of Operation Breadbasket.  Now, I had already met Jesse before that, but it was, it was, you know, it was part of--that's part of things that I can, I can look back and recall and feel real good about.
Speaker 1: Well, the thing is, I think it's also important, your clarification on that, because a lot of people think that Operation Breadbasket started with Reverend Jackson, but it, but it really was a program out of SC, with?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 1: SCLC at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and Chicago was not the first place--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that they had operated with that, no.  But, but that's how it got started in Chicago.
Story_ID: 9176
Speaker 1: You also, with a group of people surrounded Reverend [Jesse] Jackson in his early years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he was twenty-four.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know anything about Jesse, and I think [wife] Joan [B. Johnson] and I were at the quadrangle at the University of Chicago, and we were just walking down, and passed the chapel.  I had this voice, and, and it somehow it attracted, and I said, "Wait a minute.  Let's see if--what's going on in here."  And then we walked in, and I sat and listened to him.  He was standing and talking, and, and I, I said, "Gee, that's, that's a very bright, very bright fellow."  And I could tell he was very young.  But I didn't know who he was.  So I asked somebody, and they said his name is Jesse Jackson.  And, and then I asked, I asked Cirillo [McSween] if he knew him.  And Cirillo knew him.  And anyway we, we, we got to talking about him.  Al [Alvin] Boutte was another person we discussed--I discussed him with Al Boutte.  And I told Cirillo, I want to meet him, and that we--so what we did, it was Al Boutte, Stu Collins, Cirillo, Bob Martin and myself, we had a meeting in my office.  And this is 1966 or '65 [1965], '66 or '65, I can really recall at the moment.  But it before, this, it was before Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had him introduced down, as the Operation Breadbasket director.  And we sat down and talked to him.  I just, we wanted to sit down and talk, and we sat and talked to him, and we realized that he had, that he was bright, brilliant, and had a great potential.  And he was a, he was still in the, in the theological seminary at the, at the university.  I know one thing, he was very poor too (laughter).  He didn't have hardly a change of clothes.  And we decided at that meeting, all of us decided that, that he was worth it, and that we ought to get, we ought to get behind him.  And we put our arm around him, and, and we did a lot of things to, to back him up.
Speaker 1: Can you just touch on that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well, we helped him get a place.  He was at, living in, in a, what, a--and he had one child at the time, I think, and it, it was an inadequate place around the university.  So I think we got him a place on Ridgeway, I believe it was.  Bob Martin fixed it up, and we all pitched in and, and made it nice.  And, and we would, we stood behind Jesse.  We, we saw to it that, you know, he was, that he was gonna be okay.  And I think we all stuck, stuck with him for the most part.
Speaker 1: So you, what did you see, you saw in him, what were you investing in at that point?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I--the spirit that I felt, that I contacted are identified in him, was--it was a compelling spirit.  It was, not only was he brilliant, but he was on target.  He, his, his, his--he was sound, very, very sound.  And he was spiritual.  And I think that's hard to resist.
Speaker 1: And you saw in this young person, 'cause you don't see that a lot of times or you don't hear about that, you know, people sort of surrounding and supporting in that way.  But then he--.
Speaker 2: But Jesse's, Jesse's, Jesse's was the most, was the most articulate, one of the most articulate young people that I have ever met.  I think we all agree on that.  Had no idea where he, at that time, had no idea where he would go, because at that time, I didn't, I, I was not aware of him being in--really involved with, with the [Civil Rights] Movement, with Dr. King.  He had been involved with the Movement before he came to Chicago, but I don't, I wasn't aware that he was any, had any stature with, with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] with, with the Movement.  And I think that began to develop then.  But, when I look back at that, I, I--and I still, you know, I still say to Jesse, on his feet, is more--no, no one, you can't beat Jesse on his feet.  Jesse is the most articulate, brilliant individual that I've ever met.
Speaker 1: Charismatic, all at one time.
Speaker 2: And so charismatic.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he, he's so analytical.  He can, he can (snaps fingers), like that, he can analyze a situation, and he'll give you, he'll give you a very appropriate answer.  And he's a, he's a gifted man.
Speaker 1: So this, so after Reverend King's death, Jesse came.  He, he then, he set up operation here as, as--it was still Operation Breadbasket?  What was--?
Speaker 2: He was, it was Operation Breadbasket existed--.
Speaker 1: Beforehand?
Speaker 2: No, he started, he, he initiated it.  It was going at the time of Dr. King's death.  It was, it was going very well.  I think after Dr. King's death, Jesse had some problems with the people at, at SCLC.  And that's when he stepped out.  He stepped out on his own, I think in December of 1971.  And that's when he started Operation PUSH.
Speaker 1: And you were supportive there, too, right?
Speaker 2: We put the first five thousand dollars into his hands to start his bank account, you know, we were there.
Speaker 1: And what, and who was the group of we?  Who's that at that point?  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Well, we meaning Johnson Products.
Story_ID: 9177
Speaker 1: You [Johnson Products Company] went public.
Speaker 2: We went public during '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: In '69, that's right.  You went public, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: I don't know why I had--okay, so tell me how the going public, how that happened?  You said that, was it Hornblower and--?
Speaker 2: Hornblower and Weeks [Inc.].
Speaker 1: That--they, why did you chose them?  You said you had several?
Speaker 2: Well, there had, there had been a number of people--they were the first to, John Schreiber was the first broker to come out to me and sit down and talk about it.  And, and it's, he was the first to advise me, you know, you know, you don't have to make up your mind now, but what you ought to do is maybe certify your statements because you, if, if you ever decide to go public, you ought to have at least three years of certified statements, accounting statements.  And, and so we did that.  But we, we, we already had good auditors.  And I don't, I don't think we were certifying before 1966, but we did start certifying in 1966.  And that was on the advice of Schreiber who was working for Hornblower and Weeks, who ultimately became a director of Johnson Products after we went public.  Now, we had other people that came out and talked to us about going public, and when we de--when I decided that that would be a, maybe an answer to the dilemma I had, that--one of the answers.  There were several, but that was one, and one that had some personal appeal.  What happened, I had not taken a lot of money out of the company.  We were living well, but not, not outrageous by any means.  And one of the reasons I didn't take a lot of money out of the company to pay me, I, I think when I went public, I was probably making a hundred thousand dollars a year, that's probably what I was taking out.  But the money I didn't take out stayed in the company, and it was piling up.  The reason I didn't take a lot of money out is at that time, the personal income tax was, I think was, 71 percent or 91 percent, it was one, it was way up there.  And, and I, and so I, I, I left the money in the, in the, in the company.  And then my accountants began to tell me that, you know, you're gonna have to do something with this money or the revenue is gonna force you to take it out as a dividend and so they would, they would get double taxation on it.  And unless you've got, unless you can back up why you have this money in the, you know, all this money is piling up, you know, you need to do something.  I, as I said, had not paid myself a lot of money.  I, but I was getting, my assets were growing.  One thing that offsets that is kind of, do, do insurance.  Now, I had bought insurance, but insurance wasn't a lot of appeal to me because I mean at that age, and anyway, I wasn't, it wasn't a great appeal.  And Schreiber and Hornblower brought, brought the proposition that, you know, you can, you can do two things; you can go public and put some money in your pocket, and you can establish a value for the company because if today something happened to you, the government will come in--.
Story_ID: 9178
Speaker 1: The solution that I decided on was to, was to go public.  And it--because it would also put some cash in my pocket, which I didn't really have.  I let the company, just, the money pile up in the company.  And, and, and that was, that was a solution.  As I look back and, and the experiences I've had, I would never do it again.  I would never, I would not do it again because you, you can't be, you, you can't this--it's not, you can't run your business the way you want to run your business when you're public.  You can't take risks the way you want to take risks or when you're public.  I mean it's, it was a totally different atmosphere after I went public.  And, you know, we'll be here forever telling, if I tried to tell you all the experiences I had--.
Speaker 2: Tell a couple though?
Speaker 1: --we'd go in the, well, for instance, John Schreiber told me that I had to, in order to get this, to, to really make it appealing, the company should have some professionals.  Now, John was okay.  My brother, who was a sales manager, that was John's role.  I was okay, I'm the marketing guy, but I don't have a background.  I don't have a degree in marketing, and John doesn't have a degree in economics or whatever or whatever.  But I needed, and I needed some people with track records who--so his solution was to bring in a professional marketing guy would run the sales and marketing.  And he, and he brought in a guy, he influenced me to buy--to bring in a guy who, from, from New York, who was, who had been in the, in the, in the business for a quite a while, especially in the distributing business.  He, he, he had been an officer in a company that handled, that handled brokers.  And, you know, not knowing, I, I looked at the guy's resume, and listening to John and, and having to trust him, because he came on our board as soon as--the day we went public.  Anyway, we brought this man in, and he changed our whole operation in, just like over night.  He wanted me to get rid of the sales force, that we were gonna deal through brokers.  And, and I stepped back a little bit to let him try to operate until I saw where we were going.  I didn't, I didn't get rid of my sales force.  I did lay, lay some sales people off, but I kept a number of them on, enough that I could get back if I didn't--anyway, what happened is that we just, we just--they had a hay day with us.  The brokers were able to start out with the volume we had and the, and, and a dis--and, and a, and a commission on the volume that we were, that we had, plus, they, they had another, another level of commission on the volume that they would bring in.  As it turned out, they didn't bring in much.  Anyway, I would, we--I did this for about a year, and I, and I said to John, I said to, to the vice president, good-bye.  You've got--and I took back my, I took back my sales, my sales, my sales and put my brother back in there, into controlling.  And, that, but we did that on the basis of the advice that we got from, from Schreiber and what the market would, would want to see.  So I told him after that, if the market didn't see John as a sales manager and me as the marketing guy, then that's just too bad for the marketing, for the, for the, the public.  But anyway, we stumbled a little bit in, in '70 [1970], but we came back.  In '71 [1971], I think we, in '70 we, we sort of just marked time.  We didn't, sales didn't really go up.  They went up maybe a half million dollars, but in '72 [1972] they went up almost two million.  And then we just kept stepping, right up the--as I told you, thirty-seven million at, at 1975.
Story_ID: 9179
Speaker 1: Do you think--you attributed that thirty-seven million to TV advertising.  With you being public, did that help any or you think?
Speaker 2: No, probably did not.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that could have all been private money.  And it--.
Speaker 2: Say what, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it could have been closely held, all of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.  I never got--.
Speaker 1: But tax laws changed too.  They were, they--did the tax laws eventually changed too--?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: --that would have been, okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, the tax law that was in place at the time on capital gains was, was, was a big attraction too.  I think capital gains was only, was at 20 percent.  So the money that I put in my pocket from the, from the initial public offering was only taxed at--at 20 percent, whereas, I think it was 91 percent, I believe it was 91 percent for individual taxation at that time.  It was terrible.  I believe it was ninety-one or seventy-one.  It was one or the other.
Speaker 1: So when you--do you remember though the day that you went public, how that felt, 'cause there was great, and this is the first--talk about this.  This is the first black company that went public.
Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't a lot of excitement the day that I went public because--and I wasn't there.  I was at Hornblower's [Hornblower and Weeks, Inc.] office all of that.  I mean it was not--the only thing that was in the press was just the fact that a black company had, had gone public.  I think we went out, what did we go out for?  I think we went out for twenty-eight dollars a share, which was a pretty rich price.  We went out for twenty-eight dollars a share.  And we closed up, it went above that by the closing.  But I didn't sell much.  I only sold 15 percent.  But we were public from that moment on, and I had to live and dance by those, by those tunes.
Speaker 1: Well, what did, and talk about what that means?  It means a lot of, you have a lot of reports.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah.  You definitely, you're in fishbowl, and I didn't realize how--what a fishbowl it was until, you know, we did it.  But we managed it.  We did well.  Our stock was very--in fact, it was a hot stock.  It was so hot that Hornblower just pestered me into--the only guys, as I said, we put three hundred thousand issue--shares in the market.  And, and that was all.  It's, they call it a light float.  And we certainly did have a light float.  And they kept asking me to put more and put more, why don't you just do a, a secondary and eventually, I broke down in, I think, about '72 [1972] we did another 15 percent.  But I still had 70 percent left.  And that went out, I think at thirty-five dollars a share.  And that was a, that doubled in six months to seventy.  But all that, all that is, you know, it's, it's amazing.  It was amazing to me when I went public in '69 [1969].  I think that public offering, I believe raised seven million, something.  And I raked--I got probably 5.7 [million dollars], something like that.  And, and I couldn't understand it.  I said, well, my goodness, you know, this, this is amazing.
Story_ID: 9180
Speaker 1: I began to realize, I said, they've been doing this forever.  And we (laughter), here we're just now breaking into this.  But still, you know, it's a, it's a, it's a responsibility, and it's a, it's an environment that, if I had to do it over again, I wouldn't.  I really wouldn't.  And it was, it, and it created many problems because no one knew exactly what we were doing until I had to, I had to print my statements.  And when, when, when Revlon saw what we were doing, Charlie [Charles] Revson, got on a, on a, on a crusade to try to, to, I guess, depose us.  Anyway, he came after us with a vengeance.
Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about that because that, that had a lot of implications.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: Okay.  The only, probably up to that point, people are ignoring the black hair care market, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, until then, and we, we educated them.  We, we, we educated them all.  On my statements we were very clear, and I did some things that, that I probably wouldn't do today--.
Speaker 2: In terms of disclosure?
Speaker 1: In terms, in terms of disclosure.  I mean we went more--we, we disclosed too much, I would say, that, you know, basically, broke down our market as to where we, you know, our strength was--this is what they want you to do, where are your strengths and how we're moving in these areas, what percentage of our profits are from this or that; wouldn't do that today.  And I, and I imagine a lot of public companies wouldn't do that today, who might have done it in the past.  But anyway, we, we had to, we, we made that decision, and we had to live that life.
Speaker 2: And so let's, let's--that's why I want to talk about Revlon and the, you know, your products, and this is sort of the stuff, you know, you know, all products at that time, had the lye, lye base, right?  All--
Speaker 1: Sodium hydroxide.
Speaker 2: Right, so, right so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not, you know, that's a, that's a, lye is a word that--.
Speaker 2: Right, sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's sodium hydroxide and it's, it's caustic.  And what it is, is caustic soda, sodium hydroxide.  And you do make lye from caustic soda, but that's a lot--the strength of--of lye and, and, and the relaxer, the difference is night and day.  But, but you did have that--that, that ingredient in the, in a relaxer.  And, and what the, you, you want to go into the FTC [Federal Trade Commission] thing? That's a, the FTC, as far as I'm concerned, I'm gonna be real frank with you, we were put on, we were put upon, and the FTC was an instrument in that.  And I will say this to my dying day, that Mr. Revson is responsible for that.  And the reason I say that is because we learned that the chairman at the time of the FTC was his friend, who at his, at his funeral was one of the, one of the eulogizers at his funeral.  So, I mean we put two and two together.  When [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson], Jesse went to the FTC to find out why they were, they were trying to put, to come down on, on Johnson Products.  And they told Jesse that they were looking through 'Ebony' and they came across my ads in 'Ebony', and they looked at the ads, and they, they wondered about it, and that they thought that it was about time for them to do something for the black community.  So they were, they were gonna challenge us and they wanted us to explain what this, this ingredient is and so forth and so on.  And they also claimed that they had had some complaints from various places which they probably, they probably get that from every product out in the marketplace, some complaints.  Anyway, this is what they told Jesse Jackson when he talked to people at the FTC.  Well, when it came into us, I said from the very beginning, you know, whatever, you want--whatever we do is fine with me as long as everybody, and especially my competitors, and especially, my big competitors like Revlon, whatever you do to us, whatever we have to do, as long as all of my competitors are gonna do the same, who have the same product, are gonna do the same thing with, fine, which they said from the beginning that they would not do anything to Johnson Products that they would not do to our competitors.  Now, that was the assurance we got from them in that Washington--in that Seattle, Washington office.  That was a strange thing.  Why would they send us all the way out to Seattle, Washington to negotiate this, this case, when Washington, D.C. is right here, never understood that.  But anyway, we, you know, I--.
Speaker 2: Now, let's put this, what year is this, sir?
Speaker 1: This is 1974, '75 [1975] and '76 [1976], I think.  It probably started in '74, and I think the decree, the consent decree was signed, I believe in '75 or '76.  I'm--.
Speaker 2: But '75, didn't your sales, I had read that your sales approached forty million almost that year.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So this, you were like really sailing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were moving, we were really sailing.  That's true.  And, you know, Revlon had tried since 1970 with Revlon Realistic to, to move into our market.  And they weren't--and they got nowhere.  And then they bought a company called Deluxe All, which it was a small, coattail rider, and they got nowhere with Deluxe All.  So then comes this big, here comes the big government under the FTC [Federal Trade Commission] asking us, well, what are you doing, what, what, you know, what have you got in this product?  I said, well, the same thing everybody else has.  Anyway, we decided, we did sign a decree that we would, we would warnings.  And I, but I made it very clear that I would--I don't want you to do anything to me that you don't do to Revlon and that you don't do to all of my competitors because you cannot put me on a disadvantage to my competitors.  And they assured us, my attorneys, they assured my attorneys and all my officers that were with me, that they would never do that.  And I was shocked when, after we signed that decree and John Chancellor announced on the five o'clock news that Johnson Products Company had signed a consent decree requiring to put a label on their--a warning label on their relaxer product that would say whatever it said.  And then they, they--three, small insignificant competitors, and did not name Revlon.  And from the moment, from the first conversation with FTC, I brought up Revlon.  I brought up Revlon every time I've ever met with them.  And, and, as I said, already, I, I got there.  They assured me that they would not do anything to me that they didn't to our, to our competitors.  And when I called the FTC to find out why they had not named Revlon, they told me that they didn't have to tell me where any investigation in this office is.  And at, and I found out later, they had not ever done anything or talked to Revlon, so I immediately sued the FTC.  I immediately sued them.  And it, it took twenty-two months for me to win the suit, but I won the suit against the FTC, and forced them to, to put, to make Revlon do the same thing that they said that they would make, that they would make all of my competitors do.  But that took twenty-two months.  In the meantime, Revlon was allowed to go out into the market, holding up my jar, and said, look at this warning, and holding up their jar and said, we don't have one.  And we don't have to have it because our product is better.  And the government wouldn't make them put a warning on their jar, and we don't, and, and, and we don't have one on ours except ours has to be better.  That's a hard, that's a hard argument to refute.  And let me tell me, Revlon was on the ball.  They had their PR [public relations] people to disseminate this information that John Chancellor announced on that five o'clock news.  It hit every newspaper at least two times in all black areas in our--throughout the community, almost overnight.  Now, the FTC didn't do that.  But every, every small--even neighborhood newspapers, even small town newspapers, carried a, some kind of a, a story--a note or some kind of story about the FTC and what it did with Johnson Products.  And it, and, and really, it, it was an assassination of the Ultra Sheen brand.  It was, and only by the grace of God did we survive it.  Really, it would have killed anybody.  Now, it would have, it would have wiped out, I don't know--it's amazing how we survived it.  But Ultra Sheen, as far as relaxers are concerned, began to nose dive.  We had 85 percent of the market in 19--when he, when Revlon started.  We had 85 percent of the market.  In those twenty-two markets, they--in those twenty-two months, they were even with us in the market share.  I mean that was just how they raided us.  But it happened.
Story_ID: 9181
Speaker 1: Afro Sheen was still there, but Ultra Sheen was destroyed, but it, it called into question about what your products, everyone kept hearing, you know, hte==lye, no lye and the--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: But, well, anyway, that's, but, you know, that's the way it, that's the way things are.  And what we did, we, we brought our other brand.
Speaker 1: Had you met [Charles] Revson before, had you met him before that?
Speaker 2: I never met Revson.
Speaker 1: You never, okay.
Speaker 2: I never met Revson.  But, I'll tell you what he did, he, he--most of my distributors, my black distributors, all of them met him, 'cause he wined them and dined them in his office and wooed them and told them that, you know, that he was, that he was gonna trade places with me.  Anyway, he, it, it--you know, we survived that.  And what we did, we put, we, we, we introduced new brands in the retail market especially.  Gentle Treatment was advanced.  I mean we, we put the first conditioner into a hair product, into a hair relaxer and we patented that.  So for many, many nobody had conditioner incorporated in their relaxer except Johnson Products Company.  And we caught several people trying to do it, and we made them stop.  But Gentle Treatment became very strong.  Then we introduced professional products under Precise, we introduced Precise, I think in, about 1979, '78 [1978], '79.
Speaker 1: You think the thing that helped you survive was that you had a strong infrastructure to begin with--?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --and, and, you were a healthy company.
Speaker 2: And we had money too, by the way.
Speaker 1: You had money.
Speaker 2: We, we had--at the time this thing struck, we probably had fifteen million dollars in the bank, the company did.  And we were able to survive that.
Story_ID: 9182
Speaker 1: S. B. Fuller, he, he had sort of fallen on hard times, right?  And I, I and it was in '75 [1975] that you and John [H.] Johnson gave a dinner for him.
Speaker 2: No, John Johnson didn't give a dinner for him.
Speaker 1: What was it?  You know, what--.
Speaker 2: He was on, he was on the--John Johnson was one of the, a committee.  He was on the--.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: No, George Johnson gave Mr. Fuller, a, a testimonial dinner and the committee, John Johnson was on the committee.  I forget how, how many people were on the committee, but we instituted that, Ernest and I, Ernest Lafontant.  We were, we were flying at probably thirty-five thousand feet over the Sahara Desert on our way to Lagos, Nigeria, and I said to Ernest that--and Mr. Fuller was on hard times, and that, and that all the things that he'd done, that people had not really shown him any appreciation, really, of, honored him in the way that he needed, he should be honored.  So we decided to give a testimonial dinner, Ernest and I, and to give a testimonial dinner for Mr. Fuller, raise as much as we can, and give him the money.  So that's what we did.  And we asked John to, we asked John to be one of the committee members and, but, you know, Johnson Products [Company] promoted that.
Speaker 1: And you gave him stock too--did you give him--?
Speaker 2: I gave him, I gave him twenty thousand shares of stock.  I gave him, and, and he got about a hundred and twenty thousand dollars in cash because we raised a lot of money.  It was a nice affair, a very nice affair, 1975.
Story_ID: 9183
Speaker 1: When did you go into Nigeria, of what?
Speaker 2: Started working in Nigeria in 1972.  And we opened the plant in '78 [1978] in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: But you had, you even talked about looking internationally back in the '60s [1960s].  I remember--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we--.
Speaker 1: And what made you even decide to look at the international market?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I, we knew that, that there were people out there and especially in Europe and in Africa that we could serve.  Africa was a great big attraction for me.  In fact, we might have been Africa, in Africa a lot sooner, it may have been better had we gone when, when I had planned.  I had reservations to be in Lagos, Nigeria in October of 1960 when the independence celebration, they would get, they would--their independence was, was effective October of 1960.  And we were gonna be there to help celebrate that.  I had flight reservations and hotel reservations at the Federal Palace, but I, I, I got--I, I had second thoughts about it when, I believe it was in August of 1960 that Patrice Lumumba was assassinated [sic, January 1961].  The Congo had been given their independence earlier.  I think they were the first of the African colonies to get their independence.  And I think it was only about three months after Patrice Lumumba had, had become the, the head of state of the Congo, that he was assassinated.  And it was, it was very--it became very unstable.  And I thought that was a lesson that I'd better, maybe I'd better wait, better step back and see what's happening here.  That's not a, that country's not as big as Nigeria, and, you know, if, if there--if you had that same kind of instability, it might not be a good idea right now.  And unfortunately, I took, I, I, I reconsidered and, and cancelled my trip out there.  But, and I didn't get back there until '72, but we did, we didn't forget it.
Speaker 1: And why do you say unfortunately?  Why do you think it would have been a better time, 'cause these same issues, I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it's, it--maybe we've--I think it might have been a better time because we would have, we would have been able to, to manage whatever it was at, existing at that time, which was sane and which was growing at a, at a reasonable rate.  When I came in '72, they had not started pulling that black, that black substance out of the ground.  They hadn't pumped any oil.  When I arrived in '72, it was still an agricultural economy, but two years later, in '74 [1974], when they started pumping oil, that place went upside down, turned absolutely upside down in a sense.  I mean it really went from one thing to--it was just amazing.  I remember, I remember when we, when we were going to the market in '72, I mean it was just a sea of black people.  It was amazing.  You could--and you, and the, and the few white people you saw, you could say, that's somebody, somebody from one of the embassies cause they didn't, they didn't have any, any white civil servants at the time.  The white civil servants left in '60 [1960] when they became independent.  Anyway, and, and I remember sitting in the Federal Palace and, in the dining room, and it was, you know, basically, a lot of black folks and few white people.  '74 was just the opposite sitting in the Federal Palace.  It was a few black people and all white people.  It turned upside down, and that airport became one of the busiest airports, as if somebody said, the word went out around the world that Nigeria is the place.  And they descended on Nigeria.  And many--and I'll tell you, it really, it, it just--(whistles_.  Things really began to happen.  And a lot of good happened for people, you know, a lot of people that, that had never had the opportunity to make the kind of money that they were making, but it was so frantic.  It happened so fast, and I would say too fast because they hadn't digested that yet.
Speaker 1: For the health of the country?
Speaker 2: Of the country, yeah.
Speaker 1: So now, what did you find in Nigeria?  Can you talk about that, you know, the introduction of your, you know, of your product there, and you built a plant there, and--.
Speaker 2: The, the market was, the market was a very receptive, a very receptive market, very interested in, in, in, in our hair styles, and, and, and how we, how we, you know, fixed our hair, how we, how we get, how we--I call it culture, but the culture of our, our hair.  These, you know, what we tried to do is take what we had here, there, which they were receptive to.  And we did that.  We had a number of our hairstylists and our, our technicians to work in Nigeria, I guess for several years until we trained enough people, and they had enough experience; those that were, that were native, that could go out and train others.  So we, we did a, basically, the same thing in, in Nigeria that we did here.  I mean not as big a scale, but it, it worked the same way.
Story_ID: 9184
Speaker 1: I wanted to go back to Nigeria.  You were saying that, you know, that people liked?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they liked anything that was from overseas.  And that went for clothes or for anything that--they, they valued those things that were imports into Nigeria.  And one of the problems, one of the concerns we had was that by being locally manufactured that they would look at that as a local product, but they didn't.  And as long as the Ultra Sheen name and Johnson Products, they had already identified us with the U.S.  They had identified Ultra Sheen with the U.S. because it was a long time that we, we were, we were dealing in the market before we began to manufacture.  We started selling there almost after I went for my, my first trip in '72 [1972], we started shipping over there, shipping from our plant in Chicago.  And then by 1978 when we began to--we had a volume already existing that we could serve.  And they, they, they just didn't, they didn't tag us as a, as a locally manufactured product, product.  So it continued to flourish.  And the, the, and the, you know, the Nigerian experience was, was one unbelievable experience in one sense, but, and it, and it, it's a disappointment to me because it could have been, it could have been fantastic.  I have to tell you that the major problem in that country today and in, and, and when we were there was the corruption.  And I signed a corrupt practices--the U.S., the United States government had a corrupt practices act, which as an officer of Johnson Products Company, the chairman of Johnson Products Company, I had signed, which stated that I would not bribe any foreign, any, any foreign person.  I would, any foreign, foreign officer or I would not bride anybody.  And if I did, I'm subject to go into jail.  I play by the rules, and I had no intention of bribing anyone, and you don't exist in that economy without, without you doing--without bribing somebody.  And they call it dash, we never, Johnson Products, George Johnson and our officers never dashed anybody.  We tried to get our local investors because, you know, we--when we started out organizing our company, we were supposed to own 60 percent.  Before we could get, before it was organized, they switched that, foreign investment could only 40 percent, and local investment had to be sixty.  So they owned 60 percent, and I appealed to the, we appealed to the, to the board members of the company and those shareholders, you know, you deal with these people and see if you can get them to, to get the wheels turning for us.  But the major problem we had was repatriating our, our profits there.  That, that didn't happen as it should have happened.
Speaker 1: And when you say repatriating your province?
Speaker 2: We had to, when you--to take money out of, of the company, we would have to get the consent and the approval of the minister of finance.  And he always found a reason not to give it to us.  And the, the, the local investors of, the board, local board members, weren't too interested in, in getting us and getting them to give it to us either.  So that money was piling up.  And it did pile up in, in Nigeria.  All, our profits just stayed there, and we were unable to--we, we were able to, to repatriate--basically, what it cost--what, what we shipped, what we shipped in raw materials, because we, we sold the raw materials to the, to the Nigerian company.  We were able to get that money out, but the profit that we made on those, on, on the merchandise that we shipped over there, we were not able to get that out to the extent that we wanted--that we were justified to get.  But we didn't get it.  And that's what kept piling up over there.  And I just got tired of that.
Speaker 1: And I thought, I thought it was more of the issue with the currency, you know, that the--you know, that their currency would devalue--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Went down? No, no.
Speaker 1: So--okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, it wasn't that.  It wasn't that at all.  The company was very strong because it kept our money.  And I got tired of that.  And, you know, it's quite a bit, it's quite a bit to take, to go over there and spend the time we were spending, have the people that we were, that we were sending over there.  Although we got, we, we could paid for the, for their salaries and for the raw materials, but we couldn't get the profit back.
Speaker 1: Now, who, what other African American company was investing in Africa at the time?
Speaker 2: A lot of companies have invested in South Africa.  Not a lot of, not a lot of, not in, not in Nigeria.  What people have chosen to do which we, which I guess if we were gonna do it again, we would do it outside of Nigeria, somewhere else in Africa, Ghana, which would be a much better place.  And, but, but, you know, that's the biggest country.  And, and Ghana has, Ghana has a little gold, but they don't have any oil.  So the oil that flows, the oil that flows there in Nigeria, I mean it's still, it's still going strong.
Story_ID: 9185
Speaker 1: You pulled out of Nigeria when?
Speaker 2: In 1989.
Speaker 1: But once--oh, 1989, that was along time you're--you were there more than a decade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, we were working there from '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 9186
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the [Jheri] curl, you know, and how the king missed--missed, missed, you know, missed the trend for the first time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what had, what happened is that we saw the curl coming.  And we had a dilemma.  We didn't know how to, we didn't want to, we didn't want to promote it.  And every, and at that time, we were the strongest, we were the strongest company out there.  And if we, we condoned it, we, we are knowing that if we, if we started promoting it.  So we didn't want to promote it because we realized that, that it had a lot of, that it could hurt us.  And so we didn't, we just didn't respond to it as quickly as we ought to.  And even when we did respond to it, we didn't respond to it as--I, our, our product wasn't as, as, wasn't top.  We, when we first started in the, in the professional market, and we put a, we put a strong effort.  But even that was late.  We had been working on the, the Precise formula, and that was, and that was, we were pointing for that.  But the, the curl kind of exploded.  It started in the '70s [1970s], like the late '70s, '77 [1977], '78 [1978], and then it exploded.  And it just got away from us.  And, and, as I said, we were, we were focusing on another area with the Precise formulation.  And when we, when we did zero in on the, on the curl, we missed the mark.
Speaker 1: So that allowed the Gardners [Ed Gardner and Bettiann Gardner of Soft Sheen Products] to really sort of come in and gain--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who was, which was a small company up until that point.
Speaker 1: Out of their, out of their basement, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it wasn't in the basement, but it was a small company.  They were trying to sell relaxers.  They weren't getting very far or very fast with relaxers because they were coming up not against on--not only against us, they were up against Revlon too.  But that was, but when it, when it started, it exploded, and it really carried them right on, right on up and past us.  But as I said, we couldn't, and, and we couldn't just really grab it because we didn't know where it was going.  And we were monitoring it, and, and not--I guess we were trying to see what we wanted to see.  And all of a sudden, it just exploded.  So, when we did, when we did respond, we were late and, and we weren't on--we didn't, our product was not really where it should have, didn't, didn't come--didn't--it wasn't, it wasn't an excellent product by the market standards.
Story_ID: 9187
Speaker 1: What are your revenues at this point when--'cause we're in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], is that?
Speaker 2: We slowed down.  We were doing about forty, I guess towards the end of it, about forty-one, forty, forty-one million in that, in that period.
Speaker 1: From, from 1975 to 19--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1975 we grew about five million, but from 1970 to 1975, we grew about twenty-five million.
Speaker 1: And then you stayed there at the forty million?
Speaker 2: We, at forty million, we were--we kind of coasted, yes.
Speaker 1: For, for how many years?
Speaker 2: I think that, I think we went sideways for about five years.  And we went, we went sideways.
Speaker 1: So 'till like 1980?
Speaker 2: Yeah--oh, I'm talking from '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: From '80.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From the, I think from '75 to '80 we, we were--.
Speaker 1: You were, you were in a--?
Speaker 2: --we grew about five, we grew about five million.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from '80 to '85 [1985], we kind of went sideways.
Speaker 1: You went sideways.  And when you say side--?
Speaker 2: Just slightly up.
Speaker 1: Okay, side, okay, okay, I--that's what you're describing as sideways.  You're slightly up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you held your market share all that time?
Speaker 2: Well, our market share was being eroded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're--our market share was being eroded from the, from the time that the FTC [Federal Trade Commission] hit us, I mean we started losing market share.  Now, we began to build with new products.  You couldn't, I think when we introduced Gentle Treatment was, probably was the early '80s, and probably the early '80s and that picked up.  That helped us in terms of volume, began to help us to pick up in the late--and take up some of the slack.
Speaker 1: Cause you had Gentle Treatment, you had Stay--Sta-Sof-Fro, was it Stay-Sof?
Speaker 2: Well, we bought that.  But that was, we, we, that was M&M [Products Company].  That was not--.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: That was bought in 1990.
Story_ID: 9188
Speaker 1: Profits were going down.  Your son [Eric Johnson] comes into the business about when, around?
Speaker 2: About--.
Speaker 1: In nineteen--.
Speaker 2: Eighty--I think it, it was in '87 [1987] that I made Eric, I think I made him sales manager--I believe it was '86 [1986] or '87, maybe it was '87.  And then about a year later, I made him VP and operations, vice president of operations in about '98 [1998].  And I think in eighty, '88 [1988], I said '98.  I meant '88.  I think I made him--maybe it was a little faster than that because I made him president in '89 [1989], I think.
Speaker 1: And you're, then you and your wife [Joan B. Johnson] divorced, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Eric--.
Speaker 2: And I remarried.
Speaker 1: In '89 [1989], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, it's sort of a wonderful love story at the end, (laughter) it comes back (laughter).  Well, I'm just saying, even if though that was acrimonious, I mean the world--when people, when people--I remember reading about you giving your stock to your wife, I mean the company.  And it was like, oh, my God.
Speaker 2: Well, when Joan sued me for divorce, I didn't, I wasn't, I, I didn't initiate that, she did.  And when she--her lawyer gave me two choices to either give her half of my stock or sell the company and give her half of the proceeds.  And Joan had been with me since the beginning--this is a, what do you call it, a joint properties?
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I had no illusion that I would, you know, couldn't, that, that I was gonna be--so I, I, what I had was a, was a tough choice.  Give her half my stock, that wouldn't work because she had stock of her own and she's voted the children's stock.  She was the trustee for the children.  She would out vote me.  She could fire me.  That was--and, and that, so that didn't work.  I wasn't gonna sell my business.  I never, ever intended that Johnson Products Company would be sold.  I never intended that Johnson Products Company would ever get out of the black community, out of the--the ownership would be out of the black community.  I could have sold Johnson Products Company a thousand times.  I had offers almost on a weekly basis to buy the company, which I would never sell.  And I wasn't, I wasn't about to sell it to, to split the money with her.  And the dilemma I had, the, the solution I had to the dilemma was to give her the business, give my, all of my stock.  And I thought that would keep in the--in the, in the community.  I thought it would keep it in the black community because I, I had made Eric president, and I knew he could handle it.  Eric is bright.  Eric has a good education, business background--.
Speaker 1: He had gone to University of Chicago Business School.
Speaker 2: He'd, and he'd gotten his business degree from Babson [College] first.  Anyway, and, and I, and I, I hate to get too personal with this, but he had disappointed me.  And, and it was a very difficult situation.  And when I realized that I didn't have it, that I didn't have the confidence that I--I couldn't have the confidence I had before, it just, it, it, it just was a, a tough thing to do, but the solution was I'll let her and him have it.  And let them take it forward.  And I would step out.  Now, I certainly took, I took--we just split the assets in different ways.  She got the company.  I got everything else practically, which was, which was okay.  The thing is that, you know, it, you know what happened to the company.
Story_ID: 9189
Speaker 1: When [wife] Joan [B. Johnson] sold the company, I understood it.  I had to because [son] Eric [Johnson] was gone and the people that were left were not people that she could depend on.  And there were not people that she could, that she could expect anything out of.  When he left, that was, that was, that was it for her.  And she was not then protected and would not be protected.  She was fortunate that it came along, that offer came along out of the blue.  And she responded to it.  It broke my heart, but I, I understood it and accepted it.  And it was really difficult, but by that time though, we were back together.  We weren't married again, but we were back together.  And I must say I was not in, I was in the dark about what was going on until the day it happened.
Speaker 2: So you don't think--if you had known, you don't think it would have happened?  Would you have allowed it to happen?
Speaker 1: I would have fought it.
Speaker 2: You would have fought it?
Speaker 1: I would have fought it, but I didn't know until the day it happened, and Jim [James] Lowry called me up on the phone and told me that it would be announced today, that day, that Johnson Products was being sold to Ivax [Corporation].  And that was the, that was the worst day of my life.  But I had to get over it because I was in a relationship with her again, and, you know, either, either that was, that was over too or I'd get over it.  So I got over it.
Speaker 2: So do you think that--on--you know, hindsight is twenty-twenty, do you think that you would have been able to maintain market share and, and exist--I mean 'cause look at what has happened.  The whole black hair care industry has virtually disappeared.
Speaker 1: Yeah, collapsed.
Speaker 2: Just gone.  I mean except for a little, but--.
Speaker 1: It's hard to say.  It's hard to say.
Speaker 2: I mean look, it was you.  It was, it was there.  Then it was the Gardners--
Speaker 1: You know, and even Eric was, Eric was promoted, the day that he was promoted, I was, I was trying to provide for succession, you know.  And I was depending upon Eric to build behind himself.  The choices he made, I would never, I, I--you know, and one instance I--.
Speaker 2: He was cutting, well, he was cutting costs, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, to some extent, yeah.  It wasn't, it wasn't necessarily cost-cutting that really turned JPC [Johnson Products Company] around.  What happened, before I left the company, I had provided, in fact, in '87 [1987], I had made, I had a commitment from Cornell McBride who owned M&M Products Company that if he ever wanted to sell, he would sell to me.  And he had, he had promised that he would do that.  However, he was involved with Mayor [Andrew] Young in Atlanta, and Mayor Young, when--was also I think on the board of M&M.  And, and he--when, when, when they got into trouble, Young helped him to get some financing, and they made some commitment to Young that they wouldn't move the company out of Atlanta.  And so when they got, when they were finally making a decision to sell, they were trying to do a deal that would keep it in Atlanta, and they made an, they made an arrangement with a person I know who was--yeah, let me see, I guess he's still in Washington [D.C.].  But anyway, he was trying to buy it, and he didn't succeed in getting the financing.  Ultimately, they had to move away from that, and then he came back to me.  Well, by that time I'm in my divorce decree, I'm past that, and I've, I'm out of JPC, but I made them, I made him hold to his word.  In fact, I was in Paris when he, when I got word that he was reaching out to me to buy M&M.  And I set it up to, for Johnson Products Company to buy M&M, and that, that did happen in 1990, it happened, I think.  And that brought about twelve million dollars worth of, of new sales, which overcame what was happening in Johnson Products, the, the costs were at a point where every time you send a case out, you were sending about twenty-five cents out with it because you're--the, the volume wasn't big enough to overcome the costs.  Well, when you add twelve million to the volume that was already there and, and without increasing the costs except for raw materials, that much.  We had staff here and everything, it really made the money drop to the bottom line, and that's when Johnson Products jumped out of the red into the black.  But picking up twelve million dollars, adding that to forty-one million, that did quite a bit--whatever, thirty-one million dollars 'cause I think it dropped down to about thirty-one million by that, by that time.
Speaker 2: So, so the company got--so you really, you really weren't ready to leave business in, in many ways?
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't at that time, no.  I was--.
Speaker 2: Right, you weren't ready to leave.
Speaker 1: No, no, but I think I was, I was, I was preparing.  I expected to be, when I made Eric vice president and then president, I expected to be there to help hone his skills.
Speaker 2: So when it sold, it sold for sixty-one million, right?
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven.
Story_ID: 9190
Speaker 1: There are a lot of new black companies.  And some of them are just amazing to me.  Russell Simmons and his companies, P. Diddy and his company, Sean John, look at that.  Mr. [S. B.] Fuller had it in mind to be in the clothing business.  That was one of the things that he--that's why he bought South Center.  He bought South Center in the what?  The '40s [1940s] or the, the '50s [1950s] I think it was when he bought South Center.  He had it in mind to be in the, in the clothing business.  And that was, that's how you were gonna reach that hundred million dollars.  Look at these fellows.  I think Sean John is doing like three hundred million dollars.  I think they said, Master P is from, is, is multi--what, a hundred, three hundred and--between a hundred and fifty to three hundred million dollars or more.  I mean those are staggering numbers.  And it's wonderful to see that.  And there are a lot of other black companies that have come up, I mean the hair care business is, is certainly out the door as far as blacks are concerned.  You still have, of course, Luster Products [Inc.] and Luster Products, then you had, Bonner, Bonner Brothers in Atlanta.  You have a few other small ones, and I hope and pray that they, that they, that they are gonna be there.  But it's not gonna be easy.  However, I think these companies, especially, like Luster, they're, they're well, they're well entrenched.
Story_ID: 9191
Speaker 1: I spend my time between Chicago and Scottsdale [Arizona].  For the last year and a half or two years, we've--[wife] Joan [B. Johnson] and I have been, we're having, during the major, we have a the house in, Runaway Bay, Jamaica for our children and our grandchildren.  We don't intend to spend a lot of time there, but we have that house.  We built that house in 1967, and it's been a wonderful place, and we've resorted to it all these years, and especially, when the kids were smaller, the, the last two--not Eric [Johnson] and John [E. Johnson].  They were, they were teenagers when we, when we built that house.  But Joanie [Johnson] and Petey [Peter Johnson], they had just practically grew up in Jamaica.  And my grandchildren, Joanie's children and John's children and Petey's children, they love it.  So we're fixing it up, we've been fixing it up for them.  And all I want them to do is just pick up the expenses, and I think they'll, they're gonna find a way to do that, and that's theirs.  But we, we spend our time between Scottsdale, maybe 50 percent and here.  And I've been doing this for the last--I guess since we sold Independence Bank.  And we sold Independence Bank and Drexel National Bank in '95 [1995], in December.
Story_ID: 9192
Speaker 1: I've got something new that I'm, I'm embarking on.  And I'm real excited about this.  I intend to spend a lot of my time, helping--have you ever heard, have you heard of Whitley Phipps?
Speaker 2: Wendy Phipps?
Speaker 1: Whitley Phipps.
Speaker 2: No, I haven't, sir.
Speaker 1: Whitley Phipps is a guy I met, oh, twenty-seven years ago.  Jesse Jackson had him on his Saturday morning program.  And I was coming, going out to my office from Glencoe [Illinois], and I turned on Operation PUSH, and I heard this voice come over, over the radio.  It was the most beautiful voice I'd ever heard in my life.  And, and it, it reminded me of Paul Robeson, but even more, richer than Paul Robeson, and how I made a beeline, instead of going to my office, I went out to PUSH and got there before the program was over, and went up on the stage.  And I met Whitley.  And I've been friends with Whitley ever since.  Whitley is a minister.  He's a, he's a Seven Day Adventist minister, wonderful person.  He was twenty-one years old when I met him.  And he dedicated his life to music, his ministry is in his music.  Music is his ministry.  He sings only gospel songs, only the religious material and has a, just a magnificent voice.  In his experiences, he, he got on the board of, what is his name?  [Charles] Colson, Colson, who is was with Mr. [Richard] Nixon.  He was one of the people that went to jail as a result of the Watergate thing, and while imprisoned he became very interested in prison life and how to help prisoners.  And then after he got out, he started this prison--his prison ministry.  And Whitley went on the board, and he learned a lot on that board.  And he began to conceptualize how he could help black prisoners, and they did some research in that--and Colson had some research done--.
Story_ID: 9193
Speaker 1: 70 percent of these prison inmates, black inmates, their children. 70 percent of their children are either gonna follow them into prison or drop out of school.  And what Whitley [Phipps] is trying to do is to break that cycle.  And he's organized what he called the U.S. Dream Academy.  And he has, he started his first center in Washington, D.C., and incidentally, Bill Clinton helped him by getting two hundred thousand dollars for him to get it started.  And they have, they have to--they have a program for the children and it's only dedicated to children of, of inmates, to try to help them to, to, to bring up their self esteem.  They're doing poorly in school, to try to--they're tutoring them to try to help them to increase their, their grades, increase their attendance, to feel more successful in, in, in being more educated and getting an education and, and making them feel that somebody cares about them.  And he is, he has, he started this about four years ago, and he's got nine centers now.  And I think this is a most worthwhile endeavor, and I intend to spend a lot of my time, when I'm not--I, I'll interrupt whatever I'm doing in, in Scottsdale [Arizona] or here [Chicago] or wherever to really benefit or try to try him to, to build this.  And that's where I'm, I just went on the board in November, and I'm gonna work with that.  That's gonna be my passion until I'm, until I'm gone, but it's gonna be something I think that I--I visited, I toured the centers, and it's a, it's just a great thing.  And, and it's not in--it's not inexpensive.  These kids are learning with computers and they've got computer programs to help them with all of their weaknesses.  And it's working for them.  So that's something that I intend to do and, and help the U.S. Dream Academy to expand.  We hope open one in Chicago.
Story_ID: 9194
Speaker 1: Your mother [Priscilla Dean Howard] actually died--.
Speaker 2: She died in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: In '95.  And that was the same year you got remarried, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: I got married in April, remarried in April.
Speaker 1: So she had an instrumental part of your life.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother, my mother was the most, beside Mr. [S. B.] Fuller, my mother first, and then Mr. Fuller, was the greatest influence on my life.  My mother was a wonderful woman, a strong woman, a very wise woman.  She was courageous.  She had courage I, I just marvel at the courage my mother had.  Can you think of a eighteen year old woman with three children, leaving her husband where she was, where she was raised and go off.  Of course, she was going to her relatives, but that was a big--that took a, a lot of courage to do that.  And when I told you that she, she worked at Michael Reese Hospital for sixteen years, that's true, and when I went to Fuller Products [Company]--I didn't tell you this, I took her to Fuller Products in 19--in, in 1945.  She came to Fuller Products, and within two years, she was running the manufacturing.  My mother was the supervisor of manufacturing at Fuller Products until I retired her in 1965.  She was a bright woman, strong woman.  She ran a very, she ran a, she ran a magnificent manufacturing operation for Mr. Fuller, and he prized her highly.
Story_ID: 9195
Speaker 1: You know, what is also amazing about this story, and you hear about business people being cut throat, but both, and, you know, in your case and Mr. [S. B.] Fuller's case, there was a lot of giving back and a lot of providing opportunities to other people.  And I was wondering what that says about your sort business philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it's, it's been a part of, of my, it's been a part of my philosophy or if you want to call it philosophy, but the way I feel, I didn't have anything.  And everything that I have, I, I said it before, I credit, I credit God first.  I think the Lord has had his arm around me all of my life.  I believe that Mr.--that the Lord was with me every day I sat in my office in that chair.  And I've, I've never really felt it was me.  I felt that, that he was enabling me.  And he--I have been given so much, it is not difficult for me to give.  And I've tried to do that.  I think Johnson Products Company was a good citizen.  I remember that we had as many as a hundred and eighty one organizations that we contributed to.  You probably know that we were the strongest contributors to the Urban League, to Operation PUSH, personally, when I did that, that secondary in 1972, I took a million dollars of the money that I got out that, I got from that secondary offering in '72 and established the George E. Johnson Educational Fund.  And I dedicated that to children of indigent, especially it was really focused to the ghetto, people in the projects, especially.  So we--and Bill Berry ran that, by the way.  And to my surprise, I remember asking Bill and I, I expected this to last about, about ten years.  We expected the, the million dollars would last for about ten years, and I had no concept about how many people we would, we would educate, but Bill set up a program and hired a person, hired a woman who was a, a magnificent person, and, oh, what was her name?  Mike Bess (ph.).  Mike Bess had been in education, she knew the ropes, and what Mike Bess would do, she, she would handle all of the--she would make certain that we, if, if, if this child was approved, if they lived in Illinois, what were--are there Pell Grants, whatever, what--she would get all the grants that that child was entitled to from the state and from the city.  And then our money would bridge the gap between that and the, and the tuition.  And we also, we would also give them two round trips home a year.  That was our contribution.  The gap between whatever those grants didn't cover and then the two round trips.  And I asked Bill, cause I was surprised that it was still, we were still going strong in the '80 [1980s].  And I asked Bill one day, how many, how many people have we--how many have we had?  He told me sixteen hundred.  And that million dollars went all the way up until 1986.  I think the last money that was left in it, I gave it to Fisk [University], the last money that was left in that foundation.  And, and that's what, that's what, that's what it benefited, sixteen hundred kids.
Story_ID: 9196
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, Mr. Johnson?
Speaker 2: That's hard to say.  I, I just want people to think of me as a good son.  And I mean that, not just because I'm my mother and my father's son, but my heavenly father's son.  It's hard for me to talk about myself really.
Speaker 1: What do you want them to say about, though, though about George Johnson?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope they'll say that he was a good person and that he was generous.
Speaker 1: And one last question, your, your hopes and your concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: That's, this is a very difficult environment to ask that question, with, with how I feel about the politics of this country today.  But I'm, I, I'm hopeful that, that we will really have true freedom and true equality, you know.  And that takes a lot of, that takes a lot of mind changing or adjusting.  And, and it really involves the heart as--and probably as much as the mind and maybe even more so.  A change in heart to really accept people as they really are, because we're all God's creation.  And, and that's how we ought to see people, as children of God, all of us are and be accepted as such.  If that could happen, that would be wonderful.
