Story_ID: 505591
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: I am Dr. Prince A. Jackson, Jr., P-R-I-N-C-E, A. for Albert, and Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, Jr. [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 17, 1925.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired college professor.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office in Savannah [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: The day is January 24th, 2007.
Story_ID: 505592
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is lima beans.
Speaker 1: All right, what about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is in the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite dest- vacation destination.  I just try to spread it out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right.  And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a favorite phrase, and my favorite phrase is this: if you want your prayers answered, get up off your knees and hustle.
Story_ID: 505593
Speaker 1: We're gonna begin by talking about your, your family.  And I think we'll start on your father's side.  Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Prince A. Jackson, Sr. [Prince Jackson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was born August 8, 1898.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right, and your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Paul.  I didn't know him, but his name was Paul, Paul Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in Savannah as well?
Speaker 2: He was born in South Carolina, Sheldon, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said you didn't know him, but do know anything about him?
Speaker 2: No because he died when I was very, very young, so I never really got to know him.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your grandmother--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my--my grandmother's name was Susie Jackson [ph.], and she was also born in South Carolina, Levy [South Carolina].  And she died when I was very, very young, so I didn't get to know her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, let's talk about your father then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What type of man was he?
Speaker 2: My father was, was, first of all, my father was what, in today's vernacular, my father was unschooled, simply because of the fact that he never went to school a day in his life.  When he was small, he had to work and help his family.  He had brothers and sisters, and he told me he had to work and help his family.  So his, his mother and father was never able to send him to school, so he began working from a very, very young age on.  As a matter of fact, when my father died I had to sign his name.  I still had to sign his name to things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he grew up in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: No, he grew up in Savannah.  He was born in Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in Savannah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And, and tell me, did they live on a farm, or did they sharecrop (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: No, they lived in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived in city in the Old Fort section of Savannah, section of Savannah we call the Fort.  A lot of South Carolinian, more or less, picked that place, that section of town to live in, and so that's the section in which my father lived and was born and raised in.
Speaker 1: Besides having to work, did he share any other stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when he was growing up he said that his parents were very kind of strict on him.  He had to toe the line and had to go to church, things of that sort.  And for that reason, he came up kind of strong in terms of morals and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: What did you learn from your father?  What lessons learned from your father?
Speaker 2: Lesson I learned from my father is that you have to work hard for whatever you get.  Another lesson I learned from my father was that nothing comes free and that if you wanted something, you had to earn it yourself.  You didn't try to take it from anybody, anything of that sort.  And another thing I learned from my father was never to, to, to, to run with children who would get into trouble.  So, for that reason, we came up, my, my brothers and sisters and myself, we came up in a family where you more or less had to toe the line.
Story_ID: 505594
Speaker 1: All right, well, we're gonna switch to your mother.  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Julia Robinson [Julia Robinson Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born October 20th, 1893, October 20th, 1893.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island], South Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did she share any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother was able to go to school on Hilton Head.  She was able to go through the sixth grade.  That was as far as she could go.  It was a one-teacher school on Hilton Head, South Carolina and at that time.  And she was able to complete the sixth grade before she came to Savannah [Georgia].  Her parents died when she was a baby.  And so her brother, my Uncle Chamberlain [ph.], who was also born and raised in Hilton Head, more or less raised her until she was able to come to Savannah and sort of work and get a job, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather's name was Robert Robinson [ph.], R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.  And my grandmother's name was Hester Robinson [ph.].  I don't know her maiden--I never did learn her maiden name, but, but her, her, her, her given name was Hester.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't know much about them 'cause they died apparently--
Speaker 2: No, they died when my mother was very, very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they died when she was very, very young, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any other stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother said that when she was growing up she had to work.  She grew up on a farm, and she had to work.  Everybody had a job to do and that sort of thing and that she was very religious.  She was a, she was a Methodist in the beginning.  And she grew, grew up in the Methodist church so, on Hilton Head.  And she had--she was very, very smart, so she had to go to school.  So, she didn't have anything to do but study and work.  And that's the sort of thing that she sort of told us, that you had to study and work; that was the rule.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were the lessons learned from your mother?
Speaker 2: The sort of same I'd, I'd learned from father [Prince Jackson, Sr.], that hard work, with hard work you could overcome any obstacle in life, and that there wasn't anything that you wanted to do that you couldn't do if you wanted to do it bad enough and if you work hard enough at it, and that, that success was a function of work; if you work, you could be successful; if you didn't work, you weren't going to be successful, and my mother taught all of us that.  My brothers and sisters, all of us came up with that philosophy.
Speaker 1: Did you hear any stories about any of your family being in slavery?
Speaker 2: On, on, on my mother's side, she would talk about her mother, the little bit that she learned from her father, that her mother, I guess was alive, was born before slavery ended, see, because my mother was born in 1893, and that m- my great-grandparents would have been slaves over on Hilton Head on the honeycomb [ph.] plantation.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And, and that's all she knew?
Speaker 2: That, yeah, that was all.  She didn't talk about in, in, in, insofar as slavery affecting her, per se, but she said that it was part of the family over in Hilton Head.
Story_ID: 505595
Speaker 1: Tell me, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have, and, and they're all, as a matter of fact, I'm the last remaining one, but I'll tell you their name.  My oldest sister name was Olga Bailey [Olga Jackson Bailey (ph.)].  That's her marriage name, Olga Bailey.  My brother was Arthur Elliot Jackson [Arthur Jackson], and then my sister next to him was Margie Jackson Soeltner; and Soeltner's her married name.  And then my next younger sister was Hester Jackson.  She went into service and retired as a colonel in the [U.S.] Army Nurse Corps.  And then my youngest brother, who is also deceased, the name was William Jackson, and he lived here in Savannah [Georgia].  As a matter of fact, my youngest brother and I were the only two who re- remained in Savannah.
Story_ID: 505596
Speaker 1: Tell me, what was your, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was in coming up is that I came up in a family--my mother [Julia Robinson Jackson] raised six of us, and we had to get along.  My memory was that I was in the middle.  In those days if you were a boy, you had to do things like bringing in wood for the cook stove and for the fire.  If you were a girl like my sisters, you had to do--learn how to cook and things of that sort.  But my earliest childhood memory was that in my house you always, if you didn't go to school, you couldn't stay.  That--the working maxim in my house was that you had to go to school.  You didn't have a choice, and so we, we went to school.  And, and my mother tried as hard as she could.  She sent us all through private schools, Catholic schools, which was a big financial strain because my father [Prince Jackson, Sr.] was a laborer, but she was able to put together--and from that little meager money that he made with the city [Savannah, Georgia]--as a matter of fact, it was twelve dollars every two weeks--she bought a home, and she put all of us through Catholic schools.
Story_ID: 505597
Speaker 1: So your mother [Julia Robinson Jackson], she didn't work outside the home.
Speaker 2: No, she didn't work outside the home, but she did run a little confectionary.  She opened up a little business herself, and she ran a little confectionary, which was attached to the back of our house.  And that helped, that helped augment the family income.
Speaker 1: And you said your father [Prince Jackson, Sr.] was a laborer.  What did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a longshoreman.  He worked, he also worked for the city.  He worked at, at--he worked for the city first, before he became a longshoreman.  He worked for the City of Savannah [Georgia].  And during the war, when the shipyards opened up and they were hiring laborers, he went to the shipyard to work.  Then, after leaving the shipyard, he went to work as a longshoreman because the income was, was, was so much better.  However, my mother bought the home (unclear) out, out of his salary that he made with the city, which was twelve dollars every two weeks.  I, I shall never forget that.  So we had to watch what we spent; we had to watch what we, what we bought.  My mother could not give us the best things in life.  As a matter of fact, I sometime tells my--I sometimes tell my children how I wore second-handed shoes.  We would go downtown, and my mother, we used to call them shoes on the string.  They would have them hanging on the string.  And my mother when--would take us downtown.  And we would go downtown, and she would pick out these shoes and this sort of thing for us.  It was a long time before I knew what a new pair of shoes looked like.  I was pretty much on my own when, when that happened.  But that was, but we were, we were very happy because we came up in a home where there was a lot of love.  We didn't have any disciplinary problems because I had parents where you, you had to do what they--if mama said go, you went.  I mean, you know, you didn't say well, let's talk about this, mama.  You didn't do, do anything about--that sort of thing.  And my mother was the primary disciplinarian.  And if she didn't work, then you would have to go to my father, and everybody wanted to avoid that.  Nobody wanted the father, our father, to discipline you because his was so much harsher than hers.  So we tried to deal--as a matter of fact, I remember days when, when, when I did wrong and, and it got later on in the afternoon and I hadn't been punished.  I reminded her that she needed to punish me before dad got home 'cause I didn't want him to get on me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the things that you and your, your brothers and sisters did as a pastime.
Speaker 2: We played ball.  My sister played little games like hopscotch, and they had dolls.  When they weren't able to, to, to buy dolls, they would pull, go to the, to the, to the, to the yard and pull up grass and get the root, and they would comb the, the, the, the root of the hair for the, for the, the root of the grass for the hair and that sort of thing.  They played games like hopscotch and dodge ball and things of that sort, jump rope, Jackstone and things of that sort.  And you could do that after school until about five or six o'clock.  Then after five or six o'clock you had to study.  It, it was just that simple.  I mean, as a matter of fact, we were so acclimatized to it that we didn't even have to be told that we had to do it because we knew we had to do it.
Speaker 1: What about your clothes?  Did your, was, did your mother make clothes or--
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was a seamstress.  As a matter of fact, well, one, one of the things that helped us--my mother had put us through Catholic school was because of the fact she was a seamstress.  And every year at the school plays she used to make all of the costumes and things for the school [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia].  And the sisters in the Catholic school would, would allow that to go sometimes for, towards tuition and that type of thing.  And so, she made clothes and little shirts and dresses for my sisters; she made those.  She made shirts for us, the boys.  We had to buy our pants and things of that sort.  But she was, she was good seamstress, and so she did a lot of sewing.  And the girls learned how to crochet.  They learned how to make quilts and things of that sort 'cause my mother was quite a quilt maker herself.  As a matter of fact, all of the outerwear on the bed, mom, mom more or less made those herself, like quilts and blankets and things of that sort.
Story_ID: 505599
Speaker 1: When you think about those times, what are the sights, sounds and smells that come to your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, when, when I see people scuffling in life, that's something that I saw as a boy.  And another thing I saw as a boy, when I see people who get high and a little inebriated I remember that because I saw a lot of that.  'Course I later on learned that a good bit of that came from guys being frustrated in not being able to do what they wanted to do and, and for their families that they wanted to, and so they turned to the bottle and things of that sort.  And when I see students going home and studying that, that comes back to me because that's, that was my life; that, that, we just had to do that.
Speaker 1: What about sounds of, of that time in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, the sounds of that time in my life, my mother [Julia Robinson Jackson]--we had a--they used to call it a Victrola.  I don't know if you know what a Victrola is or not, but my mother introduced us more or less to classical music.  And as a matter of fact, when we were coming up, everybody in my house had to take at least two years of piano.  You had to learn how to play the piano, and mama introduced us to, to, to, to classical music of the, you know, the classical artists, Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and things of that sort.  And since we were going to Catholic school [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia], we learned to listen to a lot of Catholic music like 'Ave Maria' and things of that sort.  So those were the sounds that I came up with.  Every now and then you get to some of the other sounds, such, like 'Tisket, A-Tasket' ['A-Tisket, A-Tasket'] by Ella Fitzgerald and Chick Webb.  We knew that and Jimmie Lunceford had an orchestra that, at, in those early days.  And, but we, we, as children, we learned to listen to those.  But our, our background was that we had learned something about all of the music.  And those are the kind of sounds that we listened to.  As a matter of fact, every, every now and then when I get some of the oldies and you hear Ella Fitzgerald singing, "Tisket, a-tasket, I lost my yellow basket," I'm reminded of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about smells?  What smells take you to that time?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was coming up, there used to be a fertilizer mill that was maybe about four or five miles from our house.  And there was a pungent odor from the per- fertilizer that would fill the air, so that was a, the, the sound--that was a smell that really comes back to, to mind.  Every now and then--we have a big plant in Savannah [Georgia], and it used to be Union Camp [Union Camp Corporation], you'd have the same sort of thing.  But when they used to make that fertilizer that was a very, very pungent smell, and so you, you, you--every time when I smell--and it was nothing more than sulfur dioxide.  When we, we smell that sort of thing that reminds me of there, some of the smells that I had back at the, at that time, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 505601
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your home?
Speaker 2: Well, the only holidays we had, St. Patrick's Day in Savannah [Georgia].  Savannah is very Ca- Ca- Irish town, and everybody b- everybody celebrates St. Patrick's Day.  And since we were living in the Old Fort [Savannah, Georgia], where we sometimes said we had more Catholics per square inch than the Vatican [Vatican City] (laughter), black and white by the way, a lot of black people in the Fort--as a matter of fact, my family was Catholic.  A lot of black people in the Fort were Catholic.  Just about everybody Irish were, or everybody white were Irish, and so they were all Catholics, and so, St. Patrick's Day was a big day with the parade and all of that.  We didn't have--this was prior to Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Day] parade time and all that sort of thing, so we didn't have any parades featuring, you know, simply for blacks.  However, the schools always had bands and that sort of thing, and you would hear them playing and that sort of thing.  But those were the, pretty much what we, what we had.
Story_ID: 505603
Speaker 1: The community, the 4th Ward [sic. Old Fort, Savannah, Georgia], tell me about, tell me about the people who lived, lived there.
Speaker 2: Every, everyb- you know, and, and, and, and it's a big contrast to what we have today; everybody knew everybody.  Not only did everybody knew everybody, everybody knew everybody's children, and everybody disciplined; it was, it was really the village concept.  Everybody, everybody disciplined everybody's children.  If you were off-base, people just knew it was their duty to put you back on base.  And they didn't have to worry about mom and daddy coming around saying why you bothered my child and that sort of thing.  So it was a sort of loving community, we shared.  People literally used to borrow cups of sugar, and cups of flour, cups of rice and that sort of thing.  If somebody cooked something that they thought was pretty good, they would share it with other people in the neighborhood.  When we were small coming up and we would play with, with boy and girls, if they went home to eat and we hadn't eaten, we would go home and eat with them and that sort of thing.  Nobody had a whole lot, but they shared what little bit they had, and even the children.  When we bought candy and that sort of thing, we shared it with other guys.  We didn't put it in our pocket and try to, to hide it from everybody.  So it, it was a pretty, pretty cohesive community, and people just tried to share with each other.  And we didn't have a whole lot of--as a matter of fact, violence of the kind that we experience today was totally foreign to my upbringing, where people kill each other and all.  We didn't have that.  Every now and then, adults would have some run-in, but it was more or less arguments, and they would cuss out each other.  And when we had little fights at school, it was more or less a fistfight and then it would over.  You know, sometimes when you go home and, and, and tell your parents, they would go to the other parents, and they didn't blame any one or the other.  They would bring the children together and say you can't do that; you have to be friends.  And sometimes we would have to hug guys we didn't like at all, but that was the way it was.  We had to hug and say I'm sorry that I did so and so and so.  That was kind of, that, that was the kind of atmosphere we came up in.
Story_ID: 505605
Speaker 1: Now you talked about the Catholic church.  Were you converted?  You said your mother [Julia Robinson Jackson] was Methodist at first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I, I was converted.  I went to Catholic school [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia].  As a matter of fact, the first church I went to was a Baptist church, because when we were coming up you had to go to Sunday school and that sort of thing.  And then when we started going to Catholic schools, we, we were all, all, all of the children were converted to--my father [Prince Jackson, Sr.] never converted, but my mother eventually converted.  But all my brothers and sisters eventually became Catholics.  And so, because we went to Catholic schools, and so we went to the Catholic church [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic Church, Savannah, Georgia] more or less when we were small.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the Catholic church experience.
Speaker 2: Catholic church experience was good.  The sisters were exceptionally good, I mean.  Ev- everybody knew that the sisters wanted you to learn.  They wanted you to get somewhere.  There was always--the atmosphere was that you, you, you're Negro, but don't let that hold you back because there are opportunities out there.  And opportunities will open up for you if you're prepared to accept it, and so that was the atmosphere that, that we had in the Catholic school.  And it was strict disci- it was strict discipline.  The subjects were exceptionally good.  As a matter of fact, when I did my Ph.D. [at Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], some of the stuff that the, the, the ba- the, the basis I used for my Ph.D., I got out of that Catholic school, 'cause I learned in--for example, I'm a mathematician, and I learned my fractions and all that stuff back there in the Catholic school.  I still use it today.  All that stuff I use today rests on what I learned when I was a boy coming up through the Catholic schools.  And the sisters didn't play.  You had to learn it, and they would send--they would call your mother; they would send to your mother and let your parents know that you're not doing what you're supposed to do.  And parents didn't go to school and, and argue or anything.  Everybody figured that the sisters couldn't tell no lie, so (laughter) if they told on you, that's the way it was.  That's the way it was.  So, Catholic schools were exceptionally good, excellent, in terms of their academic preparation, excellent in terms of your moral preparation and things of that sort.  So I had a totally good experience in the Catholic schools.  However, this is not to say that the public schools weren't good either, because you had some real strong teachers in the public schools who did pretty much the same thing.  And the children who came through the public schools at that time were pretty solid when they came out of the elementary schools to go into the high schools because those teachers made sure that you knew what you were supposed to know.
Story_ID: 505607
Speaker 1: Was the Catholic school segregated?
Speaker 2: Yes, at that time the Catholic schools were segregated.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, although the church never did say that w- whites couldn't come here or you couldn't go down to the cathedral, it, it was, it was segregated.  But I, I, I guess it was more or less sub-segregated.  When I was young still coming up, I made Mass at the cathedral a lot of time, but many times I would be the only black in the cathedral.  And over at St. Benedict's [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic Church, Savannah, Georgia], where I came through, there were a lot of whites who would come there because it was closer to them, and they would go to Mass there.  But I had always--because all of the Catholic sisters were white, I had always more or less seen white people more or less in a--and, and I'd seen the good ones.  I didn't, I didn't realize that there were some really bad ones out there until later on (laughter).
Speaker 1: So the school that you went to, the name of it was St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Benedict's, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was that located?
Speaker 2: It's located on East Gordon Street, 556 East Gordon Street [sic. Gordon Lane].  It's still there now.  The church is still there.  The school is closed because all the Catholic schools now are integrated, but this, the, the, the church is still there, very, very, very active Catholic church, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you go to what grade there?
Speaker 2: I went through the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was no, there was no Catholic high school that I could go to at that time.  There were two in Savannah [Georgia], but they were for whites because the State of Georgia said that blacks could not go to school with whites.  There was Benedictine [Benedictine Military School, Savannah, Georgia], which was an all-male school, still is an all-male school; and there was St. Vincent's Academy [Savannah, Georgia], which was an all-girls school and still is an all-girls school.  And all my children went those schools when they came out of elementary school and, and, and, and, and, and junior high school.  They, they went to B.C. and--as we call Benedictine--and St. Vincent.  My daughter [Julia Jackson Chriss] graduated from St. Vincent, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 505614
Speaker 1: I just wanted to say that the community in which you lived, I, I had said 4th Ward by mistake, and it's actually called the Fort [Old Fort, Savannah, Georgia] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, F-O-R-T, Fort (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and it's Fort Mc--
Speaker 2: Fort McIntosh [Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) McIntosh.
Speaker 2: Yes, named for Fort McIntosh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, since you couldn't go to the Catholic high school, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Beach High School in Savannah [Georgia], Alfred E. Beach High School [sic. Beach-Cuyler High School; Alfred E. Beach High School] in Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about your high school years.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that's, that's interesting.  I started high school at Beach.  Then the war came; World War II [WWII] struck out.  And I went to Beach for a year, and then I decided that--the, the [U.S.] Navy had opened up the black stand.  The Navy, the United States Navy had opened up its ranks to blacks where you could go in without being a steward that is, waiting on tables and that sort of thing.  So I decided that I would go into the Navy, and so I went into the United States Navy.  And then after staying in the Navy three and a half years, I came back and finished, came back to Beach High School and finished and got my high school diploma after I, after I had put in some time in the Navy.  But going to the Navy probably was the best thing that ever happened to me because it showed me the value of education.  In the Navy I found out if you didn't have some education, formal education, you just weren't going to get anywhere.  And if you didn't--if, you know, weren't even a high school graduate, you, you just simply out of the question.  And so when I was in the Navy I did a--every base I went on, if they had an opportunity for you to take courses, I took courses.  And when I came back out of the Navy, I had accumulated a lot of credit.  And so I only had to return to Beach High School for two semesters, and I graduated from Beach High School after those two semesters.
Story_ID: 505616
Speaker 1: How old were you when you went into the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: I was sixteen when I went into the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me, besides the courses, what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: The Navy was very, very good experience.  And one of the reasons why it was a very, very good experience is because, the fact that I had gone to Catholic school [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia] means that--the Navy used to promote based on test scores.  And because I had a solid--that Catholic education gave me a good solid foundation in reading, writing, particularly in mathematics, and language skills, because you had to take Latin and that sort of thing, I was able to advance in the Navy.  And when I became nineteen, I became a first class petty officer, which was just one rank beneath the highest rank that the Navy allowed blacks to, to achieve at that time.  And so if I had stayed in the Navy, I wouldn't have been able to go up but one more rank.  And I was just nineteen at the time, and I just couldn't see myself staying in the Navy with, with, with my opportunities as limited as it was at the time.  So that was one, another one reason why I came back out of the Navy, went back to high school [Beach-Cuyler High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], and then I completed high school; then I went to college [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Story_ID: 505618
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Julia Robinson Jackson] say when you told her you were going to the [U.S.] Navy, since she was someone who wanted you to get an education?
Speaker 2: She didn't, she didn't particularly, she didn't particularly like it.  But my brother, my older brother [Arthur Jackson], who was, who w- who had already gone to New York, who had left home, and who had, had gone to New York after he finished high school, p- prevailed on her that it would be a good experience for me and that I could come back and I'd go to high school [Beach-Cuyler High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia].  Although, to be very frank with you, when I went into the Navy, I had no notion that I was going to go back to school.  I, I thought that I knew everything at that time.  I could read; I could write good; I could, could do as well as most people that I knew, and I'd just, I had enough.  But my mother finally decided that since I was so young and, and, and all that, that it might be a good experience for me; my father [Prince Jackson, Sr.] concurred.  And, and I told my mother what I would do is that whatever I earned in the Navy, I would send some of the money back to help her with the other children.  At that time there was still my youngest sister [Hester Jackson] and my youngest brother [William Jackson] at home, which I did.  As, as a matter of fact, and it's kind of unheard of.  When I tell people that it's not, they don't believe it.  We were making seventy-five dollars a month when I went into the Navy.  And every time I got a paycheck, each month I would get a money order and send Mama fifty dollars every single month.  Then Mama fooled me.  I thought Mama was using the money to help with the children.  My mother put that money in a bank account for me, but she never did tell me that she was putting the money in an account for me, so that when, really, when I came out of the Navy, I had a nest egg to start with because my mother never touched any of the money that I gave her.  She always banked it for me, and so that was one of the real pleasant surprises when I got home.  I was just twenty when I came out of the Navy.  And I was very, very surprised that when I came out of the Navy that Mama gave me a bankbook.  In those days, you know, they--you take the money to the bank and they would write on there what you put in there to--I had almost $5,000 when I came out.  I, I really was surprised.  And then she cautioned me that a fool and his money soon part, which I learned was the truth (laughter).
Speaker 1: You didn't let it get away from you, did you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I spent a good bit of it, but I, I, I don't regret it.  I enjoyed every minute (laughter).  I enjoyed, I enjoyed every minute.  Although, if I had to do it all over again knowing what I know now, I would have in- taken that $5,000, and I would have invested it.  And it's no telling where I would be now if I had started at that time.  But I, I don't regret it.  I--you know, mama told me--she didn't--you know, he said son, say, say you need to stop spending your money.  And I later on learned that I was to realize--she realized that I was going to get married later on.  I was gonna have children.  I'm gonna have to look up for them and all that.  But when you're young, you just don't realize those things.  And sometimes when you're young like that and you're reckless, you don't always listen to the older people, although later on you learn.  I didn't realize how smart my mother was until after I graduated from college [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  (Laughter) I found out that she was much smarter than I was, and that's how things--so.  She really surprised me when I got back, and every penny I'd ever sent her, she had saved it for me--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --which was beautiful, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It was a nice thing.
Story_ID: 505620
Speaker 1: You are in the [U.S.] Navy during World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any, any war stories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went overseas.  I went to, to, to, to Alaska.  First of all, I went to--I did my training at Great Lakes, at Camp Robert Smalls in, in Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  And the Navy were training African American, blacks, or Negroes at, at--the term we used at that time, to become engineers, diesel engineers, electricians, signalmen, radiomen, and so and so forth.  And because of, of my acumen with being able to score high on tests and my mathematical background, the Navy selected me for service school to go to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at that time.  So I went to Hampton Institute to take diesel engineering.  We used to call it mortar machinist mate.  And so I went to Hampton Institute and went there for four months and graduated out of that program.  But the Navy tried, for, for those who had ability--as a matter of fact, a lot of the guys that I knew at Great Lakes later on became the first black officers in the Navy, but they were already out of college.  You know it was a real tragedy that you had all these good solid African American who had college degrees and all of that, but they couldn't become officers in the Navy.  It was, the Navy didn't commission its first black officers until about 1946, '47 [1947].  And of course, I wouldn't have had an opportunity, because at that time I, I hadn't even really completed high school [Beach-Cuyler High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia] at that time.  But I had already gone at, even at the age of nineteen, I'd already gone up to just one rank beneath my maximum.  And so I met a lot of good people in the Navy, one of the first black officers, Jack LaFleur [ph.], from Nashville, Tennessee.  He, he has died now, but was, he later on had become one of the first officers.  He took a liking to me, and he helped me; he encouraged me.  And, but, but because the fact that he was a college graduate, they kept him at Great Lakes to, to encourage some of the other young guys like myself and those, to make sure that we were going and, and do--and, and I, I have never forgotten him for what he did for me, you know.  My life is--anything that I've ever gained in life is, has come because other people really encouraged me, and I had enough sense to listen.  I had enough sense to listen, uh-huh.  But the Navy was good in that.  Then we had the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Story_ID: 505622
Speaker 1: So when I came back out of the [U.S.] Navy, I went back to Beach High School [Beach-Cuyler High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], did two semester, and all of this was on the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  Then I went to, at that time it was Georgia State College [Savannah State University].  It was located in here in Savannah [Georgia].  I really wanted to get into New York University [New York, New York], in that school of electrical engineering.  But they were already crowded out for that semester, and they said I would have to wait at least a mes- a semester until a seat became available.  So my mother [Julia Robinson Jackson] said, "Well, you don't need to sit around here doing nothing," said, "Go out to Georgia State College and take some courses to strengthen yourself."  So after I went out there, I met the dean of the college who later became president, William K. Payne, who took a special liking to me.  Maybe he saw something I didn't see.  He began to push me, and I stayed, and I graduated.  As, as a matter of fact, I graduated first in my class when, when I graduated from college.  So, I went into college on the G.I. Bill, and I know that if it had not been for that G.I. Bill of Rights, I never would have been able to get the education that I got.  So I went on from there, and I, I did my bachelor's degree.
Speaker 2: Now tell me what year was this?
Speaker 1: This was 1949.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-nine [1949].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was supposed, I was supposed to graduate in 1950, but I graduated from college in thirty-three months, 'cause I just didn't play around.  I went to summer school, took all the extra courses, 'cause I wanted to get my degree as quickly as possible.  And after I graduated, then that's when I went to graduate school [Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, New York].  I didn't, I didn't work or anything.  I just came out that June and started graduate school that fall.
Story_ID: 505624
Speaker 1: Tell me about your times at, at, at college, Georgia State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I had a, I had a good time at Georgia State.  I majored in mathematics.  I had some very, very strong teachers.  And because I liked mathematics, they took a liking to me, and so I, I made excellent grades.  As I said, I graduated first in, in, in, in, in my college classes.  As a matter of fact, when I graduated from college, Crisis [The Crisis], the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] magazine, named me as one of the outstanding college graduates in the country.  So I had, I had a strong academic background.  But I had some good, excellent teachers who really gave me a good, excellent, solid grounding.  Going to college, you can come out of college--you, you, you can fake, you can, you know, you can fake your way out of anything by just doing enough to get by and all of that.  But then I realized after having been in the [U.S.] Navy, which is another thing the Navy did for me, was that you might fool other people, but you can't fool yourself, in that you had to do all that you could, and you had to get as much out of this experience as, as you could.  And then I was on the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], so I was able to go through college and, and get a bachelor's degree in mathematics and, and, and did exceptionally well with it, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Okay, there was a lady who, and she's still living; she's in Cincinnati [Ohio] now, is name is Martha Wilson.  She was head of the mathematics department at that time, and she, she was a native of Minnesota.  She had done all of her work at University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And she knew what Negroes had to go through, and she demanded the very best from all of us.  She just didn't demand, demand answers; she demanded that you do your very best.  And so I took my ma- all my mathematics practically from her, from, from other people.  And then there was another professor.  He's still living.  He's in Savannah [Georgia] now, name is John Clemmons [HistoryMaker John B. Clemmons, Sr.], who did his bachelor's [degree] at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and he went to the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  He was one of my professors too, and he pushed hard.  These were people, these were people who really, if you had potential, and you were a Negro, these were people who really pushed you because they know what you were gonna have to go off to and go up against.  And these were people who really pushed me hard.  They just didn't, they just--in other words, I just wasn't able to just pass a test.  Even if I passed a test, if they thought I could have done better, they let me know.  It might have been the best in the class, but they always let me know that you, okay, you did all right, said but this is not the best you can do.  And so these people were, were there.  And then you, you had people in, in literature, and I had an English professor by the name of Louise Owens [Louise Lautier Owens]--she's still living today too--who taught me how to speak, how to speak extemporaneously and how to write and things of that sort.  And these were people who, they didn't make a lot of money, but I think they got their reward from seeing some of us, those of us who could, go on and do well; that I think they recognized if you had something to offer, that they were gonna make you put it all out.  And these were people--I had those kind of professors; had a lady in, in literature.  She's dead now.  She, she taught American literature and English literature, and you had to learn that stuff.  You just didn't read it; you had to learn; you had to be able to interpret it and all that.
Story_ID: 505626
Speaker 1: And over the years, when I, I, I know when I was going to do my Ph.D. [at Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], all that stuff began to, to come into, all that stuff began to come into focus, even that Latin that I learned back in Catholic schools [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic School, Savannah, Georgia].  'Cause I had to take a French test, and I didn't know French that well, and so I just used the Latin.  And there's not much difference between Latin and French.  So when I went into the, for example, when I went into the French examination, I just used the Latin I knew to pass the French exam and things of that sort.  But it, it, it's amazing how all this knowledge comes to a fore, and everything that you ever learned--some people say what good is that?  Well, it's, it's gonna do some good.  You may not see some good out there right at the moment, but later on in your mind, when you have to do something, all that stuff bears on what you do.  And, and, and, and getting back to college [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], all these people were just excellent people just like the, the, the dean that I was talking about W.K. Payne [William K. Payne], who was a psychologist.  And I recall when I graduated, he said, "Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," he said, "you've done exceptionally well.  You graduated first in your class and all of that."  He said, "Now, when you have been out of college five years," he said, "I know you're going on to get a master's degree--" because back at that in black colleges [HBCUs], most people who were teachers just had master's degrees.  He said, "When, I knew you're going on, and you're gonna get your master's degree."  He said, "Then you're gonna teach a little bit."  And he said, "When you have but graduated from here in five years, you write me and ask for a job.  But I don't want you until you've been away at least five years 'cause I want everybody who knew you as a student to have graduated."  And you know, five years after I graduated, I, I wrote him.  I, I--he gave me a job (laughter).  So, so it, it was, it was--I, I had a good college experience.  By this time, the dean, he was, he was then president.  And so he, he remembered.  He said, "I told you five years ago that I was gonna hire you," and he did.
Story_ID: 505629
Speaker 1: What were some of your other activities during college?
Speaker 2: I was president of student government association.  I was in the original group of, of, of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity men, men when they brought fraternities to Savannah State [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] in 1949.  I was one of the tw- original twenty who made the chapter.  I participated in many, many student organizations.  I played three years of football while I was there.  And I represented the institution as a student in, in many, many places.  Sometimes it got me into trouble.  I recall when, when, when the country was going to, to, to execute the, I believe it was the Goldbergs [sic. Julius Rosenberg and Ethel Rosenberg], for spying for Russian and all of that.  There was this big (unclear) about spare these people and all that.  I was president of student government at, at time--at that time.  And a good friend of mine, who was president of the Savannah [Georgia] branch, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I sent him to Washington [D.C.] to join the, the, the protestors.  And Eugene Talmadge, Eugene Talmadge was senator from Georgia the time.  And somebody told Eugene Talmadge that there was a Savannah State--at that time we were still Georgia State--there was a Georgia State student out there who was protesting a- against the--it was the Rosenbergs--against the execution of the Rosenbergs.  And, and so I sent Walter Leonard up there.  And he found out that it was Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard], and he called back, inquired back, at that the college as to where we got the money and all of that.  And then they found out that I had used student fees, which was--had to go through the state to send Wash- Walter up there.  And, and so he pressured the admin- administration, and we got disciplined for it, but we never apologized.  We didn't save the Rosenberg, but at least we made our presence felt (laughter)--so, things of that sort.  And we tried, we, we tried our best to go into the neighborhoods and try to rally--when we were students at Savannah State to try to rally young blacks to, to, to go to school and to get a good education because we sort of saw in the future--somewhere down the line we knew that this could not last, with segregation and all of that.  And part of the country, the northern part of the country, was, you know, people say integrated, although you and I both know that it wasn't as deep as a lot of people though it was.  But at least Af- African Americans had a better chance in some part of the country.  And so we were, were trying to prepare students to do that.  We were encouraging our class to go to law school, to go on and become medical doctors, and ministers and things of that sort.  So all that was exciting because we felt that we were making a (unclear) for the future.  We felt we were making a (unclear) for the future, and so we worked, and we worked, and we worked.  And under that movement, just about everybody--one, one of the persons who I hope you will interview, I will give you name as Clifford Hardwick [John Clifford Hardwick III].  He isn't in town now, but I'm gonna give you his name and address and all of that.  He was, he was along with us pretty much at this time.  He's done pretty much same, same things, some of the things that I've done, who was with us at that time.  We were all, all, all of our classmates were people who knew you had to go on.  All of my classmates, Bill Jackson [ph.] and so many of them, they've been on to, to school, and they got master's degrees.  And they became teachers; they became administrators and things of that sort.  So on the first line of integration, particularly in Savannah [Georgia], it came out of my group.  It came out of my group 'cause we were the pushers at that time.  We were the pushers, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and also we, being--it wasn't 'til after I became a faculty member, when the, the, the push for integration and the desegregation began.  And Savannah State was a big part of that, and I was, I was the advisor to student protestors and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 505631
Speaker 1: So you do go on to get your master's [degree].   Where do you go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I went, I went to New York University [New York, New York] in the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.  I didn't--I di- I got a master's degree in ten months.  And the only reason I didn't do it in, in nine months, even though you had to write a dissertation, there was a law, a rule, that you couldn't get a master's degree unless you held a bachelor's [degree] for one calendar year.  And I recall, and, (laughter) and I joke about it now, I graduated from Savannah State [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] on June the 8th [1949], and New York University held its graduation the following year on June 7th [1950].  So I was one day short of one calendar year, so I had to wait for October (laughter).  I started in September.  I wrote my dissertation and everything.  So I had to wait until October to get my master's degree.  But I got my master's degree, and I did, did quite well.  That's when I--later on learned the difference between schools dependent on students.  At, at, at New York University, skudent--students, for the most part, were probably better prepared for graduate work than students who graduated with me.  And, and that was because of the fact that, as somebody told me, that unless you have competition, students who will push you, and push you, and push you, and push you, you don't ever achieve as much as you can if you don't have the competition.  And in those, in those schools, the competition among students is a little bit higher than it was in African American colleges [HBCUs] at that time.  As one man told me, Lyder [ph.], Professor Lyder from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], told me when I told him about my experience at New York University, he said well, at Sav- at, at Georgia State you are one-eyed man in the kingdom in the blind.  So (laughter), I've never forgotten that praise, that I was a one-eyed man in the kingdom of the blind.  But, and, and, and, and that helped prepare me because I would later on go on--once you get a, a taste in your mouth for, for education, you--it, it pushes you on and on and on, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, what you're saying is that at New York University you had more competition?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  See, you had students who were graduating from all of the so-called Ivy League schools and the New York schools and all of that, and these were the cream of the crop of those schools up there who were going on to graduate school and that sort of thing.  And so the competition was much harder than it was at the, and, and, and, and it was at Georgia State when I was there.  The competition was much harder.  And then I found out that competition among students is what makes you grow.  If, if you get in a, if you get into a classroom situation where you can do better than everybody else with little or no effort, then you will never do, make any more than little or more effort.  But if you have to push for every penny of this thing that you're going to get, you're gonna push.  And when I came back to teach, I always told my students that, that don't judge yourself by your competition.  You do the best that you can at all times.  In other words, you set your own standards.  Don't let other people set your standards for you.  So that New York University experience was good.  And, and, and, and because it was on the graduate level, it was a little different from the undergraduate level, is that where you had time on the undergraduate level to join organizations and mess around a little bit, party a little bit, when you get on the graduate level, you can't do that.  You have to work.  It's just that simple.  And, but, but I've never had any problem with self-discipline.  I've, I was always able to do what I knew I had to do.  A lot of people, even today, can't overcome themselves.  You, sometimes you have to overcome yourself.  What you've got to do, you go on and do it, and it'll work out better for you if you do.
Speaker 1: How did you pay for graduate school?
Speaker 2: Okay, when--believe it or not, I did it all on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had four years of the G.I. Bill.  But because I only used thirty-three months in college that gave me time to do a master's degree in the four years.  So I did all of my education on the G.I. Bill.  And then by the time I got to, after the master's degree, got to, to, to go on further, I was able to get fellowships and scholarships and all that.  So, I have always been able to, to, to get some outside help 'cause it's out there.  And, and, and, and African American students today need to know that if you get something on the ball, there's something out there for you.  But nobody's gonna invest in you if you don- if you don't have any potential.
Story_ID: 505632
Speaker 1: You receive your master's degree [from the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York, New York], and you come back to--
Speaker 2: I came back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sa- to Savannah [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Okay, I, I did my master's degree before I, before I started teaching at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  I did my master's degree; then I went--I came back to Savannah.  I was just out of school one year, but I knew that I needed some more experience, so I went to a little town called Statesboro, Georgia.  And I taught in the high school [William James High School; William James Middle School, Statesboro, Georgia] there for four years, went to Statesboro and taught there until 1955.  I was head of the mathematics and science department there.  And then in, in 1955, because of my NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] activities, I was fired, which was another blessing in disguise because I was really enjoying my work.  I could really see that I was making a difference.  And Denise [Denise Gines], believe it or not, it was a kind of situation where you could see yourself spending the rest of your life helping people, but I got fired.  And because I got fired, then I wrote Dr. Payne [William K. Payne].  I said, "You, you know, you told me after I got out five years I was gonna get a job," uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And, and so I wrote him and told him that my situation at Statesboro, that I didn't have any employment now, and I was calling to find out about that five-year deal.  And he told me, yes, that, that, that, that he knew about my situation there, and he was gonna give me a call.  And that afternoon, after I talked with him, the president [Cornelius V. Troup] of Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] called me and offered me a job in the mathematics department at Fort Valley State.  But since I'd already--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, since I'd already committed to Savannah State, that's why I stayed at Savannah State.
Story_ID: 505653
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about the fact that you, because of your NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] activities, you were fired from William James High School [William James Middle School, Statesboro, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you called--
Speaker 2: President Payne [William K. Payne].
Speaker 1: --President Payne.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so tell me what happens?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you.  Just let me step back a minute and tell you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --why I was fired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I invited Ralph Mark Gilbert.  There, there's a museum down the street that's named for him, Ralph Mark Gilbert Civil Rights Museum [Savannah, Georgia], right down the street there that's named for him.
Speaker 1: Ralph Mar-?
Speaker 2: Ralph Mark Gilbert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was probably the greatest NAACP worker in Georgia.  And had invited him up to speak to my class.  I was senior class advisor.  And he told me ahead of time, he said you, you know, the way I speak, you might get into trouble.  I told well, then let it be, so be it (laughter).  And he came up, and he talked about the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and for African American families to start getting ready because their children were going to go to those white schools, and he pa- particularly said Statesboro High School [Statesboro, Georgia] and all that.  Well, the superintendent was also at that commencement.  And I could look at him and tell that he didn't appreciate what Ralph Mark Gilbert was saying.  And he thanked me as one of the NAACP workers and that sort of thing that I had invited him, him up there, and so they fired me.  It was just--it, it, it wasn't no big deal.  As a matter of fact, Denise [Denise Gines], the letter that the superintendent used to fire me, I used it several times when I was president at Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] 'cause it was just so smooth.  I had just never seen a letter written quite that (laughter), quite that way.  They'd simply reorganized the school, and they organized me out of position.  So, after I got fired, I, I called and, and, and put in my application to President Payne.  And I, I told him that, that, you know, that I'd left Statesboro [Georgia] under mysterious conditions.  I was fired.  It's the way he knew it.  He said, "Well, Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," said, "I know," said, "this news gets out," and said, "Well, I'm, I'm proud of you."  And I'd, I'd been in his office all that morning talking to him.  And about one o'clock that day when I got home, C.V. Troup, Cornelius V. Troup, who was president of Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], had also learned that I had been fired, and he called me at home.  And see, he wanted me to come to Fort Valley State to join his, his mathematics department too, but I'd already committed to Savannah State.  So that's how I ended up at Savannah State rather than at Fort Valley State.  And I became an instructor of mathematics and alumni secretary at Savannah State when that happened.
Story_ID: 505654
Speaker 1: And so you were faculty at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] for how long?
Speaker 2: I s- as a matter of fact, I stayed at Savannah State from the time I joined the faculty until the time I retired.  I changed positions, occupied different positions, but I, I remained a, a constant part of the faculty.  Although when I went to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] on my doctorate, I'd also joined that graduate faculty as a teaching fellow.  But my, my home base was Savannah State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But in 1965 you also became the athletic director, is that right, at St. Pius (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pius X High School [St. Pius X High School, Savannah, Georgia], yeah.  That was a, that was the, that was, that was a black high school.  It was Catholic high school.  Back in the '50s [1950s], the bishop of, of Savannah [Roman Catholic Diocese of Savannah]--because the fact that he couldn't allow students to go to the two white high schools, he started a black high school, St. Pius X.  And he had the Franciscan Sisters and S.M.A. Fathers [Society of African Missions] to operate it for him.  But because of funding and because of the fact that when Georgia got to the point where they had that--allowed blacks to go into these other schools, Pius X closed because it was a small school, and the girls went to St. Vincent's [St. Vincent's Academy, Savannah, Georgia], and the boys went to B.C. [Benedictine Military School, Savannah, Georgia].  But I was athletic director there to help them out with their athletics and that sort of thing because they needed all the help they could get because money was scarce.  People didn't have money to pay the tuition in high school and that sort of thing, so we had to help them as much as we could.  So I was an unpaid--I wasn't even a dollar a year faculty member.  I just (laughter), I just went on and joined them and, and gave them as much time as I could.
Story_ID: 505655
Speaker 1: So what happens then?  You're working at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and--
Speaker 2: Pius [St. Pius X High School, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: --you go to--no, I'm saying you, you're a fa- on faculty at Savannah State--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and this is '55 [1955].  And then what happened to--how do you go on to get your post-grad?
Speaker 2: Okay, after I, after, after I went to Savannah State College [sic. Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], at the end, after I'd been at Savannah State College about five years, the Russians put Sputnik [Sputnik 1] in the air.  And then United States of America--President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] decides that they, they gonna have to put some money in science and mathematics in order to, to, to, in, in, in, in, in order to, to catch up with the Russians.  And so the National Science Foundation started giving scholarships and all of that.  And so I got two National Science Foundation scholarships to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] for the summers of, of '61 [1961] and '62 [1962].  And so, so I was able to get that then, and in '62 [1962], I, I applied.  And I, I always laugh at it because I thought it was a joke.  I said well, I'm gonna apply to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Ain't no way in the world I'm gonna get in there.  And I applied at Harvard University, and two weeks after I sent in the application, I got a letter from Harvard University offering me a full-year National Science Foundation fellowship.  They said that I would study--they would--but I've forgotten what the amount of money was, but it was enough for me to go to Boston [Massachusetts] and take my family.  It was enough money, and all I had to do was just study.  And so I went to, to, to, to, to Harvard.  And I studied at Harvard, and I, I was doing quite well.  And one day there was a young lady, who was a Quaker, asked me had I ever seen Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  She said, you know, that's the largest Catholic school, Catholic university, in this area.  So I told her no.  She said, "You ought to ride over there one day and see this place."  So it was one--it was, was on April 19th of 1963; I shall never forget.  I rode over there just to see what this school looked like.  And that's Patriots' Day in Massachusetts so no, they don't have school.  So I was walking through the hall of Boston College on this April 19th, 1963, and there was a priest in there.  It turns out that he was the dean of the, of the, of the university.  His name was Charles F. Donovan.  And so he asked me who I was, and I told him.  And I told him I was graduate student at Harvard at the time and what I was studying, and, but I was on leave from Savannah State College to study at Harvard.  And out of a clear blue sky he said, "Well, you're Catholic, say how would you like to come to Boston College?"  So I told him, I said, "Well, the only way I could go to Boston College, I'd have to have a fellowship or something."  He said, "Well, I'll see what I can do.  If you want to come, put in an application," and I did.  And I came back to Savannah State in '63 [1963], and I took--put in an application.  And about two weeks after I put in the application, I got a letter from Boston College offering me not only a fellowship but a teaching, a teaching fellowship where I would be teaching in the graduate school, and I could continue my work for the, for the doctorate.  And that fellowship also paid me enough money where I could keep my family in Boston.
Story_ID: 505656
Speaker 1: I stayed there two years teaching.  The beautiful thing about it is that I was teaching on the faculty with the people who were teaching me.  So they knew who I was, and I was a member of the faculty.  And, and, and so I did exceptionally well at Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  They went on later on to name me as one of their distinguished alumni and so on and so forth, and I got a Ph.D. with distinction.  It was more than just--they said well, we gotta do more than just give you a Ph.D.  We'll just give it to you with distinction.  And so I was one of those who got a Ph.D. with distinction from Boston College.  And they persuaded me to stay that summer after I graduated.  Then I be, I began to think that, what am I doing up here?  These kids really don't need me as much as they do back--I was trying to decide whether to, to, to come back to Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] or stay at Boston, at Boston College.  And they did everything they could to persuade me to stay.  Number one, there were very, very few black faculty members on their faculty, and I was one of their own.  They knew what I, what I had.  They knew what I could do.  And they just say well, you need to stay here.  I say you can do so much good here.  But I thought about it, and I say, you know, all these country kids coming in to Savannah State College, and they're gonna need somebody who's got some background, who can tell them what, what is this out here.  Then I decided; I told them I'd--they were heartbroken.  I told them I had to go back to Savannah, said I would go back to Savannah State.  And, and, and, and that was a funny thing too because when I went back to Savannah State, I stayed on the faculty a couple of years.  And the president at that time, whose name was Howard Jordan [Howard Jordan, Jr.]--the Board of Regents was under pressure to integrate their office.  And so they created a vice chancellor position in Atlanta [Georgia].  And they decided that he was the African American that they were going to use in that position.  And so they moved him to Atlanta, and they moved him to Atlanta.  The chancellor asked him to, to, to--since I was handling the self-study for Savannah State College, I, I asked him what did they think if, if they named me his replacement.  And he said yes, that, that he thought it would work out, so that's how I became president of Savannah State College.  So it's just been (laughter)--Denise [Denise Gines], I've just been lucky.  I've been lucky all the way up life.  So that's how I became president of Savannah State College.
Story_ID: 505657
Speaker 1: Let's step back before you become president (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Because '63 [1963] is a year that so many things happened.  And I mean, this is the year that the March on Washington happens, and Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is assassinated.  What are your thoughts on those things?  I mean you were in Boston [Massachusetts]. Did any of those things have--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --were on your mind?
Speaker 2: --particularly the, the Kennedy assassination.  I was like a lot of people, and I guess I still am, just didn't see how one person, Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald], could assassinate the president of the United States.  And I was in, I was in B- I was in Boston when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] made his famous speech.  As a matter of fact, I was looking at it on, on TV.  And I had--see, I knew Martin Luther King because we were both, we were fraternity brothers [in Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and all of that.  And, and I had talked with him several times and that sort of thing.  And I thought it was wonderful the way he did it, and of course, you know, what would eventually happen to him later on, was that he would, would become assassinated, he would get assassinated.  But then President Kennedy, after I came back to (unclear) just before I went to Boston in '62 [1962], President Kennedy was assassinated.  And Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] became embroiled in sit-ins and pushed to integrate lunch counters and things in Savannah [Georgia] right along that same time.  And I was caught up in that because I was advisor to the student protestors on, on, on campus.  So I was pretty much--I've, I've always been pretty much embroiled in the situation of trying to, to, to, to bring about equality and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  So when you come back in '63 [1963] and you're the advisor, I mean you're saying that--
Speaker 2: I came back in, in fall of '63 [1963]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was advisor to the student protestors.
Speaker 1: So what other things happened with the students as far as the protesting c-, you know, the civil rights that were going on, on campus?
Speaker 2: Well, the students were, at this time, were protesting.  And our president, President Payne [William K. Payne], got embroiled in it, and he suffered a med- massive stroke as a result, and he died.  That was just before I got back.  And so when I came back there was an acting president, but I knew the acting president, Timothy C. Meyers, was acting president for maybe three or four months.  And then that's when Howard Jordan [Howard Jordan, Jr.], who was dean, a dean up at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] at the time, was named president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he came in, and, and, and that's how, that's how we, that's how we got him as president.  He replaced President Payne--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 505658
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what happens when you become president [of Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Well, when I became president--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, wait.  Let me, let me stop right here because we talked about, or you talked about your family.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1950.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, I got married in 1950.  I met my wife on campus--she was a student--and I must say, probably was the best thing that ever happened because she stuck with me.  We, we went through thick and thin together.  You know, like, like, like some people would have been demanding that you can't go to school.  You've got to stay and work and give me some of the things that I want.  My wife was not that way.  She always pushed me ahead.  She was also a teacher.  But we being our family in 1954 with our first child, and so she, she pushed me.  She said you're gonna have to get ahead so we can have good provisions for the family.  And so she was always a pusher in this thing, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Marilyn, M-A-R-I-L-Y-N [Marilyn Striggles Jackson], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you went to Boston [Massachusetts], it was you, you and your wife and your son?
Speaker 2: Okay, when I went to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], I had, it was my wife; my oldest boy, Prince III [Prince Jackson, III]; then there was my next oldest boy, Rodney, Rodney Mark [Rodney Jackson], when we, when we went there.  And my daughter, Julie [Julia Jackson Chriss], was born while I was a graduate student at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  My j- my daughter Julie was born at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, I just wanted to get your--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) your family in there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 505659
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell me about what takes place when you become president.
Speaker 2: Well, everybody was, was very jubilated.  I was very popular on campus.  All the students knew me.  All the faculty members knew me.  I was always very approachable, and, and, and, and, and I wasn't a cutthroat.  And so ever-, everybody was, as far as we know, everybody was kind of jubilant when I became president.  And then that's when we began the big push at Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] to do some things that I knew the Board of Regents had done.  I was chairman of the self-study, so I knew what Savannah State College lacked and what it needed in order to take the next step.  For example, when I became president there were just 33 percent of the faculty members on campus who held, earned doctorates.  And so my first step was to, to, to, to, to work with the faculty, and in three years' time, I brought that 33 percent to 72 percent.  As a matter of fact, there was at one time when we had a high percentage of doctorates at Savannah State College than University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] had on their faculty because I went on a hiring spree, and I went out and, and hired.  One of the, one of the problems that, that, that, that, that, that, that I had to avoid was the fact that there were not that many African Americans who had earned doctorates.  And the ones who had earned doctorates were already settled at other colleges.  And so that's when I made the big integration of faculty at Savannah State College because what I was looking for, if you had it, I didn't care whether you were white, blue, green, or yellow, if you had it and you would come to work for me, then we did.  So we, we, we, we integrated the thing.  And then I decide that there were a lot of faculty members there who had potential but who had never had the means to go.  And so what I did, I was able to, I had a, a, a, a officer of development--Robert Best [ph.] was his name--that I talked to after the university system said that I could not send people back school to get doctorates, that they had to work.  So, I got with Robert Best, and I told him to go out and get me some grants.  He got me $3 million worth of grants.  He got $3 million, and I sent thirty-eight, thirty-eight faculty members--and they weren't all black; there were whites as well--back to school to get doctorates.  And so I made thirty-eight doctorates in four years; thirty-eight faculty member doctorates in four years.  The way I did it was that I got to the department head and said that I can use half of their pay, and I'll let you use the other half to hire part-time help.  And then I will give the other half for my grants so that when they go to school--I didn't send any faculty member back to school who had to work.  I sent them to school to go and study.  And then that way, they could go and spend the two or three years that they needed to, and get the doctorate, and come back.  So we were able to make thirty-eight doctorates in that group.  So that, that was, that was a big thing.
Story_ID: 505660
Speaker 1: And then I found out that Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia] beca- Clark College in Atlanta was setting up a, a radio station on their campus.  Then I did some research, and I found out that Clark College was, had been only the fourth African American school [HBCU] that had its own radio station.  And so I came back, and I talked to the chancellor about setting up our radio station.  And he said, "Well, you don't have the money, and we can't give you the money for that."  He said, "You can set it up, if you can find the money."  Well, providence is a funny thing.  I was on a program at B.C. [Benedictine Military School, Savannah, Georgia] to receive, they call it the Benedictine Gold Medal of Excellence.  The bishop was going to receive--one of the bishop of Diocese of Savannah [Roman Catholic Diocese of Savannah] was also receiving one.  And then there was another white gentleman who owned Savannah Marina [Thunderbolt Marina Inc., Savannah, Georgia], whose name was William Honey [William E. Honey].  He was also receiving--there were three of us who were gonna receive the Benedictine Gold Medal of Excellence.  I sat next to him, Denise [Denise Gines], and you're gonna laugh when I tell you this.  I found out he was a Lutheran.  And I said to myself, now when a Catholic school is giving a Lutheran the highest honor, there can only be one reason for it.  He must have given them a whole lot of money or had done something good for them 'cause, you know, Martin Luther was the thing that, that split us.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I talked to him, and I told him about this radio station that I wanted and all, and I just couldn't get the money, and that I was trying to get the money.  He didn't say a word, he didn't, he didn't, he didn't.  He just told me, he wished me luck and that sort of thing.  This was on a Saturday night.  And so the three of us, the bishop of the Diocese of Savannah, myself, and Mr. Hon- Honey, we all got Medal of Excellence.  And we went to the receptions, and people pat us on the back and all of that.  Well, when I went to my office on that Monday, about 10:30 that morning, somebody told me that somebody was riding up in front of the building in a raggedy 1967 Lincoln Continental.  And they were getting ready to give him a ticket 'cause he was in a yellow line area.  And I went down there, and I saw it was Mr. Honey.  And I told the chief, my chief of police, if he put a ticket on that car, I would fire him on the spot (laughter).  Well, I rushed back to my office 'cause I didn't want Mr. Honey to see me.  Mr. Honey came in, and he gave my secretary an envelope.  He said, "Give this to Dr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," and he left out.  He didn't wait.  He say, "Give this to Dr. Jackson for me," and he left out.  And so she brought the envelope into me, and I opened the envelope, and it was $10,000.  It was--I told him I was gonna need about $10,000 startup money.  That man had written over the weekend a check for $10,000.  He brought it to me.  He--when I got to the front to thank him, he had already gone off in that raggedy 1967 (laughter) Lincoln, this man with all this money.  Then later on, he (unclear) came back when I did finally get him to come back.  He came back to me and offered to build--we had a creek behind the college [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  He wanted to build a dock.  He wanted to--he was gonna chain his dredges in there to dredge out the, the creek and all that so that we could start a marine biology program and all that.  But, so I built that radio station.  At first I had called--asked for the call letters WSSC, but that was already taken.  And then I said I have to honor this man somewhere.  They didn't--at that time the State of Georgia would not let you name anything for anybody living.  So I went to the telephone book, and I looked at the telephone book, and I found all the last names in there that had the most.  And it was WHC and J, and so I named our radio station WHCJ [WHCJ Radio, Savannah, Georgia] but mostly the H because of Honey.  I had to get him in there somewhere.  And the reason why it's named WHCJ because those call letters had the most entry in the Savannah [Georgia] phone directory.  And so we named it WHCJ, and so we became the fifth radio station on an African American campus.
Story_ID: 505661
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I had already est- I had already established a Naval ROTC [Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps] unit.  During the Vietnam War in the early s- '70s [1970s], particularly at the beginning of the '70s [1970s] when I became president, schools were raising hell about those [U.S.] military units being on their campus.  Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] was getting ready to throw theirs off 'cause they didn't want anything to do with the military.  So the [U.S.] Navy sent a captain there, a white captain by a name of Haushahn [ph.].  And he said that he--they wanted to set up some Naval ROTC programs on African American campuses [HBCUs], and, and, and Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], since we were located right on the ocean, that he felt this would be ideal.  Well, there was only one other at the time, and that was at Prairie View in Texas [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  We knew that Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] was also trying to, to establish a unit, so I told him, "Okay, we, we'll let you establish a unit here."  He said, "Well, good, said we got one that we're gonna take from Yale.  We're gonna move it here."  So my unit has the, the franchise that Yale once had, and we moved it.  Florida A&M found out that we were about to, to get ours, and they established theirs one day before we did, so our unit is the third (laughter) unit on a black campus, but only by one day.  But we've had--it's, it's, it's, it's probably the number one thing that I did as president of Savannah State College.  Major General Walter Gaskins [Walter E. Gaskin], who incidentally at the end of this month will, will go to Iraq and, and take command of all the Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] units.  Every Marine in Iraq, starting in February, will be under his command.  He is a graduate of that program.  As a matter of fact, I remember pinning his second lieutenant bars on him.  And he was back here in October to, to give the Freedom Fund Dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner] and speak at the Freedom Fund Dinner.  And he, he, he, he reminded everybody that back in '74 [1974], '75 [1975], when he got commissioned, that I had to pin these bars on him.  And here he was today, he had two stars, two stars on his shirt--shoulder.  He is a major general, the highest ranking African American at this moment in, in the United States Navy and will be the first one to ever take a battalion under his full command in, in, into, into battle.  He will be the first African American history of the Marine Corps who will ever take a battalion into, in, in, in, in, into, to battle, and that's gonna occur at the end of this month.  So, watch for the name Walter Gaskin, and remember that he is a graduate of Savannah State and under that Naval ROTC unit that I, that I set up.  So, every time when I look at that, and I look at all of the number of high-ranking officers, there are a lot of captains or colonels and that sort of thing from that unit now that's getting ready to move into, to general, into the general ranks.  We got--there's a young lady who might become our first admiral.  There's a young man who also might become our first admiral, but we know that both of them eventually will become admirals in the Navy.  And we have a, a young lady who is a Savannahian.  She's a full bird colonel.  Her next step is gonna be brigadier general.  They all came out of that unit.  So, when you look back on things of that sort, it makes you feel good when you see kids that, you know, if you hadn't been there at the time, you don't know where they would be or what they would be doing now.  And they let you know.  They, they--for one thing about it, if you help people, and they, they do, they kind of let you know.  So, so that's a real rewarding thing for me as my president.  I, I have to say, as president of Savannah State College, that probably was the crowning glory.  I did a lot of other things.  I built that round library [Asa H. Gordon Library].  It's the only round brown la- ro- round library in the East.  And I had to persuade the Board of Regents to, to, to, to, to give that to us because it ran more money.
Story_ID: 505691
Speaker 1: I was asking about the school systems and operating in a dual system, you know, of racially segregated colleges--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and universities with the Title VI of the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  Can you talk to that?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] was rendered in 1954.  And what we call Brown II, which was a second form of Brown, was in 1955, in the [U.S.] Supreme Court when, when there was a question as to whether the '54 [1954] decision covered just secondary schools.  They didn't cover colleges, so Brown II in '55 [1955] clarified that by saying that it covered it all.  So technically, after 1950--from 1955 on, all these colleges and universities, which operated segregated schools, were in violation.  They couldn't say that they didn't know because the case had already been decided.  So the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Jack Greenberg, and those came in here in the early '60s [1960s] to, to, to desegregate the schools.  And of course, Savannah-Chatham public schools [Savannah-Chatham County Public School System] said that their schools were not segregated, that they were integrated, and that because students could go anywhere they wanted to and so and so forth, but everybody knew that wasn't true.  So they came in here and they sued the school board.  They had--got a family this, the, the, the, the, the Stell family, L. Scott Stell family, one of his sons, on behalf of one of his sons, to sue the school for operating a segregated school system.  So NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] came in to, to--went into federal court here in Savannah [Georgia] to, to, to get the judge to tell them that they couldn't operate the school system the way it was.  But they--Jack Greenberg and those wanted to make sure that they had an airtight case.  Well, I had just gotten out of Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  This was in 1964.  I had just gotten out of Boston College around 1966, I had just gotten out of Boston College at the time, and I was mathematics teacher [at Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  And so Jack Greenberg and an attorney whose name is Bobby Hill [Robert Lee Hill]--he's deceased now.  Bobby Hill was the lead attorney in Savannah.  So they appointed me the statistician to, to dig up all the mathematics and to prove mathematically that we had a desegre- we had a segregated school system.  And so what I did, I just took a, a pad and I went into every single school and I counted every single class.  Then I went down to the board of education [Board of Public Education for the City of Savannah and County of Chatham], and I looked at the personnel file of the teachers, and I counted the black teachers, where they were teaching, the white teachers, where they were teaching.  And I put together a report for the court.  And I, I shall never forget it.  We went to court, and NAACP Legal Defense Fund put me on the stand, and I presented my findings to the judge, Judge Alexander Lawrence [Alexander Atkinson Lawrence, Jr.].  And Denise [Denise Gines], I shall never forget Judge Alexander Lawrence said to the school board, said, "Well, you heard from Dr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," I was Dr. Jackson by this time.  He said, "And his findings," said, "do you challenge it?"  And the attorney said, "No, Judge," said, "we ain't gonna challenge him," (laughter).  But you know, I was disappointed because I was wish- I was hoping that they would 'cause I was gonna tear them to pieces had they done so, but they didn't.  And so on the basis of, of that presentation, the judge told--rendered a decision that they were operating a segregated school system, and they had to, to integrate it.
Story_ID: 505692
Speaker 1: It didn't happen quite that easy because it dragged on and on and on and on.  And then later on, right after I became president [of Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], I went on the school board [Board of Public Education for the City of Savannah and County of Chatham].  I was vice president of the school board, and we went to court.  And, and, and the judge told us we had to draw up a plan of desegregation, to desegregate the school system [Savannah-Chatham County Public School System].  This was in 1971.  And I, I sat down with another black school board member--there were only two of us--Esther Garrison [Esther F. Garrison], along with three other white school board members: Ann Stewart [ph.], there was Ann Stewart; there was Neil Satterfield [ph.]; and Bob Stroger [ph.].  We met at her house on a Saturday night.  We were going to court that, that Monday.  And we set down there, and we drew up a plan.  We, we drew up a plan I was orchestrating the (unclear).  And the plan was, I said the population in Chatham County [Georgia] was 60 percent white and 40 percent black.  Let's draw up a plan where every school would be 60 percent white and 40 percent black, and we would provide the busing so that every school would be 60/40.  They named it the 60/40 plan and the judge accepted it.  And so for the first two or three years afterwards, Chatham County operated on 60/40 plan.  People didn't like it.  As a matter of fact, I recall a couple of times at the after school board meeting they had to give me police protection to take me home because--oh yeah, it was just that hot.  People didn't want their kids to go to those black schools, and I could understand that.  And on the other hand, some of them black people didn't want their kid to go to those white schools either, you know.  You know, it's a funny thing, this discrimination works both ways.  A lot of people think when you say discrimination you're talking about white on black, but not necessarily.  'Cause I can tell you now, as president of this NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] branch, there are a lot of black racists out there, and their just as rabid as some of those white ones out there. And you just have to let them know that when we talk about racism, we didn't say white racism or black racism.  We're just talking about racism, and we have to, we have to do it right.  So that's how we got--and they whittled away at it, and they whittled away at it.  Of course, I had to leave the school board because I became president of a college and took up too much of my time.  And finally about oh, roughly ten years ago the school board went to court and, and, and, and told the judge that they thought that the, the, the, the school system was now segregate- desegregated.  And so the judge released the school board from that order, but that was a bad move to make.  As we told the school board members, that everybody knew that we still had a segregated school system.  And if you released it, we'd already been told by NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] that to get it s- reinstated we'd have to go through everything all over again, and that wasn't gonna hardly happen.  So, but for a while we, we had it totally where we wanted it.
Story_ID: 505693
Speaker 1: This helped create the school of business and school of education at Armstrong [Armstrong State College; Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the university system was under pressure too because you had a white college and a black college in the same town.  They weren't supposed to operate separate colleges, so we, we, we agreed to ex- exchange program that any student on any campus could take any course with the same title and everything on the other campus without having--you can register at your home school, but you can take the classes over there, and we would provide bus transportation for it, which we did.  And then after a while, somebody went to court and said, no, that wasn't gonna work.  So in order to make it work, the chancellor said that he would have to initiate a swapper program.  Well, Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] was the largest black teacher education program in the state.  We put out more black teachers than any school in the State of Georgia.  Armstrong had a large mostly white business school.  And so when it came up for the swap, they asked me what we're gonna do.  I told them, no, I didn't think that was right, that I didn't think that we should give up our school of education--'cause we had a business school for Armstrong.  And so, so chancellor he was sorry, but they had to do so; then that's what they did, so they swapped it.  They put business at Savannah State.  If you--in other words, if you wanted to get a degree in business, whether you were white, black, green, or yellow, you had to go to Savannah State.  If you wanted to get a teacher education degree, you had to go to Armstrong.  And so that's how, that's how we lost our teacher education program.  And, and it affect the amount of black teachers going into the classroom too.
Story_ID: 505694
Speaker 1: We were talking on the last tape about the round library [Asa H. Gordon Library], that was something that you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay; interesting story?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when Billy Bergen [William Bergen] came to me one Monday morning and showed me that round library, we'd already had approval for library, but it was the traditional rectangular library.  And at that time, I think they had appropriated something at $2 million, but which was a fairly substantial amount back in the '70s [1970s].  The lou- round library was gonna take about at least a million to $2 million more because of the fact that it was round and not rectangular.  And so Billy Bergen sold me on the fact that, that Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] should have that round library.  He just say he just believed that they ought to have it.  So I went to the chancellor, and I told the chancellor we wanted that round library.  He said, "Well, Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.], you know, they're not gonna approve that because of the fact that it's gonna cost more to appropriate the money."  And I told the chancellor that I was gonna tell 'em we wanted that round library because the Board of Regents needed to do something for blacks that they had not done before, that this would be an opportunity for the board to show that they really were gonna make black edu- higher education just as strong as any other higher education.  So he took it to them, and I met with the superintendent of plan operations to, to talk about it.  And what I did, I was a mathematician, so I told him--I didn't tell him the, the, the, the, the black part.  I told him the reason I wanted that round library was because you could get the greatest area for the least perimeter in a circle than you could if you were in a rectangle.  And then I took out my pencil and paper and my pad.  And he, he was a mathematician; he was engineer, and so I just showed him through calculus that if you want the maximum area for the least perimeter, you have to go a circle and not anything else, and he laughed (laughter).  He said, "Well, Prince, you win," (laughter).  So, they approved that lou- round library.  That's how we got it (laughter).  That's how we got it, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 505695
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your involvement with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: I had always been involved with the NAACP.  I met, met Westley Law [W.W. Law], who is Mr. NAACP in Savannah [Georgia].  He is deceased now.  But he is a protege of Ralph Mark Gilbert.  Ralph Mark Gilbert raised and trained Westley Law to succeed him as president of Savannah branch.  Westley Law was very sincere, very organized.  And, and Westley Law led Savannah NAACP through all of the sit-ins and all of that.  In the meantime, I had always been very closely associated with him, such as proving things like printouts and that sort of thing because I work, working at a, at, at, on a college campus.  And let me say this for President Payne [William K. Payne] and all the other presidents of Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]: even though they would have been reprimanded by the Board of Regents had they known we were providing all this for an NAACP, since I was the one doing it, they pretend that they didn't know.  We all, if we just had an understanding, you just stay out of it.  As President Payne used to tell me, he said, "Well, you go on and do it."  He said, "And if you get caught, I'm the president, and I'll get you out of it, but if, if I get caught, I can't get myself out of it."  So, I'm more or less fronted.  And so we provided all of the--during the sit-ins when they had handouts and handbills, we got all that right off campus.  I did it all on campus and would get it to Westley.  And when I became president, we used to--Westley and I would come out to campus.  For example, if they had a, a meeting on Sunday, we would come onto campus about two or three o'clock in the morning, and we would go to the Xerox machine, and we would print up everything we know.  Well, Denise [Denise Gines], somebody told.  You know, naturally somebody told.  Chancellor called me one Monday morning and said, "Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," said, said, said, "I can't tell you where I got this information from, but I know that you would want who provided the NAACP meeting with all that state paper and printing."  That's what he said.  He said, "And my advice to you is, is that change the hours when you do that," (laughter).  This, the chancellor telling me, he said change the hours when you, when, when, when, when, when you go out there to get this thing done.  That was the reprimand he gave me.  He just said change the hours so that nobody would know (laughter) what I was doing.  But I stayed with it.  As I told you before, when I got fired in Statesboro [from William James High School; William James Middle School, Statesboro, Georgia] it was because of my NAACP activities.  I was getting members and that sort of thing.  When I got to the campus to take a job, State of Georgia had what they call a security form.  They say you had to list every organization that you belong to.  Actually what they were doing, they put up this fake form so they would find out who were NAACP members.  And I shall never forget when I put NAACP on mine, there was a professor standing over my shoulder.  And he said, "Man," said, "Don't put that, see.  If you put that, they ain't gonna hire you."  I said, "Well, I can't deny who I am," and I put it, so they never touched me.  I never denied that I was with the NAACP, and so I worked with them.  As a matter of fact, I was on the board [Board of Public Education for the City of Savannah and County of Chatham], the executive committee of NAACP.  When I was president, I sat on the board and all that and helped plan.  And when I was vice president of the board of education, I was on the executive committee and helped plan.  And so after Westley died, Curtis Cooper [Curtis V. Cooper], who is another good man, took over.  And, and, and he handled it very well; then Curtis died.  And then a classmate of mine [at Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], William B. Jackson, Bill Jackson, who graduated--who and I--he and I graduated together, and he's gonna be one of those names that I'm gonna give you too.  I want you to interview him.  William Jackson took over, but William, Bill, took sick after about a year.  But Bill was the one, after I retired from Savannah State College, he said, "Well, boy," say, "I ain't gonna let you sit down and, and do nothing," said, "I want you to come back on this executive committee," so I did, for Bill.  I had no idea that Bill was gonna get sick so quick.  Then Bill got sick, and then that was almost six years ago, so I took over, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as, as president.
Story_ID: 505696
Speaker 1: Well, going back to, to the college we had, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Shirley James.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she talks about a challenge and at a speech that she heard you--that inspired her.  And it helped for I guess the student peer counselor.
Speaker 2: Yes, student peer--
Speaker 1: Yeah- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) counselor and the counseling, the counseling center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Shirley--right after I became president, Shirley's husband [HistoryMaker Robert James] became president of Carver State Bank [Savannah, Georgia].  And that's where, that's where I met Shirley and her husband.  The man who brought him here, John W. McLaughlin [ph.], had me at a lunch with them where he introduced them to me as president of a college and all that.  And I found out that she, too, had gone to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and, and she had a counseling background.  And I'd, so, I told her that I wanted her on my faculty, which I did.  And I figured this girl going to Harvard; she's got a whole lot involved.  So we were trying to set up counseling and all that, and I gave a challenge that we needed to get a counseling center.  And I didn't give her a chance to, to, to really think about it.  I wrote a letter.  As a matter of fact, she reminded me that she still has a copy of that letter.  And I asked her--I sent her--I don't remember whether it was Alabama or Tennessee--to some meeting where they were setting up counseling centers.  I said you go up there and you bring us (unclear) one back here, and she set it up at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  As a matter of fact, that counseling center at Savannah State College today is the one she set up that I sent her to, to Alabama to get.  So, and she, she took the challenge, and she came back and she produced; she really produced, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 505697
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Hanes Walton [Hanes Walton, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Hanes Walton, who was, was the, what they call the Callaway Professor [Fuller E. Callaway Professor].  Callaway Gardens [Pine Mountain, Georgia]--I don't know whether you heard of Callaway Gardens, but it's up in the northeastern section of Georgia near LaGrange [Georgia]--gave the university system something like $10 million in a grant, where they wanted university system to hire people who could take their own institutions to the next level.  And what they were going to do, the, the salary structure was that whatever the salary of that person was, the grant would pay--would, would augment that 50 percent.  I shall never--for example, if, if, if, if a guy was making $50,000, he would make an additional $25,000 that didn't come from the state, but it came from the grant.  When they inaugurated the program, Howard Jordan [Howard Jordan, Jr.] was president, and he had a Callaway Professor who did not make it.  As a matter of fact, when I became president I had to let this Callaway Professor go.  So, in the meantime, Hanes Walton, who was a graduate of--he'd already graduated from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and he had gone on to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And he had studied under the appropriate people.  He had a Ph.D. from Howard.  And he was very much into black higher education and black politics.  And so, but he was just assistant professor.  So I wanted him to be my Callaway Professor, and so I submitted his name.  So the chancellor told me, he said, "Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," said, "Only full professors are eligible."  And he said, "The only way Hanes Callaway--could become Callaway Professor, he would have to be a full professor."  So I said, "Well, thank you."  I said well, what I'll do, I'll just wait until he gets to the professorship.  So Hanes had about two more years before I could promote him to professor, so I didn't use a Callaway Professor.  I just disregarded the money for two years.  And when Hanes Walton became professor, I promoted him to professor and gave him the Callaway professorship.  And it was one of the best things I ever did.  Hanes Walton was a prolific writer.  Hanes Walton must have about fifteen or sixteen books in black politics that's written--he's a University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] now.  But Hanes Walton became my Callaway Professor.  And I gave him almost a credit card.  I say, "You go and you put the name of Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] everywhere you can."  And he would go from meetings to meetings.  And a matter of fact, my sister [Hester Jackson], who did her master's degree at, at Howard University, she came out of the Army [U.S. Army Nurse Corps].  She retired as a colonel.  And she went back to school to get a master's degree where she could work in the, in the District of Columbia system.  And she was gonna do her master's in political science.  And she went to the, to the department, and professor asked her who she was, and she said--and she was--and she said and, and, "My brother is Savannah State, is president of Savannah State College."  And professor said, "Yes," say, "that's where Hanes Walton work," (laughter).  He didn't know me, but he knew Hanes Walton.  That's exactly what I wanted to hear, that Hanes Walton had spread our name.  And every place where you went, everybody wanted to know about Savannah State because Hanes Walton had been there.  So Hanes Walton was a very good appointment of mine, very, very good.  But we gave up the Callaway Professor money for two years in order for him to become eligible for it.  Because if I'd hired somebody else, the chances are, since these were outstanding people, he would not have been the one.  And Hanes Walton helped us in many ways.  Hanes Walton almost got us a black collection at Savannah State College.  We were trying to buy a black collection for $250,000 out--from--I can't think of the man's name who was New York [New York].  It turns out now that some other school bought the collection from (unclear) because the Board of Regents wouldn't give us the money.  But Hanes Walton was able to help me in so many other ways because he had so many contacts.  Be he had--he could--I gave him the right to take off and go when he had to go, and he did.  He, he, he, he did a lot of traveling.  We spent a lot of money and, and paid for him.  A lot of times when he went to consult at a school, they would pay for him.  But when, when they didn't, we would pay him, and we would send him different places and all that 'cause we wanted the name--Hanes Walton was a good representative for the college, and we wanted the name of the college to be known, and so we, we invested money in him.  And he was the most prolific--turns out that he was the most prolific Callaway pres- Professor in the whole thirty-four unit system, university system.  So he, he paid off royally for me.
Speaker 1: He dedicated a whole book to you.
Speaker 2: He did.  He did (laughter).  He did, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: 'Invisible Politics' [Hanes Walton], right?
Speaker 2: 'Invisible Politics' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Politics.'
Speaker 2: And in that book he said that he, he, he dedicated it because here was a black college president who knew black higher education, where it belonged, and what to do and so on, so forth, uh-huh, he did.
Story_ID: 505698
Speaker 1: You were talking about salaries, how the salary worked for the Callaway Professor [Fuller E. Callaway Professor], but there was something else that you did when you became president, was to make sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when, when I became president, I found out that the, the--see, the state audit--auditor puts out a report every year where it gives the salary of everybody who draws money in Georgia.  If the state pays it, it's in that book.  And I went and got the state auditor, and I, I looked up Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]; I looked up Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]; and I looked at Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia].  And I found out that Savannah State, Albany State, and Fort Valley State were something like five or six hundred dollars a year less for comparable ranks than the other colleges.  And I, I told the chancellor I didn't think it was right.  If a man got a Ph.D., why should he make less for working at Savannah State than if he work over there?  So the chancellor said, "Well, there's nothing we can do about that."  He said, "We give you so much money, and you appropriate it, and you've got to fill those positions."  So what I did, Denise [Denise Gines], is that, in order to bring my salaries up, I kept some positions vacant.  And I took the money, and I add the money onto active fac- faculty salaries until I got it to the point where my average salary was $400 a year--my average salary was $400 dollars a year more than the white institutions.  Then the white institutions got mad and wanted to know, particularly Armstrong [Armstrong State College; Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia], wanted to know how I was able to pay my faculty members more.  So university system came up with a method where they say the average pay for a given rank had to be the same throughout the four-year colleges.  That was our--that, that we were the ones who, who made them do that.
Speaker 1: Do that.
Speaker 2: Another thing we did in order to, to, to, to give money for scholarships, sometimes give faculty members at the end of the year a little more money, add on to their salaries and all of that.  I found out that, on my budget, that I could draw down the money as I saw fit.  And what I did, Denise, is that the beginning of every academic year I drew down a million dollars, took it to the Carver State Bank [Savannah, Georgia], and brought C- bought CDs [certificate of deposits] with it.  And at the end of the year, those CDs had raised several, several thousand dollars.  And what I did, I took the interest off the CDs, and I just spread it among the people.  So somebody told the state we were doing that, so the state passed a law that if you make interest on state money, the interest belongs to the state.  That was f- because of us.  So I had to stop doing that (laughter).  So I had to stop doing that.  But that was one way that I could give faculty members as well as students, provide extra things for students.  Because if, if you want students to do well, you've got to give them some rewards.  So, so you set up things for them.  So we used to get our money that way too.
Story_ID: 505699
Speaker 1: So in 1992, you become president of the NAA- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen--yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --NAA--
Speaker 2: --in 1992, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --CP, and you, and you're still the president--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  So tell me what else goes on during this period.
Speaker 2: You mean since--in 1992?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, now, I, I, I'd already left the presidency in 19- now I was a professor of Savannah State in 1992.  I was a professor of mathematics and physics.
Speaker 1: Okay in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --nineteen ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did you leave--
Speaker 2: I left, I left the presidency in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Oh, in '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: I retired as president in 1978.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], okay.
Speaker 2: I had done my seven years.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: I figured the average run for college presidency was seven years, so I left at the end of seven, seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  But I was also a tenured professor, so I went back into my department.  But I went back in my department with the understanding, unwritten understanding from the chancellor that I was gonna teach two classes and do a little committee work, and I would draw my salary.  And, and, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 505700
Speaker 1: Now you belong to other organizations also that's doing wonderful things in Savannah [Georgia].  Tell me about some of the other organizations you belong to.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm on the--I was a board member, as a matter, chairman of the board of, of Ralph Mark Gilbert Civil Rights Museum [Savannah, Georgia].  I was president of Chatham Association for Retarded Citizens [Coastal Center for Developmental Services, Inc., Savannah, Georgia] for several years, of president of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] for several years.  So, it's, it's been a pretty full life.  It's, it's been very, very full.  I've, I've never had a dull moment (laughter).
Story_ID: 505709
Speaker 1: You are Roman Catholic, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Roman Catholic.  I'm a permanent deacon in the Roman Catholic church.  Back and since Vatican II [Second Vatican Council], the church re- revived its order of permanent di- the order of permanent diaconate.  Back in the early church, deacons were very, very important in the Catholic church and in years of prosperity, wouldn't necessarily have deacons because the church had so many priests, but began with the shortage of priests, the, the church revived the order of permanent diaconate.  And so, I became a, a permanent deacon in the Roman Catholic church in 1979.  As a matter of fact, there were sixteen members, was in their first class, and there were just two blacks, just two of us, two African Americans in their first class.  But I was the first president of the permanent deacon, diaconate association of the Roman Catholic of--Diocese of Savannah [Roman Catholic Diocese of Savannah].  And so I did a lot of work with the diaconate and that sort of thing in terms of going around and talking to different groups, things of that sort.
Story_ID: 505710
Speaker 1: And of course, as I mentioned, the fact that my children, who are also, all of them are Roman Catholics.  And I have a son who is, who is an attorney.  As a matter of fact, he is senior attorney over at social security office of, of, of appeals.  Then I have a son who's a medical doctor.  He is co-owner of a medical practice in Anthem, Arizona.
Speaker 2: What, what is his name?
Speaker 1: Rodney--
Speaker 2: Rodney.
Speaker 1: --Rodney Mark--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Jackson [Rodney Jackson], uh-huh.  Prince Jackson, III is the attorney; and, and then I have a, a son, Philip [Philip Jackson], who teaches at Shuman Middle School [Shuman Elementary School] here in Savannah [Georgia]; and I have a daughter, Julie [Julia Jackson Chriss], who teaches in, in, in, in, in Atlanta [Georgia]; then I have a son [Anthony Jackson] who is special needs.  We have, we have five children.  Four of them are--two are teachers and one's a lawyer, one's a medical doctor.  And we stay pretty close.  We have a very, very close family, and we keep in touch with them, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Any grandchildren?
Speaker 1: Got six grandchildren.  My oldest one, my oldest grandson, Prince III [sic. Prince Jackson, IV], is, is--he works at a, a musical shop out in the mall.  And my oldest granddaughter is now--she'll be a senior at Savannah State [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] this coming year, and she, she's--she and I have a little, little thing going on 'cause she is very, very smart.  But I keep reminding her that she will never be able to exceed me 'cause I graduated first in my class [at Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], and, and you can't graduate no higher than that.  She, she'll probably graduate first or second in hers too, but I always have to remind her that she can't outdo me because I've already, I'm already there.  But, and then the other ones, we have two grandchildren in Arizona, two girls, and we have two in Atlanta.  And they're all, they're all fine children.  I, I'm, I'm really proud of them, um-hm.
Story_ID: 505711
Speaker 1: I know that there is a, a group of black Catholics in Savannah [Georgia].  Do you know much about that?
Speaker 2: Well, you've got the Pe- Sain- the Knights of St. Peter Claver [Knights of Peter Claver].  That's, that's akin to the, to the Knights of Columbus.  I'm a member of the (unclear) Knights of Columbus.  As a matter of fact, when the Knights of Columbus integrated back in the '60s [1960s], I was the first African American--they--I was the one who integrated them, and it's curious the way that happened.  The, the vice-mayor of Savannah, Frank Rossiter, who was also Catholic at the time, had been pushing Council 631, which is the oldest--and that's the Columbus council--in Georgia to integrate.  And of course, he met--you can imagine the resistance he met.  And one black Catholic had applied, and they rejected him because they said he didn't have the qualification.  And I'll never forget he called my office one day and said he needed to talk with me.  I was president [of Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at the time.  So he came out to the college.  And he said, "Prince [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.]," he said, "we've got to integrate the Knights of Columbus."  He said, "Now, we've already rejected one black," said, "but they can't reject you're 'cause you're president of the college; you're an outstanding Catholic," and says, "no way in the world they can vote you out."  He said--and he brought the application with him.  He said, "You make out this application," which I did, to join the Knights of Columbus.  And sure enough, he took it back.  And they, they had to accept me, but there were about six or seven resignations.  But--'cause there wasn't anything they could do to stop me.  It, it would have brought the wrath of the bishop on them if they had stopped me because they couldn't say I was unqualified.  So, and, and, and, and so, the Knights of Columbus started out very, very slowly.  Then blacks became impatient.  Down in New Orleans [Louisiana] there is a, a group called the Knights of St. Peter Claver.  You know, New Orleans is very Catholic, and they established a chapter here in Savannah.  So a lot of knights joined the Knights of St. Peter Claver.  Then the Knights of Columbus then decided that they would open up, and so there are branches of Knights of Columbus even at St. Benedict's [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic Church, Savannah, Georgia] now.  And, and all, all, all of them are integrated now.  But the Knights of Peter Claver caused a lot of them--because for a long time I was lonely.  (Laughter) I was the only black Knight of Columbus in Savannah.  But it takes time, and (unclear) you just have to be patient, but it takes time.  You just--but we'll get there.
Story_ID: 505712
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when the first black bishop was appointed?
Speaker 2: Well, the first black bishop, now you're talking about Bishop Perry [Harold R. Perry] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Perry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bishop Perry in, in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I thought it was a, a wonderful thing.  I knew Bishop Perry.  He was, Bishop Perry was, was, was a divine word.  He belonged to the order of the Divine Word [Society of the Divine Word].  And I knew him because he was a good friend of another good friend of mine, who, who was Bishop William Francis [sic. Joseph A. Francis], whose brother is president of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis is president of, of, of, of, of, of Xavier.  And, and Bishop Francis, who was also an S.V.D., belonged to that, became bishop of Paterson, New Jersey.  He is auxiliary bishop of Paterson, New Jersey, so I knew Bishop Francis pretty well, so I got to know Bishop Perry, and I talk with Bishop Perry on several occasion.  And that was the first breakthrough.  Bishop Perry became--then shortly after that, Pope Paul VI appointed--I can't think of his name.  He was auxiliary bishop in Washington, D.C.  He appointed him as the ordinary bishop of Biloxi, Mississippi.  Can you imagine that?  An ordinary bishop is one who has complete charge of everything.  And so, here was a black bishop who was an ordinary in Biloxi, Mississippi, and then things began to open up.  And of course, you got the black bishops in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You had Marino [Eugene Antonio Marino], who got caught up at--I can't think of the gi- the name, name was Vic, Vic, Victory [sic. Vicki Long] or something.  Then he was succeeded by--what's his name [James Patterson Lyke] used to be at--he died of cancer.  I can't think of his name.  Then he was succeeded by another black bishop, and then that bishop died, and he's--then, then you had Donnellan [Thomas Andrew Donnellan] in, at, Atlanta.  Now Donnellan is succeeded by Gregory Wilburn [sic. Eugene Antonio Marino] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gregory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who was, who was president--incidentally, I was more impressed with Gregory Wil- Wilburn becoming president of the Catholic bishop association--the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, and Gregory Wilburn [sic. Wilton Daniel Gregory] was president of that.  So, they're beginning up, and more and more blacks are now becoming bishop.  As a matter of fact, Bishop Wilburn is, is the metropolitan for this area, which means that he's in charge of the bishop of--and I should say, I should say archbishop.  He is archbishop for Atlanta, Charleston [South Carolina], Savannah [Georgia], Raleigh [North Carolina], and other places, so he has a big responsibility.  But I know him too.  He used to be up in Belleville, Illinois, before he came to Atlanta.  So the church is, the church is moving very well in that direction now.  You know, Denise [Denise Gines], like I told some kids yesterday, if you look at TV now, and you see the number of African Americans--for example, the mayor--I'm sorry--the governor of Massachusetts [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] is African American now.  Of course, there was Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], who was first black senator since Reconstruction who was from there.  Then you got O- Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and so many.  Like I told a group of kids yesterday, that you don't need to sit down and wonder whether you can make it or not.  If you get prepared and you really want to do what you want to do, there is nothing, absolutely nothing today to stop you.  Now when I came along, there were legal barriers.  There are no legal barriers in existence now to stop an African American from moving.  I recall when I was--even when I graduated out of college [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], there were laws that said you can't do this, you can't do that, but ain't, ain't no more laws now.  And so--and, and I wouldn't swap the time I came along for no time in the world.  But I'll tell you, I would wipe it out if I was to come along now.  I really would wipe it out (laughter).  I would wipe it out (laughter).
Story_ID: 505713
Speaker 1: You've done so many things.  Are there things that you would want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: The only thing that--the only desire that I ever had that I did not fulfill--and when I was a boy coming up I wanted to be a Roman Catholic priest.  And at that time when, when, when I was coming up there weren't that many black Roman Catholic priest, so that was out of the question.  Then, of course, after I got married and family and all that, then that became an impossibility.  But God has been good to me.  There isn't any, really, anything that I really wanted to do that I haven't been able to do 'cause I always worked hard.  I, I believe that if you work hard and you, you push and you push, you can do anything that you want to do.  And so, I've had a good life.  I, I, I, I, I don't have any gripes.  I don't, I don't, I don't, I don't have any regrets.  In the words of Frank Sinatra in his song ['My Way'], I did it my way (laughter).
Story_ID: 505714
Speaker 1: Are there any places that you would like to go that you haven't been?
Speaker 2: No, I've s- when I was president of Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  And even before I became president, I mean I was a (unclear)--I traveled kind of extensively.  About the only place that, probably that I haven't been that I would like to go would be to the shrine of Our Lady of Guadalupe in, in Mexico [Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe, Mexico City, Mexico] and Our Lady of Fatima over in Portugal [Sanctuary of Fatima, Fatima, Portugal].  Those are Catholic.  Those are religious shrines, but, and, and one other thing that I haven't done that--but I'm going to do: I'm going to Washington [D.C.] and spend a week at the Holocaust Museum [United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, D.C.].  I really want to see that Holocaust Museum.  I've been to most of the presidential libraries, like the Truman [Harry S. Truman Library and Museum, Independence, Missouri] and those, and I've seen what presidents accumulate.  But I, I really would like to see that Holocaust Museum to see what the Jews had to go through because the Jews have always been more or less in- inspirational for me too, is to see (unclear) through patience.  I remember when I was a boy coming up Jews couldn't go--couldn't get rooms on Miami Beach [Florida], and what they did, they bought it (laughter).  They bought it.  They solved that problem by buying up Miam- buy, buying up Miami Beach.  And I've always seen that as: if you can't, if, if, if, if can't get them one way, you go at it another way.  But I don't have any regrets.  I, I've, I've been pretty fortunate in, in things that I had to do and things I've been able to do.
Speaker 1: Do you ever think about going to Israel, because you know, Israel, the Catholics own a lot of what's there.
Speaker 2: You mean the Holy Land.
Speaker 1: In the Holy Land, yeah
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I thought about going to the Holy Land.  And I would like to go to Holy Land, but the, the, the, the Holy Land is not the, my first priority. Our Lady of Guadalupe in, in, in Mexico is really my first priority.  And I'm gonna, I'm gonna, I'm gonna get there too (laughter).  I'm gonna get there to.  It's just a matter of finding the time and, and going down there.  I'm gonna get there.
Story_ID: 505715
Speaker 1: When you look over your life, what is the one thing that stands out the most for you?
Speaker 2: The one thing that stands out the most for me in my life is that, that, that I had good parents [Julia Robinson Jackson and Prince Jackson, Sr.].  I, I had good parents, and I had good teachers.  Had it not been for my mother and my father, I would have been just another number, another statistic.  I realize that now because the guys that I grew up with that I knew coming up more or less fell by the wayside, and that was because they didn't have the wrong--the strong parental guidance and all that.  And so, my mother and my father would have to be my, my, my--if I had to thank anybody at all, that had to be my mother and my father for being who they were.  And as I said, my mother--and I, I remember when I graduated from college [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] in, in, in tears came to her, her eyes 'cause she said you are first child that ever graduated from college.  Fortunately, I wasn't, I wasn't the last one, but I was the first one.  And, and then I began to realize that a whole lot of stuff that she told me when I was coming up is that this woman was much smarter than I thought she was (laughter), that this woman, that this woman was much smarter, this woman was smarter than I was, even though here I was in--holding my degree, and I was valedictorian of class and all that.  And I'm looking at my mama, and here's this lady who just had a sixth grade education, 'cause that was as much as she could get.  But, but all of the things that she had done for me that--even with that limited amount of education that she had, she was much smarter than I was, even when I graduated from college, because she had wisdom, which was something I didn't have at that time.  I realized then that there are something, things that you get only with age, and wisdom is one of them.  And, and you--and it doesn't come automatically, that you have to want it; you have to seek it; and it'll come to you.  But age is a prerequisite for it, that you're not gonna get it while you're young because there are some things that you have to do, and some things you have to learn, and there are some people you have to talk to.  There are a lot of--and, and that's part of African American problem today, is, is that our young people have gotten--there's been a dis- big disconnect between our generations.  We have not been able to pass back to that, that, this next--the, the younger generation the things that we learned when we were coming up.  And that was the difference in my time, is that I knew a lot of people who didn't have a lot of formal education, but as they say, they had a whole lot of mother wit.  And mother wit and common sense is worth five Ph.D.'s.  I found that out too after being college president, is that I found out that there were a whole lot of Ph.D.'s who were just educated fools and, and, but didn't have any common sense.  And there were a whole lot of people who weren't common--who weren't Ph.D.'s, but who were far more effective because they had good common sense and mother wit.  And, and that's one of the things that we messed up with our younger generation.  And hopefully we'll get it, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] working for it, and we're trying hard.  And these things go cycle.  As Book of Ecclesiastics say, there's, there's nothing new under the sun (laughter).  It's been here before, so, if we keep trying.  But we've got to keep trying, uh-huh.  And if we can inspire our young people to use that folk potential, the cure for cancer is somewhere out there on the block right this minute.  The cure for AIDS [auto immunodeficiency syndrome] is somewhere out there on the block right now, high on coke [cocaine] or marijuana and so and so forth who got our--and we've got to stop that, losing that brain training.  There are a lot of young African Americans out there today who have so much to offer but who just hadn't been able to be inspired or who slipped between the cracks.  And so we've got to close up the holes in the floor and stop letting our young people fall between the cracks.
Story_ID: 505716
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would just like to be remembered as a person who did the best he could with what god gave him and, and nothing else, and that who never crushed anybody else, that who always tried to help others.  I, I take pride--one, one of the prides I have in my life is that I tried to help people.  I've, I, sometimes I've helped people when it hurt me.  And I would like to be remembered as a person, as somebody said at the college [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], who helped people who couldn't help themselves and even at a personal sacrifice to himself, because I've, I have come, Denise [Denise Gines], to realize that you own nothing.  God gave it to you to give away.  And if you don't give it away, you can't keep it.  And I'd like to be remembered as a person who gave all that God gave him for the betterment of mankind.  And it doesn't matter whether they call me Dr. Jackson, Ph.D. [HistoryMaker Prince Jackson, Jr.] and so on, so forth.  That's not, that's not important, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there anything else you'd like to say?
Speaker 2: No, I'd just like to say I appreciate the fact that you're taking this down, and somebody might hear it and benefit from it.  And if only one person does, then it's been worth it.
