Story_ID: 493346
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], M-A-B-L-E, J-O-H-N.
Speaker 1: And, your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, three, thirty [November 3, 1930], Bastrop, and some people call it (pronunciation) Bastrop, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 11/07/19--2007 [November 7, 2007].
Speaker 1: And, where are we currently? Where is this interview being held?
Speaker 2: In my home at 1621 Virginia Road, Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna ask you--and your current occupations? I'm sorry, your current occupation?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: Whichever one you'd like to tell us about.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I am a minister, a pastor of Joy in Jesus [Joy in Jesus, Inc.] evangelistic outreach ministry. A music publisher of the Otis Music Group [Clyde Otis Music Group, Inc.] with ten or fifteen other music companies that we administer under that umbrella. And, I guess, I'm now an actor. I just finished one film ['Honeydripper'] with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover.
Story_ID: 493347
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few questions, we call them your People, our People magazine questions, and it allows the audience to know a bit more of your personal life. What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, it wouldn't be just one food. I love salads. I like fruit salads, fresh fruits, and I like all of the fruits in that particular salad. I also like green salads with all of the green vegetables in the salad. Salads are my favorite, I guess, stable foods. And, I loved cooked vegetables. Being born in the South, my mother [Lillie Robinson John] had a garden. And, I'm accustom to greens of all kind, potatoes of all kinds. So, my favorite it just foods. But, now, if I had to pick a certain food, it would be seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: The earth tones.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, Hawaii, Venice, Italy, and just hid away places where the phone doesn't ring.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase? If I have a favorite phrase? What would be a favorite phrase of mine? I don't know. Other than, I don't believe in worry or stress. And, I've coined a phrase that I acquired some years ago when one of the Gordy sisters, Miss Esther Gordy [Esther Gordy Edwards] and her husband George H. Edwards, he was campaigning for the state senate in Detroit, Michigan, and we were having a fundraiser for him. And, Mrs. Bertha Gordy [Bertha Fuller Gordy], the mother to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and the Gordy children, had come up with a, a slogan of, "By--By God, let George do it." And, I never forgot that phrase because we use it talking about everyone going out to vote for George H. Edwards; of which he won. And, I always use the phrase when everyone's trying to push me into making a decision. I just say, "By George, let God do it."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 493348
Speaker 1: Now, what I wanna do is go into your lineage, and I wanna talk about your parents momentarily. Please tell me about your mother. What was her name?
Speaker 2: Lillie Gertrude Robinson [Lillie Robinson John] was the maiden name. And, she married a John.
Speaker 1: So, where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Angie, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, did she grow up in Angie?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Angie and Varnado [Louisiana], which was only two steps away from each other.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her background growing up as a child? What do you know about her childhood?
Speaker 2: She had a wonderful childhood. Her mother was a praying woman. A woman that did a lot of community work and I've been told all of my life that I was more like my grandmother. Rebecca James [Rebecca Robinson], was her maiden name, and she married a Robinson. My grandfather was Eddie Robinson and she was a woman that worked and raised six children. And, went to church and visited, her hobby was visiting and looking after the sick.
Speaker 1: So, now, now, is that your mother or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Mother--okay. We'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: Come back to her.
Speaker 2: Okay. You want my mother?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Louisiana. And, went to school there. And, she copied from her mother of taking care of people in need. My mother was a great cook. She learned to cook gourmet foods from a friend of ours that we acquired in Arkansas when she moved out of Louisiana. But, most of the good old southern cooking, she learned from her mother in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Now, you described her as very giving. How else would you described your mother?
Speaker 2: She was giving, she was caring, she was exact, she was religious, what you would call religious. I call it spiritual. She believed in training her children so that we could grow up in a proper manner. She taught us to do all the things that she knew how to do. And, her motto was that she wanted us to go beyond her, be better than she was, because she felt she was limited but we were limitless.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about anything in particular that you can recall? Any one story that she might have talked about?
Speaker 2: Any stories about her life?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, growing up, or anything.
Speaker 2: Well, she would--my grandmother would not allow them to sing the blues; the children. And, they called them reels at that time. And, my mother said she loved to sing the blues. It was her favorite music. So, she would hide in the cotton field and sing the blues. She said, "I never knew how to pick cotton. I couldn't pick fast enough." So, she was always in the kitchen helping her mother and whenever she could steal away from the family, she'd go into the cotton field and she'd sing the blues.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, she sang the blues discreet- discreetly until the day she married my father [Mertis John, Sr.]. And, then she let everybody hear her sing the blues. And she played guitar.
Story_ID: 493349
Speaker 1: Now, your father; what was his name?
Speaker 2: Mertis, M-E-R-T-I-S; Mertis John [Mertis John, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And, where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Louisiana also. In Angie [Louisiana] and they were both raised in Angie and Varnado, Louisiana because they were like little joining country towns.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know about his background as a child?
Speaker 2: He was one of three sons to William John. And, he was a caring man so far as looking out for his sisters, his mother [Elizabeth John], and he looked out for females. He just didn't want anything to happen to a woman. He thought that men should be the caretakers of women. So, if he saw a woman in need, he didn't have to know her. If she was in trouble, he went to her rescue. He would see to it that his brothers and sisters did likewise. And, of course, when he married my mother [Lillie Robinson John] they were partners in doing things like that. He was a person that loved to hunt and loved to fish. I was grown and living in Chicago [Illinois] before I ever ate fish that came from a fish market. Because my father caught all the fish and he killed all the wild game and he ki- raised and killed all the hogs. And, my mother raised all the chickens that we ate as a child. And, I was grown before I ever bought anything like that.
Story_ID: 493350
Speaker 1: Now, how far back in your lineage can you go? You mentioned your grandparents, can you go, go back as your great-grandparents or just your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I know about them. I--they died before I was born. But, I--my father's mother, because her name was so beautiful--
Speaker 1: And, her name was?
Speaker 2: I never forgotten- forgot her name, Elizabeth Morning [Elizabeth John].
Speaker 1: And, and she--tell us--and you knew her?
Speaker 2: She passed before I was born. But, her name was so beautiful. My father [Mertis John, Sr.] was a, a man that loved history and he was interested in all of us because we were African Americans, to know our history and background. So, he told us about everything about our people that he would remember. And, he had a great memory.
Speaker 1: And, do you recall anything that he told you in particular?
Speaker 2: Anything that he would tell us in particular (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Can you recall anything that he shared with you about your background, or your family lineage?
Speaker 2: One of the things that we always talked about and, and we laughed about it. He always stressed that we would have to have an education because as long as we remain Negroes, and we would remain that, because we couldn't change ourselves, the only thing that was gonna get us through was an education. He also taught us that we did not have to fear any man's face. We didn't have to be afraid of them, but we would always need to remember what they felt about us regardless to how they were treating us. He says, "So, if you always know where they have you placed, not where you're place is, but where they have placed you in society, in life, in, in education and whatever, then you won't have any problem. And, do not ever pick a fight with anyone. But, always be ready to defend yourself."
Speaker 1: Great stories. Now, your grandmother was named Elizabeth Morning?
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: On our father's side. And, she passed before you were--
Speaker 2: Before I was born.
Speaker 1: You--I was born. How about the grandfather? Did you know him?
Speaker 2: My grandfather--
Speaker 1: Or, his--her--
Speaker 2: William John. They called him Bill John. He was a very strict Christian man. And, he was a man that, he was a deacon of his church. They were Baptist. And, he was a person that every Sunday morning whomever was sick in the neighborhood or in the church, they left a space for Brother Bill John to come and pray for the sick. So, he always prayed.
Speaker 1: So, he was praying man?
Speaker 2: He was a praying man.
Speaker 1: Now, how about the grandparents on your mother's [Lillie Robinson John] side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side; her mother was Rebecca James [Rebecca Robinson]. And, my grandmother, I don't remember if she had any brothers or not. But, I know, I knew her sisters. I knew my great aunts.
Speaker 1: Can you recall their names?
Speaker 2: One was named after a perfume that's made in Paris [France] called Anais [Anais Anais].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, being southern they called her (pronunciation) Anais. But, it was spelled the same as the perfume, the French perfume--
Speaker 1: Anais.
Speaker 2: Anais. And, I used to always tease her when I found that she had the same name as this fragrance. And, the way they advertise Anais perfume, they had a very young, beautiful girl with a wide hat on, with flowers on it and there was boy standing in a flower patch, a flower field, and he would put his hands up to his mouth and he would say, "Anais, Anais, Anais." So, I told my great aunt that, and of course, my grandmother, Rebecca, and Aunt Anais, as they would call her, would stand on their porch and talk to each other. And, they were at least three blocks away. And, they would stand on their porch in the evening--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Aunt Anais smoking a pipe and my grandmother, Rebecca, just standing there and they were just talking and hold a conversation for an hour, every evening until dusk and then they would say, "Okay, talk to you tomorrow," and they'd go back in the house.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, I've never forgotten that (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, how about your grandfather on that side?
Speaker 2: His name was Eddie Robinson. Eddie Robinson had brothers that was, I know was three guys; and, it might've been more. But, two of them were twins. There was Eddie Robinson and there was Cleve [ph.] and one other Robinson brother. But, I, I didn't get to meet Papa Eddie is what we call him. I didn't get to meet his brothers. But they were able to see me and know who I was, because I was a baby when they passed.
Story_ID: 493351
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory growing up that you can recall?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory growing up, believe it or not, I was three years old and my mother [Lillie Robinson John] wanted to get a photograph of me on my third birthday on a little pony. A little, they call it a Shetland pony. And, I was afraid of this little pony and they put me on the pony anyway. And, my mother stood beside me so I would not be afraid. And, took my three year old picture, when I made three years old. And, my mother always said to me, "I don't know how you could remember that, you were so young." But, I cried so, and I was so frightened.
Speaker 1: Of the pony?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Story_ID: 493352
Speaker 1: There any other memories you can share with us? How--what was your family life like? What were the holidays like in the Bastrop [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, they smell like Christmas. My mother [Lillie Robinson John] was a great cook. And, growing up she would start cooking five to seven days before Christmas or before Thanksgiving because she would make at least five different kinds of cakes. We made everything from scratch. There was no, what we call then, light bread or store bought bread. There was no, all of our bread was homemade. My mother made all of these yeast rolls. And, the loaves of bread and she could slice the bread and you could smell the bread even rising before it baked.
Speaker 1: What was some of the other sights, sounds, and smells that might be--?
Speaker 2: Sweet potato pie, coconut layered cake, chocolate cake, caramel cake, mincemeat pies, pumpkin pies--
Speaker 1: Just smells all around.
Speaker 2: All over the house. And, people would come in the neighborhood. There was something that was called--(background noise) I probably need to turn my pot off.
Speaker 1: You wanna pause?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So, there was all kinds of pastries being made, breads, and now, now what street did you live on at this time? What was name of street that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that started in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I'm the only child of my family that was born in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, the other children were born in Cullendale, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your siblings before we go back to the food.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who are your siblings, in birth order, starting with yourself? You're the first, right?
Speaker 2: I'm the first one. And, Mertis [Mertis John, Jr.], named after my father [Mertis John, Sr.] is second. And, the next sibling is Haywood [Hawywood John], and the next sibling after that is Mildred [Mildred John]. And, the next sibling is the late Little Willie John, and after that, Deloras [Deloras John]. And, after Delores, Ernest [Ernest John]. And, they were all born in Arkansas. Then we moved to Detroit [Michigan] and there was Raymond John, and Toronto [Toronto John].
Story_ID: 493353
Speaker 1: Let's take these, let's move all this forward a little bit to, to Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How old would you have been at this time, when you were in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: When we came to Arkansas, I was one year and nine months old.
Speaker 1: Okay. You were one year and nine months old. So, now, around, so you stayed in Arkansas how many years, 'til about twelve, right?
Speaker 2: Until I was twelve years old.
Speaker 1: So, basically, we'll stay there for a moment. So, you have good memories of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Because I began school there.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're, so, now what street did you live on? What street did you live on in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't called a street. My father [Mertis John, Sr.] worked at a paper mill there, and the paper mill, the company that owned the paper mill built what we called paper mill quarters. They weren't paper houses, of course (laughter). But, they were like shotgun houses; a front, middle and a back room, which was a kitchen.
Speaker 1: And, they were for the workers?
Speaker 2: And, people that worked at the paper mill lived in those, rented those houses. And, on, there were on both side of the street of the road but it was called Highway number 7 [Arkansas Highway 7]. And, it ran from El Dorado [Arkansas] through Smackover, Arkansas and on through Cullendale, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Smackover, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Smackover.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. All right.
Speaker 2: And, then Camden [Arkansas] was the next little city after you--and you just drive right through Cullendale. The paper mill was on one corner, the country store was on the other corner. Now remember, the store, the little corner store was the post office. It was where you could send a telegram. It was where the telephone was, and it was, and it was a, and the grocery store.
Speaker 1: The telephone.
Speaker 2: The telephone. No one had telephones in their homes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the telephone. So, if you wanted to send a letter off, the man that ran the store would put on his U.S. mail cap--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, go and stand behind a little booth and he'd take care of all the U.S. mail business. And, you bought your stamps and postage and everything.
Speaker 1: Now, was this a, now was your neighborhood all African American?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: And, was the store owner African American?
Speaker 2: No. He was white.
Speaker 1: So, in the mist of all these African Americans, the store owner was white?
Speaker 2: The storeowner was white.
Speaker 1: And, he literally wore many hats.
Speaker 2: He wore several hats.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So, now, you described--now, what were, what were your neighbors like? Who were some of your neighbors? Can you recall who lived near you around--?
Speaker 2: The Davis [ph.], the Davises, there was a Davis family that lived right there near us. And, believe it or not, some of those children we grew up with, which are now men, are in Camden, Arkansas. And, some of the children I went to school with who are now grown and has grandchildren that's still alive and they do a reunion every two years there. And, actually, my teacher, my first teacher in Cullendale, Arkansas just passed away in 2004. And, her name was Miss Willie B. Green.
Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about her momentarily (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 493354
Speaker 1: So, on that street, these pies and these, these great vegetables, like (unclear) going on right here.
Speaker 2: Oh, there just, it's smelling all over the neighborhood. Now, there was railroad track that ran behind the paper mill quarters. And, it was the railroad that they used to bring the wood in to the paper mill because they made that paper from that wood that came in. And, my father worked in a room that they called a dumping room, where they dump all of those, the train cars would drop all of that over in the water and it go through a conveyer and slice all the bark off and go through that process of making paper. Now, there was a train that would, it was a freight train. It was not a passenger train that came through there. And, there was something that probably nobody would remember now, your age and further back, you know, down, closer to this time that was called hoboes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, hoboes were people that went from town to town looking for jobs. They would get off in certain towns, off the freight train, look for food and a place to shave and wash themselves up and get--catch the next freight train going on to the next town. Because we had more children in our family than most of the people that lived in the Cullendale [Arkansas] quarters, or paper mill quarters, our neighbors knew how my mother cooked and we had gardens. And, we raised everything and we canned in the summertime. My father killed hogs in the fall. They would send the hoboes to our door.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They would stop and knock on the doors when they get off the train. And, they stop at doors and say, "I'm hungry. I just came through--I'm coming through town. I just got off the freight train." And, they said to them, "Well, we don't have any food. But, there's a family across the street in house number seven. And, they're the Johns. They have a lot of children, but they have a lot of food. And, if you go over there, they will let you clean yourself up and they will feed you." And, so, we got a chance to meet all of the hoboes that came through town and my father would tell my mother, he called her mother, so, I would. Because me being the first child, and they were married four years before they could have a child, and they was just so glad I was here until--they called each other by their names. So, I called my father Mertis [Mertis John, Sr.], and I called her Lillie [Lillie Robinson John]. And, my mother said, "She can't do that. She has to call me mother and she has to call you dad." So, she began calling my father daddy so I would. And, he called her mother, so I would call her mother. So, my father would say, "Mother, this man just got off the train and he's hungry. I'm gonna give him--." We didn't have an inside bathroom or toilet, we had number seven tubs that we took a bath in. You heated the water on a wood stove. And, you heat enough water to make your water in your tub hot and you mix your cold water with it, and you take you a bath. But, outside in the back was the outside place that we call a lavatory where you could use that. And, at the backdoor, my father had had a man to run waterlines right at our backdoor. So, we didn't have to really go outside in the yard to catch our water, we could catch it right outside the kitchen door, and put it in the big kettles and warm it there on the stove. And, give him a small wash basin that we only used for people that we did not know so they could wash up. And, then my mother would sterilize it for the next person that come through. And, she'd give 'em a washcloth and she would, most time she would tear up old towels, cut 'em up, and hem them, so that would be the stack we would use for the hoboes that came by. So, they would have a clean towel to wash themselves up with--
Speaker 1: You all were prepared for them.
Speaker 2: My mother and father prepared for them. Their mother and father prepared them to do that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, in today's terms that wouldn't been like a homeless person, just walking up to your door--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And, saying, "I'm hungry and wanna take a bath"?
Speaker 2: And, that's what I do now. That's what I do now. And, I've done that here in this house. I did that in this house for fourteen years. And, a total of twenty-one years I've been involved in the same kind of thing.
Speaker 1: We're gonna go forward into that. So, so, the community they knew that the Johns were the place to get some help. So, and, they would tell the people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, then my father would bring them in after they had shaved and washed up. My mother would sit them down at the kitchen table.
Story_ID: 493355
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, now, they had a good hot bath and they, they've taken care of, of those physical necessities. So now, they're come into the kitchen--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you mother [Lillie Robinson John] is ready to do her portion which is?
Speaker 2: And, she would sit them at the table. And, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] would sit at one end of the table with them and talk to them as they would eat. Now, my mother would feed them food that you could only dream about. Because--
Speaker 1: All kinds of great delicacies.
Speaker 2: We always had a full course meal. Every meal was a full course healthy meal. Everything cooked from scratch, and she always served a dessert that was homemade.
Speaker 1: So, what would you all be doing around the house as children when you saw this going on? What would you all have to do? Would have to assist in, in doing--?
Speaker 2: I was the one that always assisted in the kitchen with my mother. But, we all had chores. We, when we woke up in the morning, my father said, "The first thing you do is make up your bed. You slept in it, you make it. Then you go into the bathroom and you get yourself presentable." And, after we did that, we were not allowed to take our clothes off and just throw them anywhere. If they were soiled, if we were not gonna wear them, there was a place that my mother had for all we call dirty clothes. There was nothing ever, she, we were never allowed to throw anything on the floor. We hung our clothes. My mother didn't go behind us to hang 'em, she would go behind us to see if we hung our clothes. And, she would show us how to do it, and then she would see to it being done. Not in a harsh manner. She would say, "This is your room and you're preparing to become an adult. And, you're gonna want your house so." That--when I was a girl, we had radio before we had television. There was a show that was on television that was called 'Fibber McGee and Molly.' And, Fibber McGee, Fibber was the wife and McGee was the husband [sic.]. And, when the--someone would knock on the door, before they could open the door to let whomever was at the door in, she had to get all of the junk out of the way. So, she would throw it in the closet and close the door. Then when the company would leave, she would forget that all of the junk is just thrown in there. So, she would open the closet and all of the stuff would fall out on her and you could hear all of this on the radio. And, she said, "This is not a 'Fibber McGee and Molly' house."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: She say, "This is our home." And, this was just the way we were brought up.
Speaker 1: So, now, these hoboes would come and your father would hold- do you recall any of the conversations that he would have with men about why they were in the condition they were in and what they were doing and what was--?
Speaker 2: No. They were look--they were actually looking for work. They were not people that was just going from town to town because they were running from work or didn't wanna do anything. He would say things to them, "Where you, where you from?" They say, "Well, I'm from, I'm originally from St. Louis [Missouri]. And, I came to such and such a place looking for work. And, I was there six or eight weeks and when that work dried up, I just caught the first freight train and I came on to the next town."
Speaker 1: So, they never--?
Speaker 2: And, that's was, that was their story.
Speaker 1: So, these men were working? Trying to find work?
Speaker 2: They were traveling trying to find work--
Speaker 1: Possible for their families also?
Speaker 2: Right. They had families. And, after they'd work maybe six weeks or eight weeks someplace, they would most time go back home. But, they sent their money back home so their families could be taken care of.
Speaker 1: Wow. So, this was the, this was the tone of the times. Let's talk about this a bit 'cause you had a large family. So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sharing was already a, sharing was probably already an ingrained thing in your family. Sharing was very important.
Speaker 2: Sharing was, was already something, because my father would say to us, "There's a lot of you. You all don't ever need to have to ask anybody for anything. Every one of you must look out for each other. Whatever one is doing, all of the rest of you must help. When they're stable, you help the next one get to where they're going." Consequently, if Mertis [Mertis John, Jr.] had something that I didn't have but it was something I needed and I did something that Mertis didn't do, we did an exchange. Whatever Mertis needed that he didn't have, I exchanged that for what he did and I needed. And, we do that to this day.
Story_ID: 493356
Speaker 1: Let's talk about, talk about Arkansas at that point. Now, in your neighborhood it was predominately black, but now this is, this is in the early parts of the century. This is, this is 19--this is in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], going into the '40s [1940s] now.
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, this was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what was Arkansas like outside of your neighborhood? Could you all just go downtown to the city? Could you go to the big cities and--?
Speaker 2: We could go. We could go. We knew that we'd have to set aside and let the white people pass. If they were--
Speaker 1: Explain, explain that.
Speaker 2: Of course, now, it--like, we're walking down an aisle and you're in a store, we shopped at the same stores. There was Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], and there was Montgomery Wards [sic. Montgomery Ward]. And, that was where, that was where my parents [Lillie Robinson John and Mertis John, Sr.] shopped; a lot of people. And, there was Western Auto [Western Auto Supply Company]. And, then there were other little small stores. But, Sears Roe--Sears and Roebuck and Montgomery Wards were the main stores. And, they were mail order houses, and Sears had a store. If we were walking down the aisle and a couple--a white lady, a white man, a white lady was walking down there, we would step like to the side of the aisle and let them go first because that was the way it was done.
Speaker 1: Just the way it was.
Speaker 2: That was just the way it was.
Speaker 1: Were there water fountains and things inside that Sears?
Speaker 2: Oh, no. We didn't use the same water fountain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was out. There were water fountains, that was water fountains. And, then there was one that said colored.
Speaker 1: Was--and was it the same thing, or?
Speaker 2: And, with the bathrooms, if you go into a restaurant, go into a gas station to get gas and you needed to use the restroom. There was male--men, and women. But it did not mean black men and black women. And, then there was one that said colored. And, the men and the women used that one if you were black.
Speaker 1: So, it was a unisex?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At that time. So, now, how did you feel about this when you were, you know, because you've been in this giving, sharing family where you all help people and all of a sudden now you go down here and see all this racism. Who did you feel about it?
Speaker 2: How do I, how did I feel about it then?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, being born in the South, that's the, that's the custom. So, you were born into that custom.
Speaker 1: Into that mentality.
Speaker 2: Yes. Which was like no mentality at all. So, but, because of my parents having the foresight that they had, my father and mother always told me that things are going to change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we're preparing you for change. But, we are also training you now so you can live for the change. You don't wanna get lynched before change come. So, we knew the process of what was going on. But, he was always teaching us, my father was, that there is nobody better than you. "From one blood," my mother said, she got this out of the Bible. "From one blood, God created and made all nations" [Acts 17:26]. But, this is the how, this is how they want to do it. So, we're going to obey this law but knowing that we are just as good. And, when things change, you won't have to do this. And, my father would say, "It might not be in my lifetime. But, bear in mind, it's going to change."
Speaker 1: So, it was just the way it was. It was accepted, and a lot of times we don't understand that now but, it makes a lot of sense.
Speaker 2: Now, let me explain something to you. In Arkansas where we lived, there were white people that were friends to my family. And, they would bring, white families would bring their children over and they would play with us in our yard. And, we were never taught that there were any difference between us and white. We just gave them their, what they call their propers while we lived in that particular time. But, my father and mother never taught us prejudice. They told us, "From one blood, God created all nations, and no man is above another man."
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Now, men will exalt themselves above another man, but this too shall change.
Speaker 1: So, you were not taught to hate anyone?
Speaker 2: We were not taught to hate anyone.
Story_ID: 493357
Speaker 1: Now, what--you mentioned your elementary school. What was the name of that school that you went to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lafayette [Lafayette School, Cullendale, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay. Lafayette elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you mentioned the teacher, who was the teacher that influenced you?
Speaker 2: My first teacher was Miss Willie B. Green. She married years, and years later and became Willie B. Cole [ph.]. And, believe it or not, she just passed, 2004. But, she started teaching; she was seventeen years old when she was teaching me.
Speaker 1: So, she was, she would've been somewhere in her nineties, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, in her nineties in 2004--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when she passes.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. A beautiful, wonderful lady that I got to communicate with up until she passed.
Speaker 1: Now, at that point, there was--you only had one teacher. Was it one teacher for all the students pretty much?
Speaker 2: I had music teacher that was separate.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, who was that?
Speaker 2: And, her first name was Mildred [ph.]. I don't remember now, her, her last name. But, the professor or the principal of that school was Professor Murray [ph.].
Speaker 1: So, Professor Murray--
Speaker 2: And, I went to school with--he was the principal. And, I went to school--his children went to that same school because all the blacks went to that school. There were not white teachers in that school.
Speaker 1: So, it was--
Speaker 2: And, no white children.
Speaker 1: So, it was an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student. My parents [Lillie Robinson John and Mertis John, Sr.] saw to it (laughter) that we were good students. I was friends with my teacher. It was amazing that my teacher that just passed away told me something I said to her when I was six years old, 'cause you didn't go to school until you were six at that time. And, she had beautiful clothes, and I always admired her clothes. And, she said I walked up to her one day and said to her, "Miss Green, are you rich?" And, she said, "Of course not. I'm not rich. Why do you ask?" And, she said--now, I don't remember asking her this. But, she told me this about six years ago. She said, "Because you have such lovely clothes."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I--because my mother always bought fashion magazines, McCall [McCall's], and all of the magazines. Life magazines, and beauty magazines so that I could look through them. And, my mother made all of my clothes. And, she was trying to educate my mind to beautiful things and letting me know that they were mine if I wanted it. And, I remember when Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] was a little girl, and we're close to the same age. I remember when she was just Princess Elizabeth and the mother was queen [Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon]. And, she wanted to educate me, my mother did, about royalty and what royalty was all about. And, she would say to me, "You are royalty." And, she never knew at that time that I'd have a chance to have an audience with the queen.
Story_ID: 493358
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you? Now, you were a very good student. But now, what kind of--there's a lot of children here, you're the oldest. What kind of child were you, as far as your behavior (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, you know, we were all obedient children. My mother [Lillie Robinson John] and father [Mertis John, Sr.] spent a lot of time with us. We didn't have a lot of opportunity to be otherwise, if you knew parents of that time. When we would get out of school, coming from Lafayette School [Cullendale, Arkansas], we would have to pass the paper mill where my father worked. We would come through a wooded area and we would walk around a levy and coming on up to the quarters. And, my father made it his business to be there at some point so he could walk with us home. And, if he didn't walk home with us, we knew he was somewhere in the vicinity.
Speaker 1: Watching.
Speaker 2: Watching. And, my father said that we were to never, as girls, it was three girls and six boys. My brothers were never allowed to let us walk alone. I always had a brother with me. There was always at two of us, always, that were together. Usually, it was my brother Mertis [Mertis John, Jr.] and I. Later on in life, it became Little Willie [Little Willie John] and I. But, it was always two of us. And, to this day, it's my sons and I. Or, my daughter and I. I very rarely go any place that is not me and a family member, because I came up that way. And, my best friends and the people--if you hear me talking on the phone a long time, nine times out of ten, I'm talking to a cousin or a sister. My sisters are now dead, but, I had god-sisters, or I'm talking to a brother, and we can talk like friends and we laugh. And, we still do that to this day.
Story_ID: 493359
Speaker 1: Now, back in your family and during that time period, did you have any special dreams or aspiration? Anything you were thinking about in elementary school [Lafayette School, Cullendale, Arkansas] that you wanted to be or that you wanted to do? Besides, the nice clothes, did you think about any else?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a nurse.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to be a nurse because I wanted always to take care of people. And, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] didn't want me to be a nurse. He wanted me to be a teacher, a school teacher. And, he said he didn't want me looking at blood.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, he was very protective. I think sometime over protective. And, I found out later as I grew up, that it was what was embedded in me from my four parents. He and my mother [Lillie Robinson John], their mother and father, and how they looked after people. I have a great-granddaughter now that's seventeen years old. And, I--and she's coming out of school next year. And, she said things to me last night that I said to my father when I was seventeen. And, I realize when I said the same thing back to her my dad said to me, that she's only saying what I said at seventeen. She said, "Grandmother Mable [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], I need a job now so I can put aside all the money for my graduation." I said, "You don't need a job, you need that diploma. And, then you need to go into college." I said, "If you wanna work while you're in college, something light, fine. Get that under--education under our belt first." She said, "But, I hate to have to ask my parents for everything that I need." I said, "It's the parents' job, and duty to educate you" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--you recall the conversation that happened sixty years earlier?
Speaker 2: My father said that to me. And, the first job I had at seventeen was given to me by Berry Gordy's mother [Bertha Fuller Gordy].
Speaker 1: We'll talk about that in one moment. So, so, you wanted to be a nurse and that was a dream of yours?
Speaker 2: And, my great-granddaughter tells me, she wants to be a nurse.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, you know, it's, I guess, if it's in--it's a part of our DNA.
Story_ID: 493360
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lillie Robinson John] was a, she grew up Methodist, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] grew up Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, then when they both moved from Louisiana, and I was a year and nine months old, they joined a Holiness church. However, I was christened in the Methodist church. I was christened when I was month old.
Speaker 1: Describe your experience in a Holiness church, especially with the music and the things that were going on there.
Speaker 2: Oh, man, you don't have time for me to tell you about the good times we had. I think I have to credit the Holiness church and, my mother and father for all of our history of show business. Because in the church, well, the church that I grew up in they called it a Sanctified church. And, they played guitars. They played pianos, and we sang, and the people praised the Lord in the dance, they speak in tongues, and we have a good time. They lay hands on the sick, and they recover. And, they eat a lot of good food. So, I had the best of both worlds. So, I enjoyed--and, and we had some stomp down good preachers.
Speaker 1: Now, who played the music? Now, who in your family played music at this point?
Speaker 2: Almost everybody in my family 'cause my father and mother played guitar.
Speaker 1: They both played guitar.
Speaker 2: And, not professionally. And, they sang. And, they're the one that taught us at home.
Speaker 1: So, so there--
Speaker 2: And, we were singing all gospel.
Speaker 1: So, there was music in the household, all the time?
Speaker 2: Well, if it wasn't music it was what you smelled when you came in here, food.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, the pots and the pans that we used for the instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, there was always guitars.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, that was rare because, well, not rare nowadays, but for a woman to play the guitar was commonplace back then? Were that pretty common to see women playing guitars?
Speaker 2: Well, the first woman that I remember that played the guitar was Sister Rosetta Tharpe.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Great--
Speaker 2: But, I had seen Sister Rosetta Tharpe.
Speaker 1: Great blues guitarist--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And gospel.
Speaker 2: Yes. But, she was doing gospel. And, of course, we were only allowed to sing gospel at that time. And, so--but, my mother was the first woman that I ever saw play a guitar, and then when we saw Sister Rosetta Tharpe. I never learned to play the guitar but I have, I had two sons that played guitar. He's passed now. But, he was very, very good. And, then one son that is still alive that plays all of the percussion, Lem [Limuel C. Taylor]. And, then I have a son that plays base.
Speaker 1: So, they all play. So, it just come through the, come through the genes?
Speaker 2: Yes. And, then my, and he's still alive, and travels with me and plays for me. And, then my daughter plays piano and my son Joel [Joel Webster], that passed away, played all of the keyboards.
Speaker 1: So, it's for years and years of music in your family.
Speaker 2: Every day of our lives the radio was never turned off. And, we always listened to music. There's music in our house all the time.
Story_ID: 493361
Speaker 1: So, who was influencing you as a young person at that point? Who was your main influence when you were in elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the music?
Speaker 1: In music and in general, during elementary school [Lafayette School, Cullendale, Arkansas]. Who was your main influence?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lillie Robinson John] and father [Mertis John, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because everything that--see, we didn't get out in the street and visit the neighbors and the neighbors' children. My--we were really kind of homebodies. But, my mother made it so interesting at home because we sang together at home. She would teach us songs. She would write songs, take 'em right out of the Bible and teach 'em to us. My father would play the, his guitar, and then when we'd go to the Holiness church, he'd come back home and get my mother's pots and pans and imitate everything he saw at church. So, we, we had fun. People would stand around our windows on the street to listen to what was going on, on the inside of our house. And, we, that was just a normal day. That's just what we did.
Speaker 1: So, you all would leave the church and come home and have some more church?
Speaker 2: We would--yeah. Just have, but that, at that time, it was fun because my father always sat in the back of the church. He could see everything. We always sat at the front with my mother. And, when we'd go home, oh, we would have a good time. And, then we were on programs at church. My mother would groom us and my father he would just say, "Your last name is John. It's also your first name. And, you better never make the name bad."
Speaker 1: So, you all would be in the church and we all know that the Holiness church had powerful music.
Speaker 2: Powerful.
Speaker 1: Did you start to feel something special about music in that church that you said, well, maybe I can do this or I wanna do this?
Speaker 2: Well, I studied the piano a while. But, my love for the piano didn't come from the church music. It came from the music that we had at home.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was at home? What kind of music did you have at home?
Speaker 2: Well, we had the guitar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, we had tambourines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, today, well, I just took my tambourines that I had here over to my church. But, there was always tambourines in our home.
Speaker 1: And, you couldn't really listen to any, now there was other music at that time, but you all couldn't listen to it. Could you all--were the blues and the other--?
Speaker 2: No. And, we were not--remember at this time, this was before television but there was radio. And, we listened to, what is--we listened to John R. and the country music. Now, we could listen and sing all the country songs. My father loved country music. And, there was John Richbourg out of Nashville, Tennessee. And, there--we call him John R. And, there was Hoss Allen [Bill "Hoss" Allen] that was in Nashville. And, we listened to the 'Grand Ole Opry.' And, we knew all of those songs and my father sang. I never in my life saw my father sit and say nothing. If he was not talking, he was singing. If he was not singing, he was whistling. So, it was never a quite mouth with my father because he was always, it was always a song. And, he could whistle and sing every song on the radio.
Speaker 1: So, the music is coming to your house now into your soul through just being around it?
Speaker 2: Just being around it.
Story_ID: 493362
Speaker 1: Now, was there a junior high school experience or was it just straight to high school? Was there a junior high you went to after high--after elementary?
Speaker 2: Not, not in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you stayed in Arkansas 'til about twelve years old?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you moved to where then?
Speaker 2: To Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a big step now, because you come from and small Louisiana town, but now you have big, big picture, your, your most recollection is of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Right. I was never, I never really lived in Louisiana--
Speaker 1: So, now you are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd go back there every year to visit.
Speaker 1: Now, you all are going to Detroit, Michigan. Now, how did that come about and what did you think when you heard about this?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were just moving. Because, see, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] was doing in a different manner what the hoboes were doing only he didn't catch a freight train. He came from Louisiana as a log roller, rolling logs in a log pond, where I was born, in Bastrop [Louisiana]. Which the--one side of the, the log pond was Monroe, Louisiana and the other side was Bastrop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it's a street. There is no log pond. Everything's done differently. So, one side of the street is Monroe, Louisiana, today, the other side is Bastrop. And, I had the opportunity of going back to Bastrop, with Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland], and performing where I was born which was really interesting because we just walked across the street.
Speaker 1: We'll talk about that momentarily. So, you went from, from Arkansas to Detroit because, 'cause there was work there.
Speaker 2: My father, yes, started working. He--they had told my family that there was work in Detroit. The automobile factories were hiring, you didn't have to be white. You could just be a good worker. They would train you. And, there was work there. And, you see, when we moved to Arkansas, as I grew up, I would listen to my mother [Lillie Robinson John] pray. My father was working. We grew everything that we ate. But, my father worked at the paper mill and I would hear my mother praying and she would say things like, "Lord, please let my husband bring $7 a week home." Because he was only bringing about, I know when he was bringing home $5.35. Then I know when he got to $6. And, I heard her paying for him to bring home $7. And, when he brought home $7, she had money to save. So, when she found, and he found that they could come to Detroit and make money they had never dreamed of.
Speaker 1: So, prior to this, he was bringing home $5.35 and feeding ten children and a wife?
Speaker 2: That's right. Not, well, they didn't have ten children then.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, he had seven children or eight children, right? In Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well, he had me, Mertis [Mertis John, Jr.], Haywood [Haywood John], Mildred [Mildred John], Ernest [Ernest John], Deloras [Deloras John]; it was six.
Speaker 1: He had, he had six children.
Story_ID: 493363
Speaker 1: Now, as we come up to the Detroit [Michigan] period of our life, let's talk about one other little factor. Now, you move to Detroit would you say in 1942 around that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, prior to that, you had one brother, Little Willie John, who we all know, who we all know. Did you see anything, when he was born, did you see in him, anything in him as a little boy, as a toddler, to say he gonna be a little bit different, when it came to music? Did you see anything special in him?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. But, we all knew he was different because he gave us a run for our money all the time as a child. All the children stayed pretty close to the teaching line of the mother [Lillie Robinson John] and father [Mertis John, Sr.]. But, Willie was the one that broke rank, in every way, all the time. Willie did things as a child that we would have been too frighten to even try; just mischief.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, he was mischievous?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, we're gonna, so everybody moved to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're twelve years old. You're the eldest, so, he's at this time, he five years old, Little Willie--
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Willie's five. And, all the children are down in the line. So, you move to Detroit. Did you recall the street you moved on in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Dequindre [Street].
Speaker 1: Dequindre on the northeast side of Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yes. Very east.
Speaker 1: So, you move on Dequindre, and your father worked at the Dodge plant [Hamtramck Assembly Plant, Hamtramck, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Not at first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked at a plant called the Hackett's brass and iron factory [Hackett Brass Foundry, Detroit, Michigan] where they made little screws and knobs, whatever they used to put the cars together on the assembly line.
Speaker 1: Hardware. Right.
Speaker 2: And, he worked there for maybe a year or two and then he went over to, to Dodge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, he worked in Hamtramck [Michigan] at Dodge Main.
Speaker 1: Now, you're in the big city now. You're twelve years old and you're going into your pre-teen years now. So, things are little different in Detroit than they are in Arkansas. What were some of the things you saw different?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, more people. And, our neighbors were mixed.
Speaker 1: In the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was mixed.
Speaker 1: Mixed with what kind of people?
Speaker 2: White and black, and other nationalities. And, of course, the schools were integrated schools.
Speaker 1: In 1942?
Speaker 2: In Detroit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Detroit?
Speaker 2: We were in integrated schools.
Speaker 1: How was it going downtown to like say J.L. Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building] in Detroit or somewhere like that around 1942? Was it the same situation as it was in Arkansas? Did you feel different about it when you went out into the Detroit proper itself?
Speaker 2: No. You didn't have to step aside and let the white people pass. You didn't have to say yes ma'am and no ma'am to them, and they call you boy or girl. You knew that you were in a different part of the United States and things were different. But, we had been taught to respect our elders anyway. So, we automatically said, "Yes, ma'am, no ma'am."
Speaker 1: Whatever color they were?
Speaker 2: Regardless, we said that to black people.
Story_ID: 493364
Speaker 1: What junior high school did you go to in, in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: The first school we went to in Detroit was Duffield high [D. Bethune Duffield Elementary School]. At Duffield--that was the junior high.
Speaker 1: Duffy?
Speaker 2: And, then I went from there to Pershing High [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay. That was high school?
Speaker 2: That was high school.
Speaker 1: Now, junior high was a couple years probably for you, just a couple years?
Speaker 2: I did not go to but two schools.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, Duffy- Duffield was a junior high. You probably went there around eighth grade, something like that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you recall much about that experience?
Speaker 2: It was just a school that was, that was mixed.
Speaker 1: Do have any, any particular experiences in junior high?
Speaker 2: Not anything in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Other than Detroit was so much colder and I had never seen snow. And, that was the first time that I had the opportunity of wearing pants because we would have, we had to have on snow boots and--
Speaker 1: Gloves (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) now pants and gloves because we didn't see all of that in Arkansas. And, I had never been allowed coming out of a Holiness church to wear pants.
Speaker 1: This was the first time?
Speaker 2: And, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] had a fit. So, the only way I could wear pants, and I had to wear them because it was too cold otherwise. I had to wear a dress over my snowsu- my snow pants 'cause I had to have these heavy pants and the snow boots that were fur lined because it didn't get that cold in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Because he did not believe in women wearing pants?
Speaker 2: Well, we had never worn 'em. I mean, in the Holiness church, they said, they found somewhere in the Bible, of which they took out of context.
Speaker 1: The apparel of a man.
Speaker 2: Yes. And, these were not men's apparels. They were things that were made for a woman.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Said, it was an abomination to God for a woman to wear men's clothes. But, these were not men's clothes. They were made for a woman. And, if a man had put them on, they would've been out of place. They were not made the same way. So, that was the only thing that saved us.
Story_ID: 493365
Speaker 1: So, you went to high school at a high school on the east side called Pershing High School [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes. Seven Mile and Ryan Road.
Speaker 1: Explain your experiences there, 'cause you, 'cause now, 'cause now you're growing up. You're fourteen years old or so, explain Pershing and how that was going into high school.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed high school. I enjoyed sports so far as football. I li- I enjoyed go--and I was a cheerleader on the football team, for our football team. And, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] didn't want me out at night because he didn't believe that women should be out after dark. So, when I had to go to a football game, I had to have a practice. My mother [Lillie Robinson John] had to join me because he was at work.
Speaker 1: But, he made sure that things were in decent and in order as he thought it--
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: Can you believe that I can remember my teachers from the first time I went to school? And, I'm gonna have to go back through some of my old books.
Speaker 1: To get your high school?
Speaker 2: Yes. Now, my brother, Mertis [Mertis John, Jr.], because he remained in Detroit [Michigan] and never moved, he will tell me now when there's something going on with our alumni, "I saw your teacher So and So, and this one," and--because he stayed in contact with them. And, I don't know for the life of me, I cannot remember those teachers.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends? Did you have any friends that you can think of in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, my. Some of my high school friends. So many of 'em are dead. There was a young man I went to high school with that went into the [U.S.] Army. His name was J.D. Joshua [ph.]. But, he got killed in Germany. I remember him 'cause he was our walking home pal. We all worked home together. And, of course, there was the Stubbs family. Where Levi Stubbs, one of the Four Tops came out of there. And, we all lived in the projects together on Six Mile and, and Dequindre [Street].
Speaker 1: And, what were the name of those projects? Do you recall the name of these projects?
Speaker 2: Well, they were like the Dequindre projects.
Speaker 1: This is pre-Brewster [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan] and this is before all of those?
Speaker 2: We never lived in the Brewster Projects. That's where I met The Miracles.
Speaker 1: So, were you doing any music in high school [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan] at this time? Because you had a little musical talent because you had been having programs, right, in Arkansas? You would do little--?
Speaker 2: But, they were at the church--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, or the school, you know. And, I sang in the school choir and the glee club and stuff like that. And, but we weren't doing anything in the schools or at home.
Speaker 1: Were you in the church there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get--we were going to church. The same church. Because the same church that we went to in Arkansas, there were churches of the same faith in Detroit.
Speaker 1: In Detroit.
Speaker 2: But, we weren't preparing for show business. Because all of our music that we sang publically, unless it was school songs--
Speaker 1: Was gospel.
Speaker 2: Were gospel. And, we never, I never dreamed of a life of show business.
Speaker 1: And, gospel at that point, wasn't what gospel is today--
Speaker 2: No. No. It was church only.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: No. It was church only.
Speaker 1: And, it was line with it, drawn probably by--the preachers drew a line, correct?
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of what, of what was church music and what wasn't.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 493366
Speaker 1: So, you're playing sports and you're in high school and you still probably have your family life because your being the eldest, you still have a lot of responsibilities probably for the others.
Speaker 2: Oh, I worked in the lunchroom in--at Pershing [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan] and that gave me my hot lunch at school. And, I would save my dessert. I didn't like, I did not like cornbread growing up. It scratched my throat. Or, that's the story I told my mother [Lillie Robinson John]. And, I, every day when I had my lunch in Pershing, I carried my dessert home to share with my mother. My mother, you know, was my best friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, my father [Mertis John, Sr.] was my pal because I had to be sure that I stayed in his good graces because I had to stay on that cheerleading team.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I had to do everything that my father needed to have done so he would say, "Yes, you can go to rehearsal. Oh, yes, you can be on the cheerleading team."
Speaker 1: Because the, because the wrong infraction would stop that, right?
Speaker 2: If I disobeyed. My father say, said to us, "All of the nice things that you like to do, it's not a requirement. It's a privilege when you have been obedient."
Speaker 1: Did they--
Speaker 2: "And, we give it to you as a privilege to do."
Speaker 1: Did they expect you to have a lot of responsibilities for, as far as little ones are concerned, the ones under your, your nine brothers and sisters? Were you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I did help my mother with them because, you know, I was still growing up, and she was still having children. And, I helped in the kitchen. I learned how to take care of the house. But, my mother trained each of us. So, it wasn't like she worked me half to death and nobody else did anything.
Speaker 1: As they got older, they learned to do what they had--
Speaker 2: They had to learn also.
Speaker 1: Even Little Willie John?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Because if, if it was cleaning the floor, one would sweep and the other one would mop. One would wash dishes and the other one would dry. And, that's the way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he ever buck the system? Did he ever try to buck it, Little Willie John?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --would always--Willie. And, then if my mother and father gave us a time to return home if we went away to the theater, we had a time to come back. And, Willie was always out of pocket.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because if we left together, we had to return together. And, we never knew where he was. Because if we were in the theater, he'd make a mad dash and go somewhere else.
Speaker 1: And, you couldn't go home without him?
Speaker 2: Couldn't go home without him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was a no-no.
Speaker 1: So, now you--
Speaker 2: Or, he might be off somewhere singing the blues--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, people giving him money. But, he would know, he knew he had to meet us at a certain time. And, he also knew he couldn't take anything home that he didn't bring away from home unless he could explain and prove where he got it from.
Speaker 1: So, as--
Speaker 2: We would never, see, we were never allowed to steal because we couldn't take anything home that we couldn't identify.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about your high school years. You went to high school around about thirteen, fourteen possibly? Went to--you went to Pershing.
Speaker 2: I, I guess, I was 'cause that was--I was--yes. 'Cause I would've been, what, about in the eighth or ninth grade?
Speaker 1: Somewhere around there, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay.
Speaker 1: So, now, your, your younger brother who, and we'll focus on him because of his stature of who he was musically. He's seven or eight years old and growing up, where is he getting his blues idea from? Where--
Speaker 2: Listening to everything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Sneaking off. He would sneak off. He used to--how Le- he and Levi [Levi Stubbs] hooked up and would sneak off to the Paradise Theatre [Orchestra Hall] in Detroit [Michigan] and get on stage. They would wait 'til everybody went to bed and my father went to work and he, he climb out, of course, I helped him--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --climb through my bedroom window and he knew he had to be back home before my father got home from work.
Speaker 1: So, he would go, go and sing the blues.
Speaker 2: He would go--oh, yes, sing with all the big bands.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was the era of the big bands at the Paradise Theatre.
Speaker 1: Count Basie, and--
Speaker 2: Everybody. He was, he was doing that and he was fifteen.
Story_ID: 493367
Speaker 1: So, now, you're in high school [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan]. It's coming to the ends pretty soon. What, are you thinking about what it is you wanna do? You still wanna be a nurse now at this--?
Speaker 2: I still wanna be a nurse and my father [Mertis John, Sr.] still wants me to be a teacher. So, I became a clerical student. So, I, I studied the commerce- you know, took commercial so I could study--actually, I was studying biology and chemistry. And, I was, because I knew I was gonna have to have that for nursing anyway. But, I was also studying typing and shorthand and all of that. So, where ever I happened to fall, because he always said you need to know two good trades. So, if one thing doesn't work out, you can go to the other.
Speaker 1: So, then you, you get ready to graduate from high school around 1940. What year did you come out of high school?
Speaker 2: It was in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, it'd been around forty--because you went to Detroit [Michigan] in '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: It was like '47 [1947]--
Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948], some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I got married, my oldest son [Jesse Webster] was born--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1948, in October.
Story_ID: 493368
Speaker 1: So, now, you graduate from high school [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you do next?
Speaker 2: What I did next, I started going to business college. And, then I started studying nursing through a, what do they call it? A--
Speaker 1: Correspondence course.
Speaker 2: Correspondence course. So, I did that at--through Chicago School of Nursing [Chicago, Illinois] because I'm still wanting to be this nurse.
Speaker 1: Are you still living at home now, with your father [Mertis John, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I'm still living at home, but I got married very early.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about that. Who is, who is this gentlemen?
Speaker 2: I got married to a man named Jesse Pearl Webster [ph.].
Speaker 1: Where'd you meet him?
Speaker 2: I met him in Detroit [Michigan]. And, I was in high school when I met him. But, I met him at a friend's house that I would go when I was in high school. Of course, you know, you have more freedom the older you get, and you have more freedom. So, I would go over sometime and spend the weekend with a friend of mine because she was getting kind of elderly. She was a friend of my mother [Lillie Robinson John] and father. And, she rented rooms to single men that were working in the city.
Speaker 1: And, he saw--?
Speaker 2: He was from Atlanta, Georgia--
Speaker 1: And, he saw Mable [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Born and raised in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, of course, you know, my parents, my father not my mother, my father never gave me permission to court. He said, "Finish your education first." That's why I was telling you as I listen to my great-granddaughter talk to me last night. I said, "I cannot be as hard on her as my father was on me," you know. But, I wanted her to get an education. So, I met Jesse there.
Speaker 1: So, you were helping the older lady out and you met Jesse 'cause he--
Speaker 2: He stay--he lived there.
Speaker 1: Okay. He saw Mable, and, so, how did all of this come about? And, what did he say?
Speaker 2: You know, not a whole lot at one time because she knew my parents and she knew how strict they were on us about things.
Speaker 1: So, it was only gonna go so far so fast.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I knew if I was gonna marry him it was gonna almost be without courting. But, I got to the place and every weekend I was going over to her house. But, by now, I'm coming up on, you know, I'm about to be eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: And, you've been--so, now things are changing in your mindset?
Speaker 2: Yes. I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you probably knew--
Speaker 2: I'm going--I needed that change. I wanted to get married because I knew I could not, my father would've never permitted me to leave home and not be married and get an apartment--
Speaker 1: By yourself.
Speaker 2: By myself. So, I knew when I left home I had to be married. My father was not going to agree for me to date any man alive.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: When he get through scrutinizing him, he would not want to talk to me ever again. I knew all of those things. So, I said, when Jesse asked me to marry him I said, "If I do, it would have to be I leave home, and we go and get married. And, then I would have to call home and say, I got married."
Speaker 1: Elope almost.
Speaker 2: That's what they called it. So, we went into Toledo, Ohio.
Speaker 1: About seventy-five miles away.
Speaker 2: And, got married. And, then I called my mother and told her that I had gotten married. She said, "Your dad is going to die."
Speaker 1: So, what happened?
Speaker 2: She said, "And, you'll have to call him and tell him." I called him and I told him that I got married over the weekend in Toledo, Ohio. He said, "Well, you're grown now, and don't you come back here because you did not get permission from me." I said, "Okay."
Speaker 1: And, the rest is history.
Speaker 2: That, you know I wasn't gonna stay away from home and he was not gonna allow me to stay away.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, I didn't have my mother. I would call my mother when he was at work and by now we have a telephone, you know, 'cause times have changed.
Story_ID: 493369
Speaker 1: So, you and Jesse [Jesse Pearl Webster (ph.)] are living somewhere now. Where are you all living?
Speaker 2: We were living on the east side of, of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Not too far away from the folks, huh, really?
Speaker 2: Not too very far. Well, you know, we were living, when I got married, we were living, still living in the projects on Six Mile road. And--well, Six Mile and Dequindre [Street], and we were way over on the east side where we--
Speaker 1: Okay. On the (unclear) side.
Speaker 2: When we got married, where my mother's friend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You are more in the Conant Gardens area [Detroit, Michigan] and they were further?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. So, I would always talk to my mother [Lillie Robinson John] and she knew I was doing--I was doing fine. And, I started missing my father [Mertis John, Sr.]. I wanted to talk to my father. And, she said, "Well, you know his shift. If you wanna talk to him, call him." And, he would talk to me, and finally when I got pregnant, I was married, I call him and told him that I was pregnant.
Speaker 1: His first grandchild.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Now, how old are you? You were about eighteen?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, your husband, what did he do for a living at that point?
Speaker 2: He worked at Great Lakes Steel [Great Lakes Steel Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, he had a good--he had a job.
Speaker 2: Yeah. He was steel pickler.
Speaker 1: And, you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I, then I started studying full force, nursing, and business. I was taking both of these things because I was going to have my diplomas. I was going to have that education. I was gonna do--I had, then I had two professions. I could do business--
Speaker 1: Or, nursing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or, I could do nursing.
Speaker 1: So, you told your father that he was gonna have a grandchild. And, what did he say then?
Speaker 2: Not much of anything because he didn't like the idea.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He told me--he would talk to my mother, he would say to her, "I hate--," I only weighed about ninety pounds. Says, "She's just too young and she's too small to be having--." And, it bothered him because he just think, he thought that his daughter--I was still his baby. Because when I was born he told my mother, the moment that I was born, he said, "I don't care if ten more children come, this one is mine." And, he treated me like that all my life. That everybody could do everything else they wanted to do. But, I could do nothing. And, I knew he would've never given me permission to marry anybody or anything.
Speaker 1: So, it's around 1948--
Speaker 2: Eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949]. So you, so you--
Speaker 2: We're going into '49 [1949] now.
Speaker 1: And, you have a child on the way?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what was his name or her name?
Speaker 2: Jesse.
Speaker 1: Jesse.
Speaker 2: I named him after his father, Jesse Pearl [Jesse Webster].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, Jesse Pearl is born. So, now, you're a full grown woman with a husband and a baby.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: How is your life now?
Speaker 2: I was happy. Of course, Jesse was a gambler. And, he would waste up more money than you could, than the law would allow.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, I had never been accustom to people that waste their money.
Speaker 1: And, didn't do things with it properly.
Speaker 2: Didn't do things properly. But, I had been trained to respect money, and what money was for. He knew that he woul- he might gamble and lose all of his money. So, sometime he would ask me to meet him on his job, he got paid every two weeks, meet him on his job. He would cash his check and he would give me the money and he'd keep so much out for himself 'cause he knew he was gonna gamble.
Speaker 1: So, back then--
Speaker 2: He'd come home every day on time until payday. And, then he didn't come home that--he would get paid on a Thursday. If I didn't go and get the money, it would be gone. And, I would have to go and take him carfare to come home, on a Sunday.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had saved the money that he had given you previously, you had managed that money.
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew he would--well, some time he would win. But, I knew I always had to save. My father told me, "A penny saved is a penny earned."
Speaker 1: Because you certainly couldn't ask you parents for money at this point.
Speaker 2: I was not gonna allow them to even know that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, especially my father.
Speaker 1: Right. So, now, you're, you're going on through, and over the next few years, you have some more children, right, with Jesse?
Speaker 2: In 1950, I had Joel [Joel Webster].
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Gave birth to my, my second son, Joel.
Story_ID: 493370
Speaker 1: Now, is anything special happening around that time period beside Joel [Joel Webster] being born? That was a big--
Speaker 2: He [John's first husband, Jesse Pearl Webster (ph.)] was still gambling but I just had to leave him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I just didn't wanna spend the rest of my life not knowing if a man's gonna support me or not, and he made a lot of money. Because if you're bring three hundred dollars home every two weeks in 1949, '48 [1948], '49 [1949], and he had worked there [Great Lakes Steel Corporation] for a number of years.
Speaker 1: A lot of money back then.
Speaker 2: That's right. And, he would call me sometime after he had given me all of the money except maybe a hundred dollars. And, before I would go home, I would pay the light bill. I get money orders, pay the light bill, the gas bill, the telephone bill, then I stop at the market and I buy the food for two weeks. I lay some money aside in case he didn't win any money this week yet, he's gonna have to have carfare to go to work. I laid that aside.
Speaker 1: So, back then, it were addictions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, by the time I got home, he was calling asking me--because now he's off, he's already where he's gonna be the weekend, playing. He say--no, he would call sometime and he would speak to, if I wasn't at home, he'd call my mother [Lillie Robinson John] and say, where--, "Where's Mable [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mabel John]?" And, she would say, "Oh, she's out grocery shopping." "Oh, can you catch her because I need her to bring me some money." She said, "No. She's not near a phone. She's in the supermarket." So, whenever he would catch me back at home he say, "I need you to come and bring, bring me fifty dollars or a hundred dollars. I feel real lucky." And, I say, "Well, what happened to what you had?"
Speaker 1: Your own play money that you would already know that it would be gone anyway.
Speaker 2: And, I say, "Jesse, I don't have it." I said, I, "I just paid the bills. I pay, you know, your utility bills and I bought food. I don't have it." And, he said, "Well, why would you spend all the money to pay--?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I said, "'Cause it's gonna be two weeks before you have any more money." And, some time that would not be the truth. I, because I would save out enough for him to go to work 'cause I knew he was gonna need it.
Speaker 1: Now, during this '50 [1950], '51 [1951], when you decided that it was time to go, how many children did you have at this point when you left Jesse?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your brother at this point is doing something. Willie John, what is he doing? There's an amateur contest going on and he had this--what is he doing? 'Cause you're away from home, so, are you, are you keeping close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I moved back home.
Speaker 1: Oh, dad [Mertis John, Sr.] let you come back?
Speaker 2: With Joel--oh, oh, my father let me come back 'cause he had to see Jesse [Jesse Webster]. He had to look after his first grandchild. One day I called him and I said, "I'd like to come over because you need to see my baby." Well, he said, "What's stopping you?" I said, "Okay, I'll be over." So, I went over and took the baby. And, of course, he was, he loved, he loved, this was a boy. He loved it.
Speaker 1: So, now, that's his baby, now?
Speaker 2: Now, that's his baby.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And, but, he really fell in love with the second one because he was a preemie, Joel was a preemie. And, he just thought we should just take care of him. So, he spoiled him rotten.
Speaker 1: So, let's hold right there. We're gonna talk about what's going on. You're back home. Now, Little Willie John--
Speaker 2: Now, Willie, we were sneaking him out. My father gave me my room back because I said, "He's wasting his money, daddy. And, I cannot stay with a man--." See, my father always told me, if you have two trades, if you finish school, and you get out there and you make your bed hard, after you lay in it and you decide that you don't want to do it any longer, you can always come back home.
Story_ID: 493371
Speaker 1: So, now, you go home and even though you're daddy's [Mertis John, Sr.] baby, you're also a mother of two little boys [Jesse Webster and Joel Webster] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of two children. Two little boys.
Speaker 1: Two little boys. And, so, now the house is really bubbling with some toddlers, and you're back home. And, you have a good reason to be there.
Speaker 2: And, I'm helping my mother [Lillie Robinson John] with everything. And, what I'm doing is paying rent.
Speaker 1: For the first time?
Speaker 2: I'm paying rent for the first time because my theory was, that came from my father. Anything that you do for some else, you should be willing to do it for your own family because you're keeping all--everything in one place. They never put a price on me to pay. But, I thought if I'm gonna pay someone else rent, now I'm a woman, I'm back home with my mother and father, I'm gonna shoulder--I bought my own food. I paid them rent.
Speaker 1: Did you have a part-time job or something you were working at? Or, you just saved your money so well?
Speaker 2: Well, what I was doing, I was nursing. I was working as a private duty nurse 'cause that's what I love.
Speaker 1: Had you graduated from nursing school [Chicago School of Nursing, Chicago, Illinois]? Had you graduated from nursing school at this point? Had you got your--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had graduated. I had graduated from nursing school. And, I'm working as a nurse and I'm happy as a lark. My father's not saying anything about it because I'm not, I'm not teaching but I'm working and I have my own everything.
Speaker 1: And, contributing to the household.
Speaker 2: And, contributing. And, it was not something he wanted. I don't think he ever really wanted me to do it. But, I thought it was a good thing to do.
Story_ID: 493372
Speaker 1: Now, what was Willie doing?
Speaker 2: Oh lord, Willie was by now, Willie is growing up. And, he is determined that he's going for show business. So, I stayed in my mother [Lillie Robinson John] and father's [Mertis John, Sr.] house a while and then I got my own apartment.
Speaker 1: About 1953, '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: Let's see, '48 [1948], '50 [1950], 1950; yes.
Speaker 1: Around there?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I read somewhere that Little Willie John had won an amateur night at the Paradise Theatre [Orchestra Hall, Detroit, Michigan] by then.
Speaker 2: Yes. I had moved out of the house when he won that. Mrs. Stubbs is the one let the cat outta, you know 'cause people talk to each other. They don't talk anymore. But, people back then, parents talked. She went over to have coffee with my mother and father and tell them, "Aren't we proud of our children. Levi [Levi Stubbs] is winning these first prizes. William Edward is winning first prizes." And, my father said, "First prize doing what?"
Speaker 1: And, the cat was out the bag.
Speaker 2: And, she had to tell it. And, of course, the night that he won first prize I was still at home and put him out my bedroom window. So, my father had us testifying, telling how he got there and how he got back in. And, I was already making plan to move because I had children [Jesse Webster and Joel Webster] there. So, daddy sat him down, sat me down, sat all of the children down, he said, "So, this is what you want to do?" Talking to Willie. Willie say, "Yes, daddy."
Speaker 1: So, now, you all knew he could sing at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah. He's been singing in churches and throwing, breaking away--'cause we had our own singing group, The United Five. First we were the John Family Singers [ph.]. Then my father and we all decided we needed a different name. So, we called ourselves The United Five. The first five children in the family.
Speaker 1: And, you all were singing around Detroit [Michigan] and different places?
Speaker 2: With all of the quartet singers, church singers, doing--we were on the programs with everybody.
Speaker 1: But, not really, not on a professional level, just doing it?
Speaker 2: Well, they were professional and we were on those professional programs.
Speaker 1: Right. But, you all were--
Speaker 2: But, from church to church.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or, hall to hall, where ever they were having big gospel turnouts.
Speaker 1: So, long before the Winans, The United Five--
Speaker 2: They weren't, they weren't born. We're older than them.
Speaker 1: They were babies. But, long be--
Speaker 2: They weren't even born, some of 'em.
Speaker 1: They weren't the first family group. You all, you had many family groups. Okay.
Speaker 2: We probably was the first family group in gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, we didn't become famous doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my father said, "So, you want to sing the blues?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: "Yes." By now, Dizzy Gillespie's at our house and my mother's feeding him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have any real stories about Dizzy coming to your house?
Speaker 2: Well, he came to ask my mother and father, could Willie go on the road with him. 'Cause he was on that amateur show. My father said, "No, he's not going anywhere. He's a kid." My mother fed him and he became friends. And, then Lionel Hampton came to the house--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause he won on his show. My father said, "No. He's not going."
Speaker 1: Dizzy Gillespie and Lionel Hampton and your father did not care (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Story_ID: 493373
Speaker 1: So, then there was (cough), who was the guy, Little Esther [Esther Phillips] and she was--
Speaker 2: Johnny Otis?
Speaker 1: Johnny Otis. Willie left with Johnny Otis.
Speaker 2: What year would that have been?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, oh, I don't know. It might have been 1952 or '53 [1953] somewhere like that. But, now by this time, I've moved out of the house. I'm in my own. But now, they didn't give him permission to go. Because he left home to go on the road, the way I left home to get married.
Speaker 2: He called and told them.
Speaker 1: Well, no. I think I told, had to tell 'em because Willie came to my house, to my apartment, and he said, "I'm leaving tonight with Johnny Otis' band. And, I won't be back until I have a hit record." And, I said, "Oh, my god. Does Mother [Lillian Robinson John] dear know this?" "No. Nobody knows but you." And, by now, after the amateur thing, Willie now have, sung around in the city. So, him singing around in the city and everybody's loving his singing and he's singing the blues. We don't know anything about show business. (Laughter) So, my sister, Mildred [Mildred John], is working for a lady that owns a lot of theatres. And, he'll sing and mis- at the Warfield Theatres [Warfield Theatre, Detroit, Michigan] 'cause he's--she's working for Mrs. Warfield. So, he's gonna leave town. He's coming back with a hit record. He had heard that in Cincinnati [Ohio], there's a King Records and there's a man that's name Syd Nathan. So, he's gonna go and join--he's going to King Records. Well, he went to New York [New York] first. When he got to New York, he needed his hair processed.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, he goes to Sugar Ray Robinson's barbershop and he got his hair done. He--
Speaker 2: Because back then that was the look, right?
Speaker 1: That was the look. So, he met Sugar Ray and Sugar Ray took him home with him. And, Sugar Ray was married to, what's her name, Oh, god, why can't I think of her name?
Speaker 2: Is she an actress?
Speaker 1: Was it Etta Mae [sic. Edna Mae Robinson]? What was her name? It's not the woman, the la- they woman, the other lady he was married to 'til he passed, but I, I'll, we'll, we'll, I think of her name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll get it. Okay.
Speaker 1: It was his first wife [sic.]. He took Willie home to meet his wife. And, Willie stayed there with him a few days and then he went to Cincinnati. Walked into King Records, walked up to the receptionist and said, "I'm Little Willie John." By now, we're calling him Little Willie John because he kind of got that name in Detroit [Michigan] singing around locally. "And, I have an appointment with Mr. Syd Nathan." He had never seen the man, never talked to the man (laughter). And, they said, "Well, he's busy right now. He's in the studio in a session. Is he expecting you?" And, he said, "Yes, ma'am he is."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "Well, go right through there and if you don't see the red light on that means they're not, the machines are not on, they're not recording and you can go in."
Story_ID: 493374
Speaker 1: Willie stood right there, waited 'til the red light went off and went in there, on the break, and stood in the back. And, he heard Titus Turner, who wrote 'All Around the World,' singing and he was trying to make a run and Syd kept telling 'em, said, "We want you to do a certain thing when you get ready to say, grits ain't groceries and Mona Lisa was a man." And, Willie was listening to Titus trying to make that run. So, while the break was going on, Willie walked down and said, "I'm Little Willie John and I'm here to see to Mr. Syd Nathan." He said, "Sir," talking to Syd--talking to Titus Turner, "Are you trying to make a run that sounds like--," and Willie just sung the song.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, Titus Turner looked at him and said, "You know my song?" He said, "Well, I heard you singing it as I was standing back there waiting to talk to Mr. Syd Nathan." He said, "Do you know the whole song?" He said, "Well, I know what I heard you sing." He said, "Sing it." So, at that time you know, everybody's in the studio together, the musicians--
Speaker 2: All the--everybody, everybody got quiet now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Everybody's quiet, but all the--everybody is together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they didn't, you didn't do--
Speaker 2: There were no booths.
Speaker 1: No. So, they started the music and he did it in his key, did all the runs. He told--and, so, Syd--Titus told Syd, "Let's record him doing it." He said, "Well, I came here for a contract with Mr. Syd Nathan." He said, "I wrote the song and this is Syd Nathan." And, he said, "What do you say Syd?" He said, "Well, let's, let's have lunch and we'll bring--we'll see if he can do it." And, that was history.
Speaker 2: So, he went and took a record deal?
Speaker 1: He took a record deal.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Called me on the phone, said, "Meet me at the airport. Pick me up." Willie got off the, off the plane in shorts and the demo in his hand, like big like the 78s [78 rpm record], and walked off the plane. Not coming inside the airport 'cause at that time they didn't, you didn't get off on the inside. Coming down the steps, "I told you I wouldn't be back until I got a hit record."
Speaker 2: Wow, as he told his big sister. Now, big sister had to make the phone call.
Speaker 1: Well, I had to make to phone call when he left home to say, "Willie decided that he was just gonna go on to New York [New York] and make it."
Speaker 2: And, what happened then? What was the comments from your father [Mertis John, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: Well, Willie was a boy. He wasn't me. And, everybody knew what Willie wanted to do. And, my dad didn't say very much of anything. So, when he got back home, they found Harry Balk and Frank Glussman and he became, they, they became Willie's manager and my dad left his job at Dodge Main [Dodge Factory, Hamtramck, Michigan] and went on the road with Willie--
Speaker 2: So, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) until he, until he became a man.
Story_ID: 493375
Speaker 1: Now, what are doing as a career at this p- at this time when all of this is going on, what are you doing? Were you at the insurance company then?
Speaker 2: No. I was at the insurance company as a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before I got out of high school [John J. Pershing High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was working for Mrs. Gordy. Daddy [Mertis John, Sr.] allowed me to work during the summer with her and she gave me the first job I ever had.
Speaker 1: So, you have some experience with the Gordys?
Speaker 2: I had experience with the Gordys before there was a Motown [Motown Records].
Speaker 1: So, you worked in the insurance company with Mrs. Gordy?
Speaker 2: Friendship Mutual Insurance Company [Friendship Mutual Life Insurance Company, Detroit, Michigan], and then they merged with Supreme Liberty Life [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] where she was one of the head people there.
Speaker 1: So, you knew, you had a direct connection but didn't know it, to one of the biggest moguls in the music history; his mamma, and family--
Speaker 2: He had no musical history at that time.
Speaker 1: Right. Right, right. So, so, you were right there--
Speaker 2: He was working at Fords [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Right. He was working at the plant.
Speaker 2: And, I met him in the Chesterfield Lounge [Detroit, Michigan] getting his hair processed.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: When my boyfriend, Mack Burcey [ph.] was doing his hair. And, he said to me, "You need to stop coaching all these church choirs free."
Speaker 1: So, at this point, you had been going around helping choirs?
Speaker 2: I was the state minister of music of my church. I never told you that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had always worked in the church with the music. And, my boyfriend was always telling me, because I was doing it free, "That you should do something with her talent." And, I said, "No. I sing gospel and that's it." And, he is the one that introduced me to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy. But, I didn't know it was Bertha Gordy's [Bertha Fuller Gordy] son.
Speaker 1: So, what did Mack do for a living? What was he?
Speaker 2: He was a barber.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, this would have been what, about what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, this was, let me see how many children did I have? I had all, I had four children at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--
Speaker 2: That was like 19--
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: No. I didn't have all, I didn't, I didn't have four children in '56 [1956]. I had--yes, I did. Because Lim [Limuel C. Taylor] was born in '54 [1954], and he was my baby at that time. Because Berry Gordy coached me and--before he had a company.
Speaker 1: Before there was a Motown.
Speaker 2: And, then two week af- that picture that you saw of me and Billie Holiday was the first profess- real professional show, with all professionals that I had done. And, that was two or three weeks before she passed.
Speaker 1: Was it--?
Speaker 2: She was at the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Now, did, was this, now before that, had you opened for Etta James yet?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. You hadn't opened for Etta James yet. Okay, so let's--
Speaker 2: Now, I'm just getting started.
Speaker 1: You're getting started. So you, so you, okay let's go to that point. You're at the Flame Show but you're just going around, and now you're thinking about it a little bit. Berry Gordy coached you--
Speaker 2: He's coaching me and Maurice King (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, you're thinking about sing--
Speaker 2: Has the band at the Flame. And, in his coaching he wants me to go to the Flame and watch all of these fabulous ladies.
Speaker 1: Now, that was a jazz club at that point, the Flame Show?
Speaker 2: That's right. Of course, a little bit of everything but mostly jazz. I went there to see Ella Fitzgerald, Dakota Staton--
Speaker 1: Dinah Washington is she--?
Speaker 2: Dinah Washington. Who is our lady here with the church?
Speaker 1: Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett].
Speaker 2: Della Reese. And, then he puts me on the show to open for Billie Holiday.
Speaker 1: Now, that had to be an experience.
Speaker 2: Now, that's the first, that's my first big thing.
Speaker 1: So, in the, in the music world, we say your first gig, professional gig was opening for Billie--
Speaker 2: For the biggest woman in the world.
Speaker 1: So, now, what did you think at this time?
Speaker 2: I was scared out of my wits. And, Berry--
Speaker 1: At the Flame Show Bar--
Speaker 2: And, Berry Gordy did not show up to play for me because during those times, he coached me but he was the piano player. And, I did not know that I could sing without Berry Gordy. And, he did not show up for opening night.
Speaker 1: A lot of times singers do have a dependence on the person who's their accompanist.
Speaker 2: And he said that's why he didn't show up.
Speaker 1: And most people don't know Berry Gordy was a jazz piano player.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That was his first entree (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was playing the blues for me. 'Cause he could play and write anything.
Story_ID: 493376
Speaker 1: Now, Billie Holiday, you get there to the, you get there, you're opening for her. This is, this is toward the end of her life.
Speaker 2: You're--yes.
Speaker 1: Very close. So, you sing and you--?
Speaker 2: No, before I sing, I almost faint.
Speaker 1: 'Cause she walks in there?
Speaker 2: No. No, no, no, no, no. Berry's [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] not there to play for me--
Speaker 1: Okay. That's right, he's not--
Speaker 2: And, Maurice King is telling it's time for you to get dress, you gotta go on. Ziggy Johnson [Joseph "Ziggy" Johnson] was the emcee.
Speaker 1: So, who was gonna play the piano for you?
Speaker 2: Maurice King.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, he says, "Come on, you gotta go on."
Speaker 2: She said--and, I wasn't dressed. I said, "I'm waiting on Berry to get here." He's said, "He's not coming." I said, "Then, I can't go on."
Speaker 1: And, musician--
Speaker 2: And, he said, "Billie Holiday can't come on until you go on. And, either you going on tonight or you will never go on."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He said, "Berry's not coming." 'Cause see, they all knew Berry wasn't coming.
Speaker 1: Except you?
Speaker 2: Except me.
Speaker 1: He had pulled one on you.
Speaker 2: So, I went on.
Speaker 1: Now, is Billie Holiday there yet, in the building yet?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. She was there.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: She was standing in the doorway of the dressing room watching me perform.
Speaker 1: And, had you met her officially, prior to you going on?
Speaker 2: I had met her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, just an introduction (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Saying hi. Okay. And, you probably, it was probably a blur because now you gotta go on stage without your accompanist.
Speaker 2: And, then I came off.
Speaker 1: Do you recall what you sang while you were up there, the song you did?
Speaker 2: She was there while I was singing. She was standing there.
Speaker 1: The song--no, no, no, your song. What did you sing up there? What song did you sing that night? Do you recall? Or, was it all a blur to you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I sang some blues song.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't even remember. I don't think that's ever come up in life since that night. But, I did about three songs. I don't even remember. But, they were some Dinah Washington songs I think. And, maybe one of Della Reese's [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] songs. Because at that time, I didn't have a song out.
Speaker 1: Do you recall the audience reaction when you sung? Was it--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they acted like they loved me, you know, and they were being very kind. Once I started singing, I felt all right. But, just the fact that Berry wasn't there, I wasn't afraid that I could not sing. I could not sing if Berry didn't play.
Speaker 1: Right (laughter). I understand.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, when I came off, the band took a break and then they were gonna come back, do one number, and introduce Billie Holiday. And, she said, "It's time for me to get dressed." She said, "Come on to my dressing room with me." So, I walked into her dressing room which was next to mine. And, she said, "Were you scared?" I said, "Yes." She said, "You did, you did good. You did all right." She said, "You can do all right. And, everybody's scared the first time." And, she said, "I'm gonna get dressed. But, what are you doing tomorrow?" I said, "Nothing, but getting ready for tomorrow night." She said, "Come down to my hotel." I think she was at the Gotham Hotel.
Speaker 1: Which would've been a black hotel at that point, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: For all the black entertainers to stay at in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: And, I went down. So, and I went down every day that she was there after that. 'Cause she was schooling me and getting me ready. She said, "Honey, you can make it." She said, "I'm gonna tell you a few things you'll gonna have to do, and you'll make it." She said, "Don't depend on anybody else making it for you. You have--you'll have a different musician every night. So, don't even, don't even get tuned in--unless you get your own band." And, said, "And, if one musician can't show up, you still gotta hire another one." And, I said, "Oh, but, I'm so--I know exactly what's Berry's gonna do." She said, "Well, you have charts, you'll know what everybody else is gonna do because you find that out in rehearsal." She said, "But, I want you to forget about all of that." She told me about her life. And, then she said, "But, what I want you to remember are three things and you will do well. Know when to begin, and when it's time to quit. And, then have guts enough to say, I've done enough. And, guts enough to say I quit." She said, "I never knew how to say any of those."
Speaker 1: That was not about music was it?
Speaker 2: It was about life. And, every time I embark upon anything else, I have a church now, Joy in Jesus Ministry [Joy In Jesus, Inc.]. I know and I hear her voice when we embark on, upon anything when it's time to start it, and it run its course, and I have no problem saying, because I can still hear her saying, "It's time to quit." It's time for change. And, I say, "Nope, we're not gonna do that."
Story_ID: 493377
Speaker 1: Say those three things again for us? Know, know, when to start.
Speaker 2: Know when to start. You know this is something that you can do. Or, something--you might not know all that there is to know about it, because you learn as you go. But, you know it's time, this is a good thing to do. Then you know when you have finished. You, you--I've done it. And, say, "No. I'm, I finished this now." And, then have guts enough to say, "I quit. I'm through. I finished."
Speaker 1: Had enough.
Speaker 2: This is enough.
Speaker 1: They're other stories I've interviewed recently that said she's told them the same thing. I think it was [HistoryMaker] Sonny Turner from the, from The Platters.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He said, he was in the company of Arthur Prysock and, and possibly Billie Holi- it was Billie Holiday and Arthur Prysock. And, she was going on stage and they were back stage or something. And, he was ready to go on, a young man, before The Platters and she said, "Oh, you're the singer, huh?" And, she pulled her sleeve up and said, "You see this? Don't ever do this." And, said, that, and Arthur Prysock told him, "You heard her, right?" And, that was it. He said from that day, he never touched anything like that. So, do you think that those people back in the day, even though they may have had their demons, they knew how, how demonic these things were, and they tried their best in their own way to stop you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she told me, she didn't know when to say I quit. She said, "You work hard to become popular. You want people to love you. You want them to really enjoy you. You wanna make the money. You want to be famous. So, you achieve that. You have a hit record. The people love you, and they're coming to see you and you're making the money. And, whoever pushed you there is still saying, 'You can do this. You ought to do this. You better do this. You need to do this.' And, because you think you have to accommodate them because they put you there. You go beyond your limit." And, you see, I was with her. So, I was with her when the nurse was there with her. Now, she has to be administered to.
Speaker 1: Tell us about it?
Speaker 2: The drug has to be administered to her. Her life was hooked into that. And, I've never smoked. I've never drank hard liquor. I, you know, I've drank wine. I never liked the taste of champagne, so champagne is out. I never smoked. I never used drugs in any form. Other than medication that a doctor would give me and my body is so not accustom to pharmaceuticals, it doesn't do well when medication, even if the doctor prescribes it. So, I take herbs, and vitamins, and good food, and exercise, and fresh air, and prayer.
Speaker 1: So, now--
Speaker 2: And, that's my life.
Speaker 1: Two weeks prior, so, so, so you meet her like a two or three week prior to her leaving this planet, right? Is that true, she passed about two weeks after you met her?
Speaker 2: Two to three. I, I'm, it was very close; two to three.
Speaker 1: So, do you feel like that that message was for you?
Speaker 2: It was because she demanded that I come every day. And, every day she would tell me another story. Of stories that I will not tell until I'm doing my autobiography because it's, it's personal and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It meant so much to me. It's, well, the next person that embraced me after that that carried me on and did the same kind of thing was Ruth Brown. She gave me my first gowns.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Professional gowns.
Speaker 1: And, I think, and I've had some experience to play for Ruth Brown. And, Ruth Brown actually, I believe, I think Billie told her--here's a story that I wanna see if you've ever heard this story. Ruth Brown said she was somewhere singing and she had a whole Billie Holiday act going on.
Speaker 2: Told her to get your own act and be yourself.
Speaker 1: Actually, the same story.
Speaker 2: And, she, and she told me that. Don't try and emulate anyone. She said, "When you get at that microphone, it's yours. The people came to see you. Whatever you are, that's who they wanna see."
Speaker 1: So, Ruth Brown gave you your first gowns?
Speaker 2: She gave me my first gowns, told me, "Your brother is wearing Mohair suits and got his hair processed."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: "And, he's Little Willie John. But, when you step on the stage, you are Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John]. And, I want you to look as equally as good as he." And, she gave me sixteen gowns from her home in her closet. And, put me in position. I just finished a movie with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover that's coming out in December, December 28, 2007, in Los Angles [California] and New York [New York], and worldwide in January, called 'Honeydripper.' Ruth Brown did the demons on all of the music I sang in the film without my knowing it, she was too sick to do anything else. And, when I finished the film, and I didn't know she had done the demos until I told the, the music director, "Let me see the--hear the whole track." And, I heard her voice. And, she passed two days after I finished this film last year.
Story_ID: 493378
Speaker 1: So, Ruth Brown realizes that now at this point, your brother is a star and--?
Speaker 2: And, they traveled and worked together.
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: That's how I met her.
Speaker 1: So, she wanted you to say, you should be on the same level. That's your brother and if you performing--perform like the star that you should be also.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because music was, you were still doing it, now, but, you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] with him. That was my first trip to the Apollo Theater was with Willie [Little Willie John]. That was after I had worked with Etta James.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell us about the Etta James experience.
Speaker 2: Etta James and I were both booked at the Key Club in Minneapolis, Minneso- [Minnesota] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna hold for one second. Now, at this point, you're music, music is on now. You've decided you're gonna--
Speaker 2: By now I'm recording for Motown [Motown Records]. So, I'm traveling because of the records being out.
Speaker 1: 'Cause [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy has started Motown now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By this time, yeah, he started Motown.
Speaker 1: So, he's left Ford [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan]--?
Speaker 2: And, I am the first single female artist that signed to the company, Tamla [Tamla Records; Motown Records].
Speaker 1: So, what year is it? About 19--?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [sic. 1959], or whenever Motown started.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the first female artist, single female artist 'cause the other female artist that was there right before Berry had a company, was Claudette Robinson [Claudette Rogers Robinson], [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson's wife. And, she was not even married to him at that time 'cause Smokey managed The Miracles and me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had no company.
Speaker 1: He was a manager?
Speaker 2: Yes. And, then he went on to own the publishing company, Jobete [Jobete Music Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: 'Cause he wasn't even, Smokey wasn't really into singing then, was he just kind of managing--?
Speaker 2: He was--no, no, Smokey was--no, Berry Gordy was the manager.
Speaker 1: Okay. Berry was the manager of both those groups; The Miracles--?
Speaker 2: See, it wasn't Smokey and The Miracles [Smokey Robinson and The Miracles] then.
Speaker 1: It was The Miracles.
Speaker 2: It was just The Miracles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, Smokey happened to be The Miracle. He was the lead--
Speaker 1: One of the Mira- okay.
Speaker 2: He was the lead singer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, now it's The Miracles and you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, Berry Gordy is the manager of both?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And, none of us had a contract. He put them on another label for one song. Was it Inn Records [All Inn Records] or something and he was trying to make a deal for me.
Speaker 1: So, what is your father [Mertis John, Sr.] saying? Now, his son is a big star but he's fol- but, he's on the road with him now, so he's happy with him now.
Speaker 2: No. But, I'm, I'm grown and I have all these, I have a family.
Speaker 1: But, how about your--his daughter is a singer?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father never stopped, my father was fine because he would travel with me at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, he's, so, so your father is one of the first, I guess, you would say companions to the stars. He's going with you and, and his son; he's doing both?
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, when Willie became twenty-one he didn't travel with him any longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, whenever I went someplace, traveling to sing my--I ask him to go with me.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you used to a man, and your family going with you.
Speaker 2: I knew my father was gonna protect me.
Story_ID: 493379
Speaker 1: So, now you're on the road and you go, there's an Etta James experience. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Etta James became friends through Willie and my father [Mertis John, Sr.]. And, we are booked by the same booking agency, Universal Attraction [Universal Attractions Agency] out of New York [New York]. And, Ben Bart owned Universal Attraction. And, somebody was supposed to come into the Minneapolis [Minnesota] Key Club and they couldn't come. And, they hired Etta because Etta was booked by the same booking agency also. And, because I'm booked by the same agency and Willie's booked by the same agency, they say, "I'll send Willie John's sister and Etta James." And, that was the first time Etta and I had worked together. And, we're sitting in the apartment that they gave us to live in over the Key Club, and it's as cold as the North Pole.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, we're sitting there talking and Etta James is saying to me, "Why are you not traveling with your brother Willie?" I said, "He--I never thought about it and he never asked me." And, she would always open for him. They would work together a lot. She said, "I'm gonna tell them, don't book me with Willie not another time." I said, "Well, don't do that." She said, "I have Willie's itinerary." I said, "I do too." She got Willie on the phone and she said, "We're in Minneapolis about to freeze to death. And, I wanna know why your sister don't open for you and I'm opening for you all the time." He said, "She never said she wanted to." She just handed me the phone, and he said, "Hello," and I said, "Hello." He said, "You didn't tell me you wanted to travel with me." I said, "And, you didn't tell me you wanted me to." I said, "I never thought about it." He said, "Do you wanna travel with me?" I said, "Yes. It's okay." And, that was the beginning of it. And, I met him in Port Arthur, Texas.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the, you know, you hear stories and we see the industry today. But, it seem like it, like it wasn't so glamorous. It seem like it was fun but, but it wasn't a lot of glamour by in those days for artist. There was hard work, study, and a lot to prove who you were. Is that fair to say that? I mean, you couldn't just get up there and start doing something.
Speaker 2: Well, see, I never experienced that, because Willie had a million seller, 2 million sellers before I ever went to work with him.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: So, I guess, a lot of things that people experienced, I didn't. He was playing, playing all the best houses, making as much money as people were making back then. When he made his first hundred thousand dollars, you know, that was a whole lot of money back then.
Speaker 1: Was it more of a (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he had his first million seller, and we did a lot of one-nighters. We, we worked from New York to Mississippi; one-nighters. Started at Rockland Palace [New York, New York] and it was all of--it was Shirley [Shirley Goodman] and Lee [Leonard Lee], it was [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, it was The Flamingos, it was Roy Hamilton, it was Little Willie John.
Speaker 1: How did you all travel back then? Train, bus?
Speaker 2: On a bus. A chartered bus.
Speaker 1: Long trips; one-nighters, each night.
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't make the whole trip in one night. We would do six hundred miles, six hundred--yeah, six hundred miles stretches.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Go from, go from New York to the Carolinas; from the Carolinas to the Tennessees, the Tennessees to the Louis- the--New Orleans, Louisiana. Where they put a--
Speaker 1: How was life on the road for you doing that? 'Cause you, 'cause you really had another thing about you wanted to be a nurse. So, now you're out here on the road singing the blues around the country with your brother. What did you think, on buses? But, a few years prior to that, you hadn't thought about doing that.
Speaker 2: I never thought about doing 'til ins- 'til somebody brought it up to me. But, everything I've ever done, somebody else have told me, or put me in position to do it. I never thought about doing a movie (laughter), you know. I, I--it's, my life has always been that way.
Story_ID: 493380
Speaker 1: So, let's flash forward. So, you open for Etta James and you start off--and she tells you, "You know what, I'm not doing this, you're gonna do it," (laughter). And basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it, and it happened. And, I traveled with Willie [Little Willie John] until he was no longer here.
Speaker 1: So, now, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, you sign with Berry Gordy though, in the process of while this was going on?
Speaker 2: I signed with Berry Gordy, and he knew that Berry Gordy was my manager even before that time. And, he was always a little bit jealous because he thought I gave Berry Gordy too much attention. And, he'd always remind me of what my father [Mertis John, Sr.] said, "Blood is thicker than water," and you should be with your blood.
Speaker 1: But, it was time for you to do your own things, so to speak after all.
Speaker 2: Well, I was just beginning. You know, I wasn't ready for a Willie John show at the beginning, any more than I was ready for a Billie Holiday show.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: So, everybody have a beginning. Somebody else gets you and you're learning as you go.
Speaker 1: So, how was that on the road with your brother opening for him? Did you all have little conflicts about things because--?
Speaker 2: We had no conflicts, 'cause I let him call the shots and I did whatever he wanted me to do.
Speaker 1: Did, did he ever tell you--?
Speaker 2: I was the oldest, and he, he picked the songs from my catalog that he wanted me to sing. He picked songs that Brook Benton and Dinah Washington had as hits. And, he and I learned them and did them together on stage. He told the band how fast to play my songs and what to do. He hit me in my back when we're singing there together so I would do all these optics with him when he was doing them. And, it worked out fine.
Speaker 1: And, so, so, he was a good coach, and you, and you let him be that (laughter).
Speaker 2: I let him. He was my brother.
Story_ID: 493381
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I went from there and somebody else took my life over. I left Motown [Motown Records] and went to Stax [Stax Records]. [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes and David Porter were my producers, and we wrote together.
Speaker 2: So, before we get to Stax, though, so, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] signed you on--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --signed you. Does anything big come out of that association?
Speaker 1: The first--well, we were always very close friends but, the--we recorded some very good songs that even 'til four years ago, they're all now packaged in a package that said--
Speaker 2: Compilation?
Speaker 1: Yes. 'Call my Name, it's Mable' [sic. 'My Name is Mable: The Complete Collection']. And, and those songs are in there. And, "Who Wouldn't Love a Man Like That" was the first song. And, "No Love" was the first song that I ever did. And, even Stevie Wonder came on as a kid after that and reproduced the song on me again with a whole new version.
Speaker 2: So, you sign with Motown and you have a, you have a couple little regional hits there, or was it pretty big?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did that one. "Who Wouldn't Love A Man Like That," "Actions Speak Louder Than Words." But, I did six or eight songs for Tamla [Tamla Records; Motown Records] which was owned by Motown.
Speaker 2: So, now, why did you leave Motown?
Speaker 1: Because I saw things changing and I didn't think I could sing anything but the blues.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, I, I asked Berry to give me a release and he did.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the other artist that you saw coming in and you said, well I don't really do that. I do something different.
Speaker 1: The Vandellas [Martha and the Vandellas], [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves. And, when The Supremes came in. And, I saw the, I saw the trend of music changing. It had to change so Berry's company could survive. But, I didn't know that I could be in that mix. And, I just didn't feel that I could do it. I asked him for the release. He gave it to me. I went to Stax from there--
Speaker 2: And, it felt like home at Stax, huh?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: It felt like home at Stax?
Speaker 1: It felt like home because I could do all the stuff that I could do. And, then I has an Isaac Hayes and an Al Bell and Deanie Parker and a David Porter, and a Booker T. and the MGs, and Steve Cropper and they--we were all writing together and putting this together, together. Then I had the MGs as my band; that played on everything that I did.
Speaker 2: So that folks will know at Stax that there, a lot of people that came out Stax; Isaac Hayes, Otis Redding--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The Staple Singers--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Wilson Pickett, Luther Ingram, Albert King, The Bar-Kays, Johnnie Taylor--
Speaker 1: Eddie Floyd.
Speaker 2: Rufus [Rufus Thomas], Carla, Rufus and Carla Thomas.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, you felt at home with that being a southern girl, good music--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And, it felt right to you. And, it really was an extension, the feeling of gospel. Motown didn't have that same--Motown had a polished thing.
Speaker 1: Yes. But, I, but, I needed to feel comfortable and it felt, it felt like home to me. Now, I didn't wanna leave Berry Gordy. He told me, "We will always be friends. If I can't give you what you look, you're looking for here and you know where it is, we can be friends; go get it."
Speaker 2: There have been great comparisons to Motown and Stax who were both making good records at that time. But, they said, Motown was the polished label; had all the slickest jazz musicians--
Speaker 1: But, they got me ready.
Speaker 2: They got you ready.
Speaker 1: Now, Motown prepared me for show business.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Berry Gordy, the Gordys prepared me for show business. Stax allowed me to settle in and find myself and be sure of myself. Ray Charles recruited me from Stax.
Speaker 2: So, how long did you stay at Stax?
Speaker 1: As long as that--until, 'til they declared bankruptcy.
Speaker 2: Okay. So, you were at Stax for years. Now, wasn't Al Green on Stax at some point also? Was he on Stax?
Speaker 1: He was never on the Stax label. He might have--he recorded there, I'm su- 'cause so many people, even The Beatles came in there to record.
Speaker 2: Now, you had so many, you had bunch--in '66 [1966] "Your Good Thing (Is About to End)." That--
Speaker 1: Which became a classic.
Speaker 2: And, Lou Rawls even did that song.
Speaker 1: Yes. And, also Bonnie Raitt.
Speaker 2: Bonnie Raitt--
Speaker 1: And, everybody went gold on it.
Speaker 2: So, but, it was already a hit before in 19--
Speaker 1: It was hit with me, in 1966.
Speaker 2: Six [1966]. And--
Speaker 1: It was my first million seller.
Speaker 2: So, Stax was putting them out at that point. They had that one, then they had, they had another one, it wasn't on you but Eddie Floyd put "Knock On Wood" out--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The next year. So, Stax has got--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Some energy now.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What, what were they saying about Motown, you know, because Motown was strong too? Was there kind of a competition going on?
Speaker 1: We, you know, we didn't look at it like that, we were looking at doing what we do. We were not trying to compete. They have never been competition with another record company when it came to Stax.
Speaker 2: So, and so the tours were different too. Because they have the Motown tours, The Temptations and all of that--
Speaker 1: And, sometime there were times when Otis was playing with some of the Motown artist because we--see, and I worked with everybody because Willie [Little Willie John] was at King [King Records].
Speaker 2: Exactly. So, you could across, you were everywhere (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, and, you know, they were, hey, we were all in show business. So that was important to me.
Story_ID: 493382
Speaker 1: Tell us about [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes. This is long before 'Shaft' records and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: It was long before he had a hit.
Speaker 1: Right. Tell us about what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, I've been in the beginning of so many things so I think, I have been like an icebreaker because Stax [Stax Records] named me their goodwill ambassador 'cause I brought the Stax music back from Memphis [Tennessee] to Chicago [Illinois], so it could get played in Chicago--
Speaker 1: All those stations.
Speaker 2: On WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. [HistoryMaker] Lucky Cordell was my manager. But, he was also the station program director for WVON. So, I wanted my company on the map and I wanted my manager to be the one to get the credit for bring Stax from Memphis to the East Coast.
Speaker 1: How was Isaac Hayes as a musician and a person?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, he's fabulous. He is fabulous. I enjoyed working with him. And, you know, we still work together. We still work together.
Speaker 1: So, Stax did a lot, Stax goes to Europe. You went to Europe. Was that your first overseas, your overseas trip in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: My first overseas Europe was during my first Stax days.
Speaker 1: In '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: I went to Stax in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: So, how did you--so, tell us about Europe. Europe, now you see something totaling different now, you're in Europe and how is that now for you?
Speaker 2: Wonderful. See, I was never--my parents [Lillie Robinson John and Mertis John, Sr.] trained me to be ready for the world. Where ever you go, if you're a lady, the world is waiting for you.
Speaker 1: So, you were, you were ready--
Speaker 2: For whatever that had to do with what I'm doing.
Speaker 1: So, now, is this where you saw the queen [Elizabeth II]?
Speaker 2: Not that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I had the audience with the queen it was when we were on a--see, I did nine world tours with Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we'll--
Speaker 2: So, it was during, it was during (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One of those.
Speaker 2: During some of those, some of those time, times.
Speaker 1: So, you go to Europe and in '67 [1967]. It was kind of a sad tour because Otis Redding's plane when down when you were in Europe. Is that correct? Otis Redding plane--
Speaker 2: It didn't go down in Europe. It went down in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: No, no, I mean, Milwaukee but you were in Europe when this happened or ended up around the same time? 'Cause it's '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Yes. But, what I'm saying to you, we were back from Europe--
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: We went to Europe more than one time.
Speaker 1: You were back?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I went to Milwaukee because I was living in Chicago. And, I had just left Otis in Memphis. When he was leaving on his plane coming to Milwau- coming to right outside of Milwaukee on his plane. And, he asked me if I would wanna fly back with him and send my car on. So, I missed--
Speaker 1: The plane.
Speaker 2: --dying to--by telling him, "No, I don't like to fly private planes. So, I'm gonna ride back to Chicago in my car with my brother [Little Willie John]."
Speaker 1: Which all went back, which went back to knowing when to saying, "I've had enough," (laughter).
Speaker 2: And, then I was playing the radio, we got into Chattanooga [Tennessee], driving, and my brother and I was listening and the news (snaps fingers) broke in on the music and said, "We have sad news, Otis Redding's plane just went down and all are presumed dead." And, I said, "Pull the car over to the curb." 'Cause see they had, he got a little bit hurt with me because I wouldn't get on the plane with him. But, I would've been gone.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Today, would've never happened for me. So, we were, we were both there. He had just finished recording, took a day of my time, and he went back to Macon [Georgia] to get ready to leave. And, he said, "You need to get on the plane. You need to fly with me. You'll be there in a few hours. It's gonna take your car--you'll be, won't get there until tomorrow," and, you know, and--I had no other reason for saying no but I just--
Speaker 1: Something inside.
Speaker 2: Didn't wanna fly on that plane, on that private plane.
Speaker 1: Well, we're glad that you didn't. So, you continued, that's a sad thing, and that kind of changes, how does that change the climate at Stax now? Everybody kind of in a different kind of--?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was definitely a damper because we were at the break of something as big as life. 'Cause Otis had really, he was our man at, you know, he, he, and we could see 'cause he was so charismatic. It was, it was a sad time.
Speaker 1: And, and, most of The Bar-Kays also, The Bar-Kays, people don't know that, that--
Speaker 2: Except two.
Speaker 1: So, those two started the new ones later on after that. Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes. One of The Bar-Kays was on the plane, and was thrown from that plane into the water and held on to a branch. He's a trumpet player. He's in Memphis now. Now, he was injured.
Speaker 1: But, he held on.
Speaker 2: But, he didn't die. The other boy missed the flight.
Speaker 1: So, there was something going on for that for sure. As we know, The Bar-Kays became a great funk band later in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they were the, they was the horns on my stuff--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All my Stax stuff.
Story_ID: 493383
Speaker 1: So, now we go through '67 [1967] and you're still at Stax [Stax Records] now. Otis [Otis Redding] has passed away and things are bad now. In '68 [1968] something else that's more personal occurs.
Speaker 2: Willie passes.
Speaker 1: Now, where is he at this time?
Speaker 2: At this time, he's in Walla Walla prison [Washington State Penitentiary, Walla Walla, Washington] but he's getting ready to come home?
Speaker 1: Is there any reason--are you able to say why he was there, or?
Speaker 2: He was there because he had been accused of killing a man. But, we knew he couldn't have done it.
Speaker 1: Well, well what was the story that supposedly happened, that's supposedly happened?
Speaker 2: He was at, after he finished performing in Seattle [Washington], he went to an after hour club. And, he was talking with a young lady. A man came in that somebody--he had already been in some kind of brawl back there in the back--
Speaker 1: The other guy, yeah.
Speaker 2: The other guy. Willie hadn't. He had just walked in. The party was for him. A lady walked over to the table where Willie was and said, "Are you Little Willie John?" And, he said, "Yes, ma'am I am." She was a young lady. He stood up and offered her his chair. The man stumbled out of the, where ever he was, told the lady to get up. Willie said to the man, "She's with me." And, he slapped the lady; the man did. And, Willie said, "She's with me." When he said that, the man hit Willie, knocked him--the man was 235 pounds. Willie weighed 130 pounds wet. And, he had nothing on him. And, when Willie got ready to get up, he hit Willie again, knocked him down again. And, Willie went into a seizure 'cause he had epilepsy. When he came to he said the last thing he remembered when he was going down on the floor for the last time, was a man behind the bar said, "Willie John defend yourself, he's gonna kill you." And, someone else said that this man pushed a little pairing knife down the bar. But, Willie was on the floor, and now he's into a seizure. When Willie woke up there was nobody in that club but he and the dead man. He was laying beside the dead man. There was never a weapon found. Willie didn't know the man. I don't really know if the man knew Willie. But somebody had stabbed the man and they--when the police came was nobody there but Willie and dead man.
Speaker 1: And, back then, there were no video cameras and all of that. It was just hearsay, and reasons--
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, we--I found out enough to know that he had, the man had had problems with somebody else and having the problems with somebody else, that Willie was setup, you know--
Speaker 1: As people are today.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So, and then I got pretty close to finding out some things that they didn't want found out. And, I had to back away for the sake of Willie's children. Because I received some information that said that I needed to walk away because Willie had children, and you would like to see them grow up, so.
Speaker 1: There it is. So, he goes to prison on, on whatever charges. And--
Speaker 2: And, then I worked to get him released. Got him out a couple times to go to, one time to go back to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] for the last time. And, he went back to prison because I was raising money to pay off everybody you payoff. And, then he, I got him out another time, he went to Capitol [Capitol Records] and recorded an album for them. He took pneumonia and had a seizure and passed.
Speaker 1: In prison (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just at the time that I was ready to go and pick him up and bring him home.
Speaker 1: In prison?
Speaker 2: In prison. He passed away in a hospital in Walla Walla.
Speaker 1: Walla Walla, Washington?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 493384
Speaker 1: So, at that point, music for you and everything, what happens at that point? Do you come at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I decided I didn't wanna sing again. I didn't wanna go into a club again. I didn't wanna do anything because Willie [Little Willie John] and I--of course, my birthday was Saturday the 3rd, and Willie's birthday is the 15th. And, we were very close. And, we had made plans of things we were gonna do. Willie didn't say he was gonna retire. When I retired, things we were gonna do industry wise, and all the stuff that I do now.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That I'm doing. Willie and I had talked about it. And, Willie has wonderful sons that travel with Stevie Wonder. One of them do, Keith John. And, Kevin [Kevin John] is a minister, Jehovah Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses] minister and teacher. And, Willie's wife never married again, Darlynn [Darlynn John]. She's in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: So, you decided not to sing anymore for a while, at that point?
Speaker 2: I promised not--I decided not to sing period.
Speaker 1: So, 1968, you leave Stax [Stax Records] and all of this is going on. Now--
Speaker 2: Oh, see, I was at Stax when, when Willie passed.
Speaker 1: Right, you--
Speaker 2: I was at Otis Redding's house.
Speaker 1: Right. So, you were, you were--Otis is gone. Willie John is gone (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, Willie is gone.
Speaker 1: In a course of about a year, close to a year, year in a half.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you had had enough. As you said--
Speaker 2: That was enough.
Speaker 1: That was enough.
Speaker 2: So, what I did, I came home--
Speaker 1: Back to Detroit?
Speaker 2: And--Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: Got in my car and went on to Detroit so I could make plans to receive Willie's body in Detroit, get that funeral and everything out. And, Motown [Motown Records], Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] said, "Whatever you need, you have it." Stax said to me, "Whatever you want, we got it." And, they literally, did exactly what they said. And, I was in a daze. Berry and Diana Ross took me away from the family after the funeral. Just so I could get away from the atmosphere to try to have some fun, getting my mind somewhere else. And--
Speaker 1: 'Cause this probably one of the most devastating things that happened to you because your family, pretty up to this point--
Speaker 2: 'Cause my father [Mertis John, Sr.], two years prior to that had passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father passed in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Which was a heavy thing for that family 'cause he was the patriarch of that family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, how about your mother [Lillie Robinson John]? How--what was going on with her?
Speaker 2: My mother passed here in this house.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, but, how did she--?
Speaker 2: In 1999 had--I have you know she was in her nineties.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I nursed her ten years here.
Speaker 1: Wow. How did she feel when her son--what was her, what was her--?
Speaker 2: My mother was so spiritual. She said she had gone downtown the day before we got the news and she was walking down some street downtown shopping, going into Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan] and she passed a restaurant or somewhere and they were playing 'Fever.' And, she said a thought jumped into her head and said, "What would you do if somebody told you Willie had died?" And, she said it was just a fleeting thought. She said, "Well, I'd do like I always do. I would just pray for strength." And, she got the call that Willie had passed. And, I was in Memphis [Tennessee] and then we went on up to Macon [Georgia] to Otis' house. Otis was already buried. I went up there to see his tomb. 'Cause he was, he's buried in his front yard. And, she said she didn't tell it to anybody until after he passed. I said, "Oh, my god." It was a devastating time. But, it was Ray Charles that pulled me out of that time.
Story_ID: 493385
Speaker 1: So, also that year Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated. There's a lot of trauma going on. Not just in your personal life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot, lot of drama and trauma.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us the story about the--in Memphis [Tennessee]. You were in--
Speaker 2: Every time we, well, the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee] was the hotel--a motel that all of the artist stayed at. It was black-owned and it was not too far from the Stax studio [Stax Records]. And, we would rehearse there. We would do--we stayed there. We lived there and just before Otis was killed, he took a day of my recording time. So, it made me stay over an extra day at the Lorraine, and Dr. King was coming in the day that I should've been gone. So, the owners of the hotel said to me, "Do you mind, if you you're gonna be here an extra day, take the room down the hall?" And, what they said, "Martin is coming in tomorrow. And, you and he like the same room." And, I said, "Not at all, I'll get a chance to say hello to him before I dash out." I said, "As a matter of fact, when I leave for the studio, I'm not coming back to the hotel. When I leave here tomorrow morning, I will wait and say hello to him and I'll go to the Stax studio and I'll go from there to the airport." So, that's exactly what I did.
Speaker 1: So, did you speak to him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I said to him--he said, "You had my room?" I said, "No, I gave you mine."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, I told him it was good seeing him, wished him a lot of blessing and success. And, I said, "I'm going on to the studio, and I won't be coming back to the hotel." And, I just said what we always say, "See ya." 'Cause with my mother [Lillie Robinson John], we never said good-bye. And, with our family we never say good-bye, we say peace or see ya.
Speaker 1: Now, I do recall because I was young, very, I was a child, I recall Dr. King, his death because I had a, I had a brother born the day before.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So, how, so how close was Otis Redding's and then Dr. King as far as, as far as timeline is concerned?
Speaker 2: I've never thought about the timeline so, I, I don't, it was too close for comfort.
Speaker 1: Was it days?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, oh, (pause) it was, it was some space between that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Between those two?
Speaker 2: Between--yes. It was, it was some space between that. I, I don't wanna even speculate because I don't wanna say anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand.
Speaker 2: --that's not accurate.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Story_ID: 493386
Speaker 1: So, basically, after all this happened in '68 [1968], you go into, we'll call it, we'll call it a slight depression with music. You had, you've had enough of it.
Speaker 2: I had had enough. I could hear the voice saying, "Your brother's [Little Willie John] gone." And, he was one of my inspirations. So, I just need to go home and do what I do.
Speaker 1: So, you went home and what was that, just kind of re-grouped?
Speaker 2: No. I was married to a man that was a pastor, a minister. So, I mean, you know, it wasn't that much time lapse in between because as soon as I came home in '68 [1968] and saying I'm not gonna sing anymore, Ray Charles started calling me on the phone.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we're talking about Ray Charles calling. I wanna ask you one quick question. How was it raising your children and being on the road at the same time? How was that as a mother raising your children? How do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I didn't take gigs and just be gone a week or two. I had children at home. I would work, I would leave home on a Wednesday, and I'd work Thursday, Friday, Saturday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, most time I would fly back home in time to get to church before church was out so I could come back home with them.
Speaker 1: So, you still, so you still had two careers, you were a singer and a mother.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: As your father [Mertis John, Sr.] always told you, have two careers.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I cooked the food there even if I was on the road because I cooked up enough, had it in the freezer, and I had the days on it. This is Tuesday's dinner--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is Wed- (laughter). I didn't want them to forget their mother.
Speaker 1: So, now, do you mind saying who, who the pastor you were married to, or the minister you were married to, his name? Do you--?
Speaker 2: Reverend John A. Samuels [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay. And, that was in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No. I was living in Chicago [Illinois] at this time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Chicago at that point.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 493387
Speaker 1: So anyway, you, you come home, Willie John [Little Willie John] is gone, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is gone, Otis Redding is gone, and the phone is ringing, and who is it?
Speaker 2: It's Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you already know Ray Charles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had been on tours and shows that he was on. And, of course, I was a Ray Charles fan 'cause I loved his music, you know, and I thought he was very, very talented and et cetera and et cetera.
Speaker 1: So, what did you say?
Speaker 2: And, when he called me and he said, "I'm Ray Charles." I said, "Yes, I'd know your voice anywhere."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So, you were a Ray Charles fan, and so he's calling you now about doing, what? Joining his group, or being background?
Speaker 1: He called me and the way the approached me, I would've never known he was asking me to come and work with him. He said, "Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], this is Brother Ray." I said, "I would know your voice anywhere." And, we kind of laughed and I couldn't figure out why he would be calling me. But, I also knew he was, he and Willie were very good friends, so. When he called me I was putting together a memorial for Willie in Detroit [Michigan]. And, I was making plans to drive on to Detroit from Chicago [Illinois] and be there until we do that memorial show to memorialize my brother, Willie. And, I told him all of that. And, he said, "Well, why didn't you tell me about it?" He say, "He was a good friend of mine." He said, "I wanna be a part of that." I said, "Well, I have a souvenir journal." And, he said, "How much are the pages?" And, "I'll buy a page." So, he did. And, then he said, "But, I'm calling you because I need you to find me a lead singer for The Raelettes." And, I said, "Really?" I said, "I don't know anybody." And he said, "Well, would you try and find me someone?" And, I said, "Well, I'll try, but," I said, "I don't know anybody that I know of with your sound." I said, "I've been listening to you for a long time." I said, "And, that--you have a very special unique sound." I said--
Speaker 2: And, the music is changing now. So, the people you're hearing are different. Yeah, it's '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: It's 1970 now. So, the people you're hearing--
Speaker 1: No, that wasn't 1970.
Speaker 2: Okay. It's '69 [1969] or so?
Speaker 1: That was 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: So, he said, "Well, promise me you'll look." I said, "Okay." And, then he, "I'll call you back in a few days." I said, "Well, it's gonna take me more than a few days, I don't even know who to talk to."
Speaker 2: Plus, you're in the middle of something else you're doing too.
Speaker 1: And, I told him that. So, before I could get everything together that I needed in Chicago, because I was gonna be gone a long time, he told me he was very sorry that my brother has passed, and et cetera and et cetera. And, he said, "And, I'm sure you're gonna carry the legacy." I said, "Oh, no, I don't intend to sing anymore, again, ever. I don't intend to walk on a stage without my brother." I said, "So, since that's impossible, I'm not singing." Oh, he said, "Oh, really?" He said, "Well, I wouldn't think you would feel that way." I said, "Well, I do." So, we hung up the phone. Four or five days later, he called me back. I told him when I was going to Detroit. He called me back and he said, "Mable John this is Ray Charles again," he said, "are you looking? Did you find me anybody?" I said, "No. I have not found anyone." I said, "Now, I'm leaving now for Detroit." I said, "So, if I find somebody there, I'll call you."
Story_ID: 493388
Speaker 1: When I got to Detroit [Michigan], I told my mother [Lillie Robinson John]. I said, "Guess who's been calling me?" She said, "Who?" I said, "Ray Charles." She said, "Well, what did he want?" I said, "He wants me to help find him a lead singer for The Raelettes. He says he doesn't have a lead singer." And, she said, "Well, what did you tell him?" I said, "I don't know anybody I would recommend to him." I said, "If they don't work out," I said, "my name would be mud with him." I said, "Now, he doesn't have this number but if he calls just tell him I'm not in, or anything." She said, "Well, you know I'm not gonna lie." I said, "Well, tell him something." I said, "Just don't give me the phone." Do you know the man called me one morning early, I was asleep. She brought the phone in the bedroom to me and put the receiver to my ear and said, "Mable [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], Mable awake up, telephone." And, before I opened my eyes to see the phone, she said, "It's Ray Charles on the phone." And, I opened my eyes and I said, "Didn't I tell you--?" And, he finished my sentence. He said, "I'm sorry darling, I know you told her you didn't wanna talk to me. But I got to talk to you."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "I need a lead singer." I said, "I cannot find you anyone. I don't know anybody with your kind of sound. And the way you sound, I would not give you anybody that couldn't do what you want them to do." He said, "How do you know what I want them to do?" I said, "I know how you sound." I said, "I've been listening to you for years. I don't know anybody that could duplicate your sound." He said, "Well, is it all right if I just call you one more time?" And I said, "Yes, but the answer is probably gonna be the same."
Story_ID: 493389
Speaker 1: He called a promoter that used to book us in Florida and told him he was trying to get me to come and work for him and I had turned him down. The man's name is George Grogan, Jr. George Grogan; he called me on the phone. He said, "I can't believe she turned you down." He said, "She have turned me down flat." George called me in Detroit [Michigan], and he said, "Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], Ray Charles told me he's been calling you trying to get you to come work for him, and you you've just turned him down flat." I said, "He never asked me to work for him. He never said, anything like that." He said, "Well, what did he say?" I said, "He asked me if I'd find him somebody." "Well, he was expecting you to say, 'I will do it'." I said, "He didn't ask me if I would do it. I would never say, I will do it." He said, "Mable, you have made the circuit. For years, you have gone as far as you can go. You have played every house you can play except the ones that Ray Charles is playing. And, he's playing all of the houses every artist in the world dream of playing. You need to work with that man. He will be the finishing touch that you need on your career. When you finish working with him, you will be able to do anything in life you want to do. He is the genius."
Speaker 2: So, that falls into the category of know when to start, right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: And, I said, "But, he never asked me." And I said, "He shouldn't have told you he asked me." He said, "That was his way of asking you. He wanted you the first time he called." I said, "I don't know if I can give him what he's looking for." I said, "I know that sound." He said, "But, he know that." He said, "And, he know that you know that sound and that you have the sound he's looking for." I said, "But, he didn't ask me." He said, "Now, I'm gonna tell you one thing, (laughter) he's gonna call you again because he called me and told me this." He said, "And, I want you to say yes when he ask you." He said, "Now, remember this, he's cheap." I said, "Cheap," (laughter). I said, "I'm not gonna work cheap." He said, "I'm not through." He said, "But, he's honest," he said, "so, negotiate with him because whatever he promises you, you may never get a dime more. But, you will never get a penny less. He will do whatever he says he will do." I said, "Oh, I can work for a person like that," I said, "because once he give me what we agree on, he will have no problem with me." I said, "But, I don't know if I wanna work for him or not." She said--he said, "Now, he just came out of rehab. He wants somebody with character and that's strong, that's clean, 'cause he's running a clean ship." I said, "Okay." I say, "But, he has his own plane, and I'm not gonna fly on his plane."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: He said, "I'm not even going there. I'm gonna call Ray Charles and tell him that I spoke to you. And, I'm gonna tell him that you did not even know that he was asking you to come and work for him." (Background noise) I said, "Because it's the truth." I said, "I'd never thought I would be someone he would want to work for him." He said, "Why not?" I said, "I never gave it a thought. I never dreamed of working with him." You know, like a lot of people tell me, "I've always dreamed of singing with--."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I said, "I never had that dream."
Story_ID: 493390
Speaker 1: And then Ray Charles called me the next day. He said, "I'm sorry to bother you, but this is Brother Ray." I said, "I know." He said, "You didn't know I was asking you?" I said, "You never asked." He said, "I didn't want you to say, no." He said, "But, I just kind of thought you would say, 'I can't find you anybody, but can I do it?'" I said, "I would never say that." He said, "Well, may I call you John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John]?" I say, "Sure." He said, "John, will you come and work with me?" He said, "I don't want you to work for me, I want you to work with me." I said, "Doing what?" He say, "You see, I don't need just a lead singer." He said, "You can sing and I like your sound. But, I want a director for The Raelettes. I need you to director the girls. I want you to handle them. Take care of these women."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, he said, "And, I will pay you twice for that. I'll pay you as an artist and I'll pay you as a director." And, I said, "You know what, since your back is to the wall, I will travel with you one year, and maybe while we're traveling I'll find somebody." And, he said, "If you give one year, I won't say a thing if you don't wanna work anymore." I said, "I really don't wanna sing anymore." I said, "I, I really don't." He said, "I know." He said, "But, if you don't, your family legacy will die 'cause there's no one else to do it." He said, "I'm gonna be in New York [New York] at the Apollo Theater next week and I'll just send my plane to Detroit [Michigan] to get you and bring you up here and we can talk." I said, "Don't send your plane, not one block for me 'cause I'm not getting on it." He said, "Why not?" I said, "I don't fly private planes." He said, "Why?" I said, "Most people--." I said, "Now, Otis Redding just, plane just went down." He said, "Now let me tell you something. I have the state of the art pilots. I have the same rules that the airlines have. I service my planes." And, he said, "Do you think I wanna die?" He said, "When you get on there," he said, "my mechanics are the same mechanics that are the mechanics for Eastern Air Lines, they services my plane." He said, "I'm not going one step, and I'm not gonna put everybody's lives in jeopardy by doing something wrong." And, then he said, "Besides, (laughter) if you're luck is that bad, you better not take a bath."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, I said, "What?" "Yeah, because you may slip in a bathtub and fall and kill yourself."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, I said, "Oh, no, I will not die in a bathtub. And, I will not die on a plane." I said, "But, I am not coming to New York at this time. So, whatever the negotiations are they will have after to be after I finish my brother's [Little Willie John] memorial." And, he said, "Okay." He said, "But, I have your word on that?" I said, "Ray Charles, let me tell you one thing, whatever I tell you I will do, I will do it." I said, "But, if I tell you I'm not gonna do it, you can bank on that too." He said, "Let's make a pact right now, as long as we know each other from this time on, don't ever send me a message, and I won't ever send you one." He said, "Because sending message, messages gets turned around. Since I will only do what I say and you will only do what you say, we're only gonna talk to each other. If there's anything that you don't like with my company; no, with my organization, he said. Don't tell it to a soul, you tell it to me. I will look out for you if you look out for me." I said, "Okay. I'll look out for you." And, I'm thinking, well, he's blind, he does need somebody to look out for him, maybe he can't see, blah, blah. But, we bonded at that point. And, then when I was finished with my brother's memorial, I went, I came to California to have a meeting with him. He said, "Well, since you won't fly, I'll just fly you out, since you won't get on my plane." So, he paid for my ticket; sent it to me, and I told him, he could just get a--get--be sure to get me a roundtrip ticket.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: He said, "Well, if you have to have a roundtrip, I'll get a roundtrip." So he was sending someone to the airport to pick me up.
Story_ID: 493391
Speaker 1: I got in a cab at LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California] and went to his studio here. And they were looking for me and paging at the airport and doing all kind of things, and I walked in the studio. And I said, "I'm Mable John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John]." And, he said, "Oh, let's get Mr. Charles [Ray Charles], he has everybody looking for you at the airport." I said, "Why?" "Because his valets and drivers there to pick you up." I said, "I didn't need that." They went in the control room and got him. He paged Bob Taylor and said, "You might as well come back, she's here." He said, they, we had, "They had your name ringing all over LAX." So, he come running out of the studio, grabbed me by the arm, "I'm so glad you're here." And, then he introduced me to everybody there. "Why did you do that?" I said, "What?" "Why did you come in a taxi? What did it cost? Is it cabbed outside?" I said, "Oh, no, I paid the cab." I said, "Ray Charles, I don't need your money." I said, "I came here so we could negotiate a contract." I said, "That's all I came for, and I can go back home when this is finished." He said, "That fast, huh?" He said, "Without meeting the girls and auditioning the girls?" And, I said, "I'm gonna do whatever we have to do to negotiate the contract, and then I'm going back home." And, Miss Ruth [Ruth Brown] just kind of looked at me and winked her eye, and said, "He got a good one now," you know. You know 'cause they had had so many different kind of experiences. And, we negotiated a contract and of course, negotiating the contract called for more than just money. It was a whole lot of other things involved.
Speaker 2: In regards of your children and your life in general?
Speaker 1: Yes. And, how I wanted the girls to act and look, and be. And, I wanted ladies. And, I didn't want the girls walking the streets smoking cigarettes. And, Mr. Adams [Joe Adams] and I agreed that we didn't think the girls should sit down in the gowns. Once you get dressed, you're dressed to walk on stage. We didn't want them using profanity. We didn't want the men cursing over them. Yeah, 'cause you know, I had seen and heard all of that.
Speaker 2: Ladies. You wanted ladies in The Raelettes, now?
Speaker 1: I said, "We're coming in ladies, and we're going out the same way." And, when I got through talking to Ray one day, he said, "John, I tell you what you do. You get a piece of paper and you write all that stuff down that you want and don't want." And, he said, "Write it all down and we're just put it all, put it into the--I have rules, we're just put it all into the rules." And, that's--we negotiated the money last.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause that was more important to you, those things, because of the life you had led?
Speaker 1: I had to know that the world knew that we were not the same Raelettes.
Speaker 2: Also, you were pastor's wife, also, at that time, right? Or, had you--?
Speaker 1: I was a pastor's wife at that time, but I put being a lady above being everything.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: If I can't be a lady, I can't be nothing to nobody else. So, that was a--the pastor's wife didn't even come up.
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: I wanted all the ladies treated as ladies, and they were. And, we all went in as ladies and we did all come out as ladies.
Story_ID: 493392
Speaker 1: Now, was he, of course, your relationship, you know, you hear stories about Ray Charles and things, but in your tenure, was he a good man to work with?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't wanna work for anyone else. I have always worked for myself. He was the only person I ever worked for. And, I'll tell anybody, whatever he promises you, you can count on it. And, he didn't tolerate you being late. That was fine. I went all the way through high school without being absent or tardy. I got certificates--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --in being there and being on time. I didn't give him an excuse. I wasn't sick on the job.
Speaker 1: It was a work ethic that you had. A serious work ethic.
Speaker 2: My mother [Lillie Robinson John] taught me good work ethics. So, I had no problem working for the organization. And, he always told me, "You will always be a part of this organization." And, up to this day, and he passed in 2004, whatever that bonding is, we still have that bond.
Speaker 1: Spiritually.
Speaker 2: And, everything that's happening now with his music and everything, I'm making more money on it now because he said, "I will always take care of you."
Speaker 1: So, you stayed with Ray for seven years?
Speaker 2: Eight. My contact really never ended because I asked him to allow him to stay--stayed home the--I worked the first year. Then I gave him a letter in braille, thanking him for a perfect years. And, telling him that I did not find anybody else. And, I said, "And, at this point, I don't wanna give the girls to anybody else because they might not treat them the way I think they need to be treated. So, I'll stay with you another year." And, the years just kept passing. And, even after I told him that I wanted to come home and I asked him if he would let me come home this year, is what I said, to him. I said, "But, if you call me, if you get in a bind, I'll come." So, I continued to write. I have fifty-two songs that his publishing company and mine share together. And, we share some writing of the songs together to this day, fifty-two.
Speaker 1: A lot of songs.
Speaker 2: And, I go over and do sessions. Two of my sons recorded and worked right along with him, produced with him. And, his family embraced me as their family. My family embraced him as a part of our family.
Speaker 1: So, according to just the records, you had forty--you stayed 'til '77 [1977] as a Raelette, or as in charge of the Raelettes until about '77 [1977], is that true?
Speaker 2: Either '77 [1977] or '78 [1978], whichever.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 493393
Speaker 1: So, for the next ten years, you went back to gospel music after that, correct? Is that what happened?
Speaker 2: Not, directly. I, I didn't sing at all for a few years. I already had my music publishing companies [Fourth House Music Company]. I stay in my office, running my companies and putting my publishing companies together; my children's companies, and mine.
Speaker 1: From being in the business so long, you knew now what to do in order to make the--?
Speaker 2: Well, I opened that company while I was still working with Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: To have legacy?
Speaker 2: Remember you gotta have two jobs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, that right (laughter), that's right, you gotta have two things at all time.
Speaker 2: And, he did everything he could to help me to be sure that I was on the straight and narrow, and the companies would stand.
Speaker 1: Beautiful. So, for the next ten years, you ran your publishing company, you sung some gospel music. Then in '86 [1986], you started the Joy in Jesus Ministries [Joy in Jesus, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but, before that I went into the school of ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, that's right, Crenshaw.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Crenshaw Christian Center, School of Ministry [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Dr. Price [Frederick K.C. Price].
Speaker 2: And, I studied there and graduated.
Story_ID: 493394
Speaker 1: So, we talked previously about Ray Charles being a great man to work with, and, how you groomed The Raelettes into ladies. And, made sure that they were ladies, and they went ladies and came out ladies. And, that was a good thing for him because as we have read in biographies and things, autobiographies that he was going though--he really wanted to have a clean organization at that point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: His frugalness has been talked about by many people, you know. And, and, but, his character, integrity is what we've talked--you and I focused on, how--
Speaker 2: Well, when people get to know the real integrity that that man had, that, that it'll open up a whole new world for them. So far as ability, talent, because it transcends race, color, money, or anything because he was a man of his word. And, I've always known that one of the, one of the greatest things that happened to him in his life, because it had, had a great impact on him, was his mother [Aretha Robinson]. He always talked to me about his mother and he was married to a wonderful woman [Della Howard Robinson] that is a very dear friend of mine, and his children, and Mr. Joe Adams. Joe Adams is, he was a Ray Charles man. I think that he was born, I think the two of them were born to work together.
Speaker 1: They were serendipitous. They were there.
Speaker 2: And, you have to have people around you whether--you don't have to be blind, you need to have people around you that you can trust and have creditability. But, they also have to have knowledge. People that know what to do. And, there's so many people that don't known how to strategically work together as a team. And, Ray Charles was a man that knew how to work together as a team. And, I worked with Mr. Joe Adams, as a team. He would sit down and talk to me about what he wanted the girls to do. And, most of The Raelettes' photographs, of my group of Raelettes were taken by Joe Adams. And, which shows you the versatility. Of course, Joe Adams knew the plane very well, and he could fly and he would fly a lot of times. That same plane, with, with, the other pilots, 'cause he kept a pilot's license and kept it up to par so regardless to what we needed, all he would have to do is get in the seat.
Speaker 1: Two jobs (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, the other thing that, that was very unique about that, because I had to be on that private plane and there was no way I could've done everything that I needed to do with Ray Charles without flying the way we flew, I studied flying. And, of course, he and my mother [Lillie Robinson John] stopped me when I got to a third class pilot's license 'cause they just figured I didn't need to, need to fly. And, I don't fly anymore but I love planes and horses. Those are the two things I love more, those are my two hobbies. And, I promised my mother that I would not fly, I would leave the flying to them. And, I, and Ray Charles just never could figure out, why would you know how to fly? I said, "I need to know, how planes work." See, to me, it's important. Whatever you're going--where ever you have to be, you need to know what works.
Speaker 1: So, you stayed for quite a few years with Ray, as we said.
Speaker 2: Eight or nine years, ten years. I, up to four--two weeks before he passed, we were, I was complimenting him in person about what I had learned from him. And, he was still telling me, "I told you I wanted you and I to do one more duet song together." And, I was still telling him, "Why don't you go into the catalog, go into the masters and pull out the song we did and put that on." And, that was probably my error, because where he really wanted it to go, Ray Charles, the 'Genius Loves Company,' has done about 20 million copies. (Laughter) It was the last thing he did. But, I feel justified in the decision that I made because I, I wanted to always feel that he was not pushed beyond the limit. And, you know, he was ill at that time. But, he was such a positive man. And, I could just, he could tell me anything that's going on but he kept it on a certain level. And, that's been one of the things throughout my life, I've always had these geniuses, starting with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, to Billie Holiday, to Al Bell at Stax Records, and Ray Charles, Ruth Brown, to just keep me settled. So, if you stay settled all that time, you never get out of whack.
Story_ID: 493395
Speaker 1: So now, you, the next ten years or so, you run the publishing business [Fourth House Music Company]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You sing some gospel music--
Speaker 2: In 1971, I opened the publishing companies.
Speaker 1: And, they're still running today?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And, you sung some more gospel over those next ten years?
Speaker 2: Yes. My sons and I; Lim [Limuel C. Taylor] and Joel [Joel Webster] and I, sat down and wrote, along with my cousin that was a keyboardist for Graham Central Station, Robert Butch Sam, and we put a project together called 'Where Can I Find Jesus?'. And, that's the only strictly gospel project that I have out. But, we, we do a lot of other gospel stuff and it's fun.
Speaker 1: And, in 1986, because you have to have two jobs at all times, you started, started, the Joy in Jesus Ministry [Joy in Jesus, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: What is that ministry?
Speaker 2: Joy in Jesus Ministry is a church. It's a church that I believe the kind of church that Jesus was talking about. A church that includes the community, the family, the job, your entire life because we are the church. We're the church. And, I had become disenchanted with some of the traditional happenings in churches because I had found from a girl, preachers that preach one thing in the pulpit and was something else after dismissal. And, I had to learn between what the Bible teaches and what the people are doing, the difference. So, I couldn't get mad at God because he was unchangeable. So, whatever was wrong, people made it wrong. And I wanted--I did not want to go into the ministry. But I heard God's voice.
Story_ID: 493396
Speaker 1: Now, prior to that you had gone to Crenshaw, the Crenshaw Christian school [Crenshaw Christian Center, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, well, well, before then, while I--the, the last day that I worked with Ray Charles on the road was in Alabama at the close of our year in December before Christmas. And, we was standing on stage and I'm beating this tambourine, we're having church. And, he's singing, "Baby let's go home." And, we're saying, "Let's go home." And, then he's saying, "I wanna go home with you." And, then I hear this voice in my ear. And, it's saying, "Mable [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], go home, I have something for you to do." Now, I knew that was the voice of God. But, it was so loud, I thought all the girls heard it too. So, I turned to Susaye and I said, "I just heard a voice telling me to go home." She said, "Huh," you know, like that on stage, like, yeah, 'cause we played on stage a lot. And, then she told Vernita and Estella, "Mayberry's hearing voices, she, she, and she doesn't have sense enough to know, we're all going home tonight." I said, "I'm going home, home." Vernita said as we were walking off, we're still beating the tambourines, "If you're going home, I'm going home too."
Speaker 1: We are all The Raelettes as this point? Just give us their names.
Speaker 2: Estella Yarbrough, who stay with him until he passed, like twenty-nine years. Vernita Moss, Susaye Greene, myself, and Dorothy Berry came in at a point when Estella was away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, these young ladies are so very, very dear to me. I was like, I guess, Ray Charles sometime called me the Mother Hen. I guess, they were my, really my daughters. They were, they loved me. And, we are close today.
Speaker 1: So, you heard the voice.
Speaker 2: I heard that voice and as we took our bow and walked off stage behind Mr. Charles, my only thought was, "How can I go home and it not hurt him," because I don't wanna leave anybody in a bind. My job is my job and the job that I had with him nobody had ever had that job. It was created for me because it was what he needed, he felt with his organization at that time. And, he always said, "You could always work for me." And, he was the kind of man you could work for. But, of course, when the Lord speaks, you have to answer. So, I waited until the off season was almost over, and I kept telling my mother [Lillie Robinson John] when she came here for the Christmas, that winter, because she came every winter. And, I said, "I heard a voice when I was on stage telling me to go home. That there was something else for me to do." And, she just looked at me and she said, "Are you going to obey?" I said, "I know I have to. But, I have to figure out a way to make Ray understand." She said, "Have you told him?" I said, "No. But, I'm gonna tell him in time so he'll have a chance to put somebody else that'll do what I'm doing." Well, he never really gave anybody else my job. Because I really, I took The Raelettes out on stage ahead of him and we performed. We would go off stage and then Ray would come on, sing a few numbers and he would bring us back on. I carried my music with me from Stax [Stax Records], and he loved those songs. So, I was able to just take all of the stuff that I had always done and just, and do it, 'cause he loved them and he played 'em, and he kicked them off at his own tempo, and we would talk and play with each other on the stage, in the songs. And, he really, he enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 493397
Speaker 1: And I found the time to talk to him [Ray Charles] and ask him if I could stay home that year. I told him, if he needed me to call me and I would come. And, he is the kindest and most understanding and spiritual man I know when it comes to employment and studying people and knowing people's hearts. Because when I made an appointment with him to go to his office to tell him that, he was sitting behind his desk in his office, and I was sitting on the couch across from him. I started to cry. He knew I was crying so he got up from behind the desk and came and sat beside me on the couch. And, he took my hand. He said, "John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], let me tell you something, I don't know what it is you think you have to do but if you do it, whatever it is, half as well as you have worked with me, you got to make it." Then he said to me, "Now, what can I do to help you?" Nobody tells you that when you're saying I won't be here when you need me and I'm the one that took care of everything for the girls [The Raelettes]. We never had an argument about it. There was never any, never any animosity. And, for the rest of his life, I would go over when the off-season come and play him new music and he would record it, and we would work. He would come to my house and have dinner. My--especially, if my mother's [Lillie Robinson John] home 'cause she was gonna be cooking. He'd play the piano and he would talk about me to my mother and tell her how, what he was say, said that I was, "I had a lot of pride." He would always tell her, "Mother Dear," 'cause we call my mother, mother dear, "John has a lot of pride. I've never know anybody with the kind of pride she has." And, he say, "And, she doesn't really always treat me right." And, my mother would say, "Oh, I didn't train her like that. Oh, she has to tre--." I said, "Pay him no attention. I do my job." And, he would always go to our piano and he'd play my mother a song as he's leaving out the door. Now, my mother did for him what we did in Arkansas for the hoboes. She knew he was going home. She had already served him his meal, at this same table. She would fix him a lunch to take with him. She said, "I don't want you to get hungry in the middle of the night." And, he would say, "Oh, Mother Dear, I'm so glad you're here because when I come over here to pick Joel [Joel Webster] up in the mornings all I can ever smell here is, is perfume." Say, "I'm thinking I'm gonna smell bacon frying and she--and you can smell perfume." And, my mother loved to hear that because she loved to cook.
Speaker 2: So, it's a smooth transition for you, and--
Speaker 1: Everywhere.
Speaker 2: In all your life experience.
Speaker 1: All my life.
Story_ID: 493398
Speaker 1: So, when did you go to Crenshaw Christian Center [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: I went to Crenshaw Christian Center before I stop traveling with Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I went to Crenshaw Christian Center two years as a member.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was, I'm an alumni graduate of the School of Ministry there. And, the young lady, Pastor Odom [ph.], that you just saw, the pastor, we were in class together. When I graduated--after I had been a member for two years, I took counselor training, and became a counselor. When Dr. Price [Frederick K.C. Price] announced that God had told him to start a school, that everybody couldn't leave home and go away to school, that he was to start one here. And, people that had a call on their life--I didn't think I had a call on my life, you know. I, when he said that I, that kind of went over my head. He said, "They can be at home. They can go to school day or night, 'cause there day classes and night classes. And they can be at home at night with their families." And, I said, "You know, maybe I should go to school." Not thinking I was going for anything in particular but just to learn more about the Bible. And, in doing that, God showed me that I was to be a leader. I had already led in so many ways, in so many different kinds of fields that he just wanted me, he was training me for--I call it training day. He had me in training for today. So, I went through the School of Ministry there. Graduated from there.
Speaker 1: With a doctorate?
Speaker 2: No. I didn't, I didn't graduate from there with a doctorate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My doctorate was from a theological seminary in Texas. And, got my degree there, and then I studied counseling too, classes under Professor Norman Chisholm [ph.] at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. And, then went on to study the Hebrew and the Greek because when the Lord let me know that I was gonna be preaching, I said, "Well, I have to know what I'm talking about because I will not lie to people." If I say the Bible said, you can turn there and find it. And, then I went right on from there and I've just finished my third book with David Ritz for Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House]. 'Sanctified Blues' because [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and his sister's named me, when they met me, a sanctified blues singer. They said that's all I would ever be, because everything I sing sound like a gospel song. Then I did a CD, well, I did a conglomerate of stuff at Stax [Stax Records]. And, the CD was put together from a song that I did that Steve Cropper wrote called 'Stay Out of the Kitchen.' So, my second book is called 'Stay Out of the Kitchen!' [Mable John with David Ritz].  That was released this year, 2000--June, 2007. Because 'Sanctified Blues' came out June, 2006. Next year I'll have book coming out called 'Love Tornado' [Mable John with David Ritz], and it's from a song that's from that's same 'Stay Out of the Kitchen' CD that was written by Miss Deanie Parker and myself at Stax.
Speaker 1: Are these fictional books?
Speaker 2: They are fictional.
Speaker 1: And, the church is going well?
Speaker 2: But, there, there's a lot of truth in it because I used a lot of the bible training and stuff in there, and it is not fictional. Whatever I said the Bible said in my, my character in book is Albertina [Albertina Merci]. Whatever Albertina said the Bible said, I give you the scripture and you can go find it.
Speaker 1: And, these are on Random House, in--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, your church is going well, now?
Speaker 2: Church is doing well. And, we have a large outreach where we take care of homeless, hungry, underprivileged, children born with aide, seniors and anybody in need. We're getting ready to feed about two thousand people Thanksgiving Day now at the Hollywood Rec Center [Hollywood Recreation Center, Los Angeles, California], [HistoryMaker] H. B. Barnum and I, LIFE Choir, and Joy in Jesus [Joy in Jesus, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Now, you've been doing this since you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: You've been doing the same thing since you were a little girl.
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. And then we do Christmas all over L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. I'll be on KJLH [KJLH Radio, Compton, California] December 13th, which is a Thursday. And I'll be doing my giveaway the next day. I'll be on 'The Front Page,' and I'll be doing my giveaway. And, I've been on that for ten years from--on 'Front Page.' The giveaway is the 14th which is a Friday, at my church. And it's at 5730 West Manchester in Westchester [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 493399
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994], you received the Pioneer Award by the Rhythm and Blues Foundations [Rhythm and Blues Foundation].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was big award.
Speaker 2: That was a big award. And it was right at the time that my brother, Willie [Little Willie John], was going into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: So, the Johns are being immortalized into two different categories?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel about the Ray Charles movie ['Ray']? How did you like that? Was it a depiction of The Raelettes and the things that they--?
Speaker 2: That group, yes. It wasn't my group. My group came in after that.
Speaker 1: Went in ladies and came out ladies.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, it depicted his life up to that point. That was the first half. And, I tell everybody that if they missed the last half of Ray Charles life, you have missed a treat, because that's where you see the real Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: How do you--?
Speaker 2: But, it was done extremely well; the movie.
Speaker 1: Jamie Foxx did a good job?
Speaker 2: Jamie Foxx, five minutes into the movie, he became Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life? And, what's really important to you?
Speaker 2: God is at the top of the list. God is the most important thing that abides with me and in me. Nothing can top that. And, after that, it's my family. Family means everything to me. And, I love people. I cannot stand suffering. I cannot stand abuse. I can't stand to see it. It bothers me to even hear about it. I don't like injustice. I know that everybody cannot and should not be treated the same because we all have different needs. But, we should all be treated right and fairly.
Story_ID: 493400
Speaker 1: For those going into the music business, be it publishing, singing, or those going into ministry, what is your suggest--your suggestion to them?
Speaker 2: Any business that you're gonna embark upon you should learn as much about it before you go in to it, as possible. Because to go in without knowledge, you're headed for a fall. Know what you're getting into, sell out to it. Everything that I'm involved in, I'm sold out to that. It has to become me. I won't sing a song I don't like. I won't sing a lyric that I will not identify with in real life. I think you should know what you're getting into and make that your choice and not someone else's. And, know when you've done the job. Know when you've done enough, and have guts enough to say, "I quit."
Story_ID: 493401
Speaker 1: Would you chose a different career path?
Speaker 2: Would I have chosen, if I could do it over again, or would I chose--? No. God has been good to me and I've learned so much from everybody. One of these day's I'm gonna write a book and include the people that helped me walk the stairs. Starting with my dad [Mertis John, Sr.] and mom [Lillie Robinson John]. You don't go through life without challenges. In life there are pitfalls. But, you have to do what Ray Charles said to me two weeks before he passed, and he was telling me about his different surgeries. He said, "John [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John], I have been though a lot." I said, "I know." He said, "But, what did I say?" I said, "You just said, you had been through a lot." He said, "What didn't I say?" I said, "You said, it didn't go through you, you went through it." He said, "Don't ever forget that." And that's what life is, you have to go through it. Do you know what I learned a long time ago; 95 percent of everything that we come up against, we go through. It's only that 5 percent that we allow to frighten us. And, if you will remember as you're approaching something that you don't wanna go through, that you're not one of the 5 percent, I'm going through this. You can do it.
Story_ID: 493402
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for African, for the African American Community, in general?
Speaker 2: What is my what?
Speaker 1: Your hope and concern for the African American community?
Speaker 2: The African American community? That we will learn to live together in peace and harmony. And, that we can be our brother's keeper. Stop allowing outside forces, outside events, outside cultures to cause us to deny who we are. Because we are wonderfully made by God. There's nobody like us of our culture. And, every culture was put together because God wanted it, and we have a place. And, when we take our rightful place, there is absolutely nothing that can stop us as a culture of people, as a race of people, as a nationality of people, and we have--we're like a rose garden. We have every complexion on earth in our genes. Put us all together and we look like a bouquet. To learn to be proud of who you are, what you are, and do it to your best ability.
Story_ID: 493403
Speaker 1: So what values do you consider the most important and why?
Speaker 2: In my life?
Speaker 1: In everybody--in a person in general.
Speaker 2: What value they should have (laughter)?
Speaker 1: In your opinion.
Speaker 2: Well, I think as a female, the most valuable thing we have is our degree of ladyship, to be a real lady. And, the next value that people in general should have, they should be true to their word. My father [Mertis John, Sr.] said, "If a man's word doesn't mean anything, he doesn't mean anything." Your word should mean something. So, those are valuable things to me. It's, and it's always irritates me if a person is consistently late with everything, and have an excuse for everything. And, one of the things that I loved about Ray Charles, he never accepted an excuse from anyone, and he didn't give you one. And, his saying was, "An excuse is just a dressed up lie." And, I bought into that. So, these are things that determine whether you can be trusted or not, 'cause if you don't keep your word, you can't be. If you're not a lady, then who are you? And, you don't have to walk around telling people, "I'm a lady," because men, women, children, the cat, and the goldfish will know if you are.
Story_ID: 493404
Speaker 1: How do you want, want to be immortalized, your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't either--even know. God has been so gracious to carry me in so many (background noise) directions. And everything that I do my daughter films. We have it somewhere archived personally. I don't know. I have an exhibit in the Stax, in Soulsville [Soulsville Foundation], the Stax Museum of American Soul Music [Memphis, Tennessee]. And, I'm giving a lot of things that I've been given over the years to the museum. I don't know, just a person that loved people and loved life and happiness. Anything else would have to come for the--see, this is the way I see it, anybody that want to immortalize me, I would want them to go into their heart and present me the way they felt me in their heart. Then, that would be the truth. Because if would be a true feeling. People mean different things to different people. So, if I say, "Oh, I would wanna be immortalized as a great songwriter." Somebody could say, "I never heard anything she sang." So I would've lost that one. But if everybody would take their own stock and just tell who I am to them, whatever it is. That's what they would remember, isn't it? So, (laughter) that to me that's the greatest way to be immortalized.
Story_ID: 493405
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you haven't done that you still wanna do?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I'm looking now. All my life, because I told you my two loves were horses and airplanes. Since I can't fly, I promised my mother [Lillie Robinson John] I wouldn't and I still obey my mom. I'm looking for a ranch to buy or someone could give me one if you just are so inclined because I want at least two horses. So, I can get up in the morning and just go riding off into the sunset; me and anyone that wanna come ride with me. And, I just, I just want my ranch. I've always lived right in the city. And, I have al- I always said, when I retired I was gonna buy a ranch and have horses, and still do everything I'm doing. Of course, I'll never retire because I enjoy what I do, so. But, that's the only thing that I can think of.
Story_ID: 493406
Speaker 1: What message or lesson do you have for your grandchildren, your children, or just children in general coming up in the future? What, what primary message do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Message? The one that we get out of the Bible that says, children obey your parents, or, "Honor your father and mother that your days may be long on the earth which the Lord thy God giveth thee." If you want to live a fruitful life, a successful life, if you honor father and mother, you'll have long life. And, I don't mean your hearts just beating, you'll have a fruitful life, because God promised that, and he cannot lie.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you, thank you for being such a gracious lady and giving--
Speaker 2: Thank you so much (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) us all this information. And thank you for the life that you've led and it's just really, it was a pleasure interviewing you this afternoon.
Speaker 2: It was really my pleasure.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it. I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Thank you, ma'am.
Speaker 2: You are quite welcome and I thank the two of you for coming.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
