Story_ID: 483088
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Nathan Jones, N-A-T-H-A-N, J-O-N-E-S, Jones.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Several of them, Tiger was one, Nate, you know, people call me all kinds of little things, and some things I wouldn't repeat (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Six, twenty-seven, forty-two [June 27, 1942].  Place, Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Artist, inventor.
Speaker 1: Okay, you've done some architectural work too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've built homes for five years, including the one I'm in now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the August 14th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 6423 Aberdeen Avenue, Dallas County, Texas at the home of Nathan Jones studio.
Story_ID: 483089
Speaker 1: --Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management makes me ask everybody as a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Burgundy.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably anywhere there's water, lots of it.  California, Galveston [Texas] and so forth, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Story_ID: 483090
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, then your father's [Eunice Jones] side.  Can you give us your mother's full name first and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Bertha Lee Jones [Bertha Penton Jones].  That's B-E-R-T-H-A, L-E-E, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Maiden name was Penton, P-E-N-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now, birth place is Shreveport, Louisiana.  Date, I'm a little bit shaky on it, but I can try to get that for you precise.  I got all those dates, I've got ten members in my family, so.  I could get that--those dates for you.
Speaker 1: Was she--when you were born was she in her twenties or in her teens?
Speaker 2: I would say she was probably, probably 30, 35, 30, around in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that--okay, that'd put her around 1908, 1910, something like that or?
Speaker 2: Probably nineteen--I think it's closer to 1917, something, I'm guessing, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Probably not very far because we really moved here when I was young, very young, five years of age.  And we moved, when I say here, moved to Texas and that was I guess--there was ten of us in one family.  And record keeping was not something that we really did.  My mother and father, they worked basically for--to survive and to--for us to survive.  So we're--not a lot of record keeping.
Story_ID: 483091
Speaker 1: Oftentimes, you know, families have stories that they pass down about what the family was doing, if there is somebody that in the family, grandparents or somebody they remembered, Reconstruction or slavery, or what life was like in Louisiana, you know, before they moved?
Speaker 2: Well I have a [paternal] grandfather who really was a slave.  It was--it was--his name, I call him Grandfather Nelson [Nelson Jones], is what I know of him.  I used to take tobacco to him.  He lives in a little one-room house with a little chimney, and that's all, was no other rooms, big fireplace.  And he died at 102, completely gray beard was probably twelve inches long.  But I precisely remember delivering tobacco.  It was kind of a sweet 'cause when he smoked it, the flavor was kind of--smelled good, you know, but of course that's about the extent of it 'cause I don't care for smoke at all.
Speaker 1: But he actually had been a slave?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually he was a slave.  You think about it, 102, slavery what had been only over about 142 years, we were slaves.  Then in 1863, of course the proclamation emancipation [Emancipation Proclamation] was passed and we were supposed to be free.  We all celebrated as being free men and women.  Of course that wasn't true, as you know.  Slavery was actually abolished in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment.  That gave--that nullified any, you know, body having slaves.  So, our freedom really came because the border states in 1863, they still sold slaves.  If they found you with a document that say you was a free man, they took that document, tore it up and continued to sell human beings at that time, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it's conceivable he could've--now how old were you when you used to go to deliver him tobacco?
Speaker 2: Round--I would say I couldn't have been no more than six, seven, because actually when we--when I moved here, I--we didn't stay very long when I moved to Texas.  We went back and maybe lived a year or so and then back here again.  So I was bounced around quite a bit, so.  You take a hundred and--you take my age you'd say I was six, he's 102, that's 96 and slave right now--when you say slavery ended, slavery really didn't end.  People still worked as slaves, years and years following the abolishment of slavery.  Even though the law was passed, guys--people didn't have no land, they didn't have food, didn't have a place to go, so they remained as slaves, so to speak.  But officially (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah but you--what you're saying makes sense, if he was born, say in 1850, a hundred years later is 1950.  You would be like eight years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 102 years later is 1952.  So, he, yeah, that's--it's very, yeah, a lot of people were alive then who had been slaves.  There were some anyway, but not a lot, but there was some.  And so did he have any stories about slavery that he shared with you or your parents [Bertha Penton Jones and Eunice Jones]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually he didn't share too much with my Uncle Ben, which was Uncle Ben, we cal- his name was Ben Jones, his son.  Now, his son was very familiar with what was going on with the father.  Of course he would tell me about stories, little stories about the people looking for him and him hiding and stuff like that.  It was pretty bad back during the time that my--even my Uncle Ben lived.  He died here recently about ten years ago, and he was ninety-one when he died.  And he also lived in Louisiana and he died--born there and died there.
Story_ID: 483092
Speaker 1: But I just wondered if he [Jones' paternal grandfather, Nelson Jones] told you 'cause you're the only link to that kind of story in your family.  Those of us who are alive now, if we don't pass on some of those stories, they don't get passed on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered if he--if you even knew if he--did he like it, did he think he had a good master, did he dislike it or was he trying to get away or?
Speaker 2: I don't think he liked it.  I know my Uncle Ben [Ben Jones], his son, didn't like it.  You know a lot, even after they, you know, that fifteen acres or whatever and a mule--
Speaker 1: Forty acres.
Speaker 2: Forty, nobody got that, you know.  And even if they got it, and the other races felt like it was good land, then they'd figure out a way to get it back anyway.  They'd have you sign a document saying that they meant one thing and they meant another.  'Cause at that time, my uncle couldn't read anyway.  He never drove a car, so he always had a wagon.  But the thing is when you can't read or write and someone comes along and say well I'm gonna give you this or whatever, you may end up signing something that's not even what it's supposed--that you thought you were signing.  So you end up giving up something.  Especially land, that was valuable, had oil on it and stuff like that.  People figured out a way to get it.  If it had even good timber on it, they'd figure out a way to get it because you're illiterate, you can't read, you can't write, and you're not even considered human.  So, a lot of us lost a lot of things.  And I've noticed how life is today when you say a guy say well I'm rich and he's black.  Say he's 50, 60, 70, well you know he had a hard time because you take those years, subtract them from what's now, you know how life was back there.  So that's why we all have these stories to tell, because we lived a difficult life.  Our life was not easy.  The--normally our wealth that we have acquired, we acquired through hard work.  It wasn't like somebody giving it to us.  We started at a period in life, I would say roughly twenty-five to thirty years after slavery was abolished in 1865.
Speaker 1: Now--now what did your people do in Shreveport [Louisiana]?  What do they do there?
Speaker 2: They tilled the soil, planted the crops and that's how they lived.  They raised everything and they shared their profits with one another, such as well if they raised--this guy had watermelons, this guy have corn, this guy have wheat, whatever, they swapped it.  It's kind of bartering technique, and that way, everybody lived happy.  I remember when I was a kid, there was a family needed a house built in Louisiana.  All of the neighbors came in and they had a big party, and they built the house.  Now he has a house, he has no note, has nothing, but he has a house.  Not like today is, today.  By the time you go through buying a house, deeding and getting permits and whatever else, I mean you, sometimes you just threw up both hands and said I don't want a house, I'll just go back to an apartment.  A lot of people do that, they say it's too much and then the credit problem that we have, and not to mention the skin color 'cause it is a giveaway.  You walk in wanting to do business.  And I'll tell you, I'm working on this project right now, this is a very modern time, we're living in 2006, I'm working on this project, been working on it for six years.  And in most cases it's--I think it's a great project and most people think that that have invested their money.  As I said, I've raised a million, two hundred plus thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 483093
Speaker 1: Did you know your [paternal] grandparents?  Well, that was your grandfather that, what was his name, what was your grandfather's name, the one that was a slave?
Speaker 2: I called him Grandpa Nelson [Nelson Jones].
Speaker 1: Okay Nelson, was it Nelson?
Speaker 2: N-E-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Nelson Penton [sic.], or was it?
Speaker 2: Well he had to be Penton, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: Her name was Emaline [Emaline Jones].  And I only knew her for a short period of time because she--I visited her.  In fact, I got two or three of her quilts, they're real heavy.  She made these quilts and back then if you want to stay warm, of course you probably wouldn't go all the way into town to buy a quilt because yeah, you know, it's expensive.  So she made these quilts out of little bits and pieces.  And those quilts that I have, they're extremely heavy.  I don't know why they're heavy, so heavy, but some of the material is mixed, it's so different.  It's material that you wouldn't find today.  It--it's really--really.  And I've kept those quilts because my mother [Bertha Penton Jones] got those quilts when she died, when Emaline died.  And when my mother died, I got the quilts.  So, that's some of the only things that I own that I've got from my mother, is those quilts.  So I kind of hang on to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up in Shreveport [Louisiana]?  Now, Shreveport is on the coast right of Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Shreveport, no, it's--Shreveport is about 190 miles, 195 miles from here, it's going kind of northeast.  It's going, you know, down Beaumont [Texas], New Orleans [Louisiana] area down there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought it was like on the--on the gulf like?
Speaker 2: Well, now New Orleans and stuff is not that close, but Louisiana is--it's that way, but it's not just--well we can walk out and you know, to the waters and things.  It's, you know, it's large, but we've never been to the coast from (laughter) there on the ways.  It's got to be quite a distance from the coast from there.  It would be great because if it was, you know, I could probably go down there and do what I like to do it instead of just going to Galveston [Texas] to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, my geography is off I guess.  But okay so, did your mother ever get a chance to go to school in Shreveport and everything and finish it?
Speaker 2: My mother didn't go to school until she was of age.  She was a grown, full-grown adult.  Went to school some here in Dallas, Texas.  No school in Louisiana.  My father [Eunice Jones], no school in Louisiana.  My uncle [Ben Jones], no school in Louisiana.  My grandfather, no school in Louisiana.  And as far as I know, my grandmother--my grand, no school.  There's literally, there was some schools when I was three, I remember three or four, I remember maybe attending school just for a short period of time before we moved to Texas.  And it was just a--just a house with one room, had little tables and stuff.  And we had one teacher that taught everything.  She taught everything.  She also had a switch.  And man I'll tell you what, we was frightened of that switch 'cause back then, they had permission to whale us if they needed to, and we got it.  I'll tell you so.  It was pretty rough there.  But we went to church a lot.  Church was a thing of the family.  We--I went to so much church and to be honest with you, I don't enjoy church today the way I should because I was forced to go three days, sing in the choir, do this, that, just church, church, church.  It's kind of like me saying, you wait until I grow up, I'm never going to church (laughter), you know, it's the kind of, you know.  But church is--was really a family thing.  With blacks, you know, we all depended--we lean on God more than probably most races because we--it's--we have no other choice it seemed like.  So God is our savior.  So that's why we go the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now let me--what was the name of the church you went to in Shreveport?
Speaker 2: Camzines Baptist Church [ph.] near--
Speaker 1: Camzines, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I think it's C-A-M-Z-I-N-E-S, Camzines.  It was near the graveyard site--grave site when people died wo- the families got together and they prepared the funeral and they dug the hole and so forth.  And of course there was no choice for that.  I don't even know whether there was caskets around at that time.  I don't remember them.  But, later on in life I, you know, but--
Speaker 1: Was the school associated with the church too or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kind of because everything was right there together, yeah.
Story_ID: 483094
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Eunice, E-U-N-I-C-E, last name Jones [Eunice Jones].  And they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and what is his--
Speaker 2: --and he has no middle initial.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have it (laughter), I should--should've known you were gonna ask me all of these dates.  I should've, but they're right there on the table in that--in my manual.  I keep everything there.
Speaker 1: Well was he born in Shreveport [Louisiana] too?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was born in Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Wha- was he much older than your mother [Bertha Penton Jones]?
Speaker 2: Not much.  I would say maybe three years, four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about his people, his ances- the ancestors on his side?
Speaker 2: My father, Uncle Ben, I call him Uncle Ben, that's Ben Jones, was his brother.  We got another one that I call Uncle Andrew [Andrew Jones], he was his brother, lived in California, died in California, but moved from Louisiana to California.  Ben Jones never moved.  He was born in Louisiana, died in Louisiana.  As far as his background, it wasn't as--as lavishly talked about as my mother.  His was--he was the man of the family and we barely talked.  We don't--we didn't--we kept in our place.  We'd rather talk to our mom then to our father--with our father because he was a little more strict and things.  And when he came home he was tired.  When he got up he was tired, so he'd go back to work and he did that.  And he carried this little lunch thing with him.  It's a little metal box, it looked like the lunch pail that we carried to school.  And mom always fixed him his sandwich and stuff and he off to work.  And that's what we saw of him.  We didn't see a lot of him because--and he wasn't a participant as far as activities, giving us, involved in our activity and things.  Of course, we understood, because after all there was five sisters, and I have two brothers, which is a total of eight.  And it took all the effort that he could muster to just take care of us, and we understood that.  Maybe not initially when we were little kids, but as we grew up we understood that.  I only have two, and I'm having all kinds of problems.  And I'm (laughter) much more fortunate then he was.  So I can understand with eight in a two-room house, 'cause we slept, you know, bunk beds, mattresses, whatever was necessary.  We kind of--we lived like most people lived back then.
Speaker 1: So, where do you fall in the order of the eight children?
Speaker 2: I'm next to the last.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the seventh.
Story_ID: 483095
Speaker 1: --Now when you think about your parents' [Bertha Penton Jones and Eunice Jones] personalities or what you know about them, their personality, their talents and things that they could do and tended to do, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother.  She's very talented.  She did paintings.  She did a little sculpting.  But she did those things because she enjoyed them.  She took the time out even though she worked, she worked as a cosmetologist.  And that's the schooling that I was telling you that she got.  That's the only schooling that she attended to go to get education toward her profession.
Speaker 1: Now did she attend one of the C.J. Walker [Madam C.J. Walker] schools or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a--
Speaker 1: Poro society, or?
Speaker 2: It was a school for cosmetologists.  So she went there and got her, what they call beauty license.  But you know, she and--and she worked, that was her profession.  But meanwhile, she did quite a bit of artwork.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she ever sell them, sell her--
Speaker 2: She wasn't interested in selling.  She just (laughter) enjoyed doing them and accumulating them, you know.  I thought she had too many of them, but you know, she loved every one of them.  She accumulated them like I did when I first started.  I first started painting, I put them all on the bed.  I just painted them, I just didn't care I was just like her.  They just accumulated, you know.  So that's what she did.
Speaker 1: What was her subject matter for the most part, what did she?
Speaker 2: Mostly animals, flowers, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what medium did she use?
Speaker 2: I would say tempera mostly, tempera paints.  That way if she made mistakes she can paint over them.  So she was pretty smart in selecting that media.
Speaker 1: And there was a lot of that available I guess in those days too.  I mean the schools had it and I mean you could get tempera easier than oil or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oil was expensive so you wouldn't--you want to keep away from that.  It's been--it's expensive.  It always kept ahead of other things.  And if you get pure pigment, you're really talking quite a bit of money for a tube of paint, such as crimson red, of red light, pure, you know, all these colors, these primary colors, red, yellow and blue, you're talking about real expensive.  And you can get those, of course you can make all of the other paints from those so you don't need to buy all the monochromatic colors they have in between, you know.
Story_ID: 483096
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just a pretty rough childhood (laughter) memory.  I, you know, when I was growing up, we was always struggling and that's what caused me to shine shoes while I went to school and I also worked at night.  So I worked at nights and I shined shoes.  Those were my two jobs.
Speaker 1: When did you start working, about what age?
Speaker 2: Actually I started working when I was in high school [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas]--no I take that--I started working when I was in elementary school 'cause I worked for Harold's Drive-In [ph.].  I was a busboy there.  And Harold, this guy that owned it, he was a Caucasian, he liked me, he liked my ambition, so he gave me a little extra help, you know.  Most people that I worked for back then participated in, you know, giving me a little extra support that was not family members.  Some of them used the phrase, as long as you're trying as hard as you are, I'm willing to help you.  So, I got a lot of help so I didn't do things on my own, I didn't make it on my own, I had lots of help from people.  And it wasn't--now the help, when I say lots of help, I don't mean they--the help was at minimal when you come to financing, but they--there was numerous people who gave me support--
Story_ID: 483105
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have, oh, we always ask this question.  I asked you if you had an earliest childhood memory, the first childhood memory, the first thing you can think of?
Speaker 2: The very first, as I remember, coming to Dallas [Texas] on the back of a large truck that had up to a perimeter was wood where they stick these frames into--there's a cou- they had these slots around the truck and they put--the way the put the bed on there, the way they put the frame on, they put them in and they'd slide them out, and you can get out and they'd slide them back in.  They had a slot where you could--that's my first memory of anything that I can ever remember as a child.
Speaker 1: So you all came in a truck, in a pickup basically with a (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it really wasn't a pickup, it was one of these other bigger trucks, in between.  You know, it wasn't an eighteen-wheeler or anything, it was a--bigger than a pickup because it had all our belongings on it.
Speaker 1: So the whole family was on the truck?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that's the first memory that I can--thing that I can remember as far as Texas is concerned.  And there maybe--now there were some other memories I remember down in Louisiana, swimming in the bayous with my brother down there and we stepped on snakes and stuff like that when we was little kids.  I mean, we was--we thought we was adults, but we was really small kids.  We, you know, swimming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were kind of in a rural area in Louisiana when you were there.  When--when you moved to Dallas was a--were you all in the--
Speaker 2: City.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it real different from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was West Dallas [Dallas, Texas], lots of houses, people living close to one another.  Unlike anything that we'd have ever seen before.  Because our home, where we lived in Louisiana, probably six, seven miles from another house.  We was pretty well spaced apart.  Living here, moving to Texas seemed like everybody was living on top of one another.  It was that kind of thing, you know, it was that contrasting.  But--though you know, it--it's kind of like hot and cold.  You go--once you go from hot to cold it's such a big contrast, you got to get accustomed to it.  Kind of like it was when we first moved here.
Story_ID: 483106
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, sights was big city obviously, bright lights.  Seemed like no people never went to bed, 'cause in Louisiana we went to bed at six o'clock, we in bed.  It's dark, you can't see your hand.  You go down--it's so dark until, there's no reflective light in Louisi- here lights on all the time.  And even the reflective light is giving you the--give you kind of the feeling that, you know, it's still, nobody's going to bed.  Street lights, we had--well one light down in Louisiana and it had--it was put in later in life, a pole.  'Cause they charge you to run the line to--if you want light, they'll run it, but they charge you for it.  We had no money, so we didn't have any light.  Six o'clock, we're in bed.  All the cows and everything (laughter) is just sleeping.  So hogs are slopped and everything.  So we're asleep.  So it's quite different coming to the city [Dallas, Texas].  But, the city life is more--is fast, everything is fast here.  And even if you go to Louisiana today, it's slow.  And it just depends on what you like.  Like here, I'm crowded to me.  I live in this neighborhood and I'm crowded (laughter).  I would love to have more space.  Space here (laughter), you can't afford it.  One inch of space more costs a lot of money on your tax roll, you know.  So I enjoyed the--I enjoyed--I could see my enjoyment being different from there to here, it's very contrasting life to move from one place.
Story_ID: 483107
Speaker 1: Is North Dallas like the black community of Dallas [Texas], basically or is it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, North Dallas is the white, the Anglo-Saxon.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry, West Dallas, I'm sorry.  You moved to West Dallas [Dallas, Texas] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, West Dallas is more of the people who are underprivileged.  You wouldn't find--I mean it's very few.  The percentage is probably less than 1 percent of rich people that would even consider living over there.  Now there's probably some parts of West Dallas, but right now I'm very familiar with Dallas because I've been here so long.  But, it's--West Dallas started out as three kinds of people lived in West Dallas when I was small.  West Dallas was not as developed near as much as it is now.  'Cause a lot of water there, a flood plain, they fill in and they came in, they built all these apartments.  And they built three sectional apartments.  One for poor blacks, (laughter) one for folk--poor whites, and one for Asian Americans or whatever.  So, and then they subdivided this, it's amazing.  But, you know, let's look back at race, look how race is, what if people don't--I don't wanna live near you because of the ethnocentricity.  I think that I'm better than you, you know.  So, what they did, they subdivided Dallas, West Dallas in these segments.  Now we live in a government apartment.  Two bedrooms, still--there's still eight of us kids and mother [Bertha Penton Jones] and father [Eunice Jones].  So we lived in a two-bedroom apartment.  I went back here a few years back and I looked at that apartment and I could not underst- it looked big when I was a kid, but I could not understand how we could live in that apartment, there were eight of us in that little apartment.  But, we--there was always problems there in West Dallas because if there was anything that criminal, even though seemed like the policemen, maybe five or six squad cars, they come to the black neighborhood.  Now maybe blacks may have been migrating and meandering over in that neighborhood doing things, I don't know, but it seemed like the blacks always caught the heat when something happened.  But, by and large, they had--they built three schools.  It was segregated.  Three schools--the Mexicans went to one school, the other the Asian Americans.  We went to one school, which is black, and the whites went to another school.  But we were all poor.  Everybody there was poor, but it doesn't matter how poor a white man is, he still feels superior over the black man because, in most cases, the white man knows that we were owned by him.  So how could he give us respect when he can buy and sell?  You don't want respect--you have a banana or an apple or an orange or a house or a cow when you can buy--you can't put him on your equal.  You can't, you're buying and selling.  So, that's--so we had problems in the apartments.  There's always something going on, but--
Speaker 1: So were the three separate schools close by each other in the same way or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there was these sections, the schools were put in the sections where the race where they divide--they subdivided.
Speaker 1: So they subdivided the--those on government--
Speaker 2: The government did that.  And the government built those apartments on flood plain land because there was--there was water as far as you can see, but I bet the deepest part of it couldn't have been no more than six feet.  So they'd fill in.  See, during the time--say for instance when I was a child living over there, the trash, all the trash and garbage were picked up by people that's four or five guys on a truck and they pick up the garbage.  Right now, there's one guy on the truck.  He got this machine, picks it up.  But there was four or five guys and they would put all that stuff in--in these dump trucks and they would take it and then they'd push it out in that fill area, and they filled all this area.  And they would burn the trash.  It's unheard of to burn trash nowadays.  Very dangerous, whatever, smog, whatever, but they don't burn it anymore.  But they burned it then and they'd burn, burn, burn, they fill all that stuff in and then they built the homes--apartments on it, the apartment complex.  So as a result of that, we had a place to live, but we were still segregated.
Story_ID: 483108
Speaker 1: But the most segregated place in Dallas [Texas] is Highland Park [Texas].  You say rich, North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] versus West Dallas [Dallas, Texas], Highland Park is the most.  And that's why statistically I think that somewhere I've seen this where we're the third most racist, Texas.  We're conservative here, but we're so conservative so we don't--it doesn't appear that way, you come here, "How do you do, sir?"  You know, everybody conducts business just fine.  But once that's done, you stay in your place, we stay in our place.  And I'm sure you know the story why [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride sent his money in to join a country club here, a golf country club.  They sent it back to him.  Last month, there was a guy trying to get into Dallas Country Club [Dallas, Texas].  They don't have no blacks, what did they do, they reject him.
Speaker 2: That's just last month?
Speaker 1: Last month.  I got the article, it may have been--may have been two months, it hasn't been that long.  But it was a big deal over it.  But, you know, it's something that you can accept because you know that's the way it is.  It's a private country club, they don't have to let you in.  It's phenomenal.  It's something you going to accept, so why even--it's good news to know that we still have a neighborhood here in Texas that have their own police force, have everything right there and to be honest, I've tried to buy a house there.  See, when I first started my little career I said, I need a house in North Dallas and I don't wanna go to West Dallas.  You say West Dallas, I don't wanna go to West Dallas, I don't wanna go to East Dallas [Dallas, Texas], and I don't wanna go to Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas].  So ain't one place left, the high dollar place where people have the tendency to be--get the respect that they due.  But, you got to bypass Highland Park because when I first put an application in, I saw a house and they had a sign, for sale.  I tried to buy it.  It's only thirty thousand dollars.  But that house today would cost you six or eight hundred thousand, easy.  But it's just a shack, but you're not buying the house, you're buying the land.  But they refused to sell me that house, and I got a lawyer and the lawyer says--his name was Joseph A. Devaney, and he said, "Well Nathan [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], look, you're entitled to that house because it had a sign up for sale.  So you can buy that house."  Says, "But if you did, you're right here in a segregated area where everybody in there has got probably millions of dollars, how long do you think you're gonna be there before somebody drives by and throws a bomb in there?"  So I said, "Forget it, forget it."  That was enough for me 'cause my daughter was just born, I loved her and I just, oh--I just--so anyway.  These areas, you have to be very careful about where you spend your money here in Texas, and I'm sure in other places too.  And since I've been here so long, I can tell you where to go and where not to go, where to spend your money, where to make your investment, how you're gonna be treated.  And that's probably what you--we all look for.  I didn't go in the war, I didn't go in the [U.S. military] service.  I was inducted, but I refused to go.  I was worse than Muhammad Ali.  Because I said, why go, lose an arm, lose a leg, lose an eye, lose a life, and then when you get back, you can't buy a house where you want to.  You're fighting for a country that you don't--you don't have the rights to exercise your right (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 483109
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up did your family really pay attention to the Civil Rights Movement, did they talk about it at home, with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], involved in the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and you know?
Speaker 2: My parents [Bertha Penton Jones and Eunice Jones] were more humble, do the right thing, church, you know, going, do the right thing, don't do this--
Speaker 1: Do you still go--so, what church did you all go to here in Dallas [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Church of Christ.  My whole family was Church of Christ people.  And so, my mother, usually she tried and keep us out of situations because she felt like here for the most part the only thing you do is get in more trouble.  She was more worried about us kids then herself, you know.  If she started teaching us rebellious things, and we're gonna start acting that way in the general public, and we'd end up in jail or killed.
Speaker 1: So she was afraid you'd get in trouble if you got too excited about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because cops here when I was eighteen, nineteen, cop can kill you and there ain't nothing gonna be done about it, absolutely nothing.  They had a case here where a child was--they'd picked this child up and had him in the back seat and they played Russian roulette and the gun went off and killed him, and the other officer testified that yeah, they did it.  So, they got them off the force, we ain't heard of them no more, but things like that happens.  You know, they just happen.  You could be killed here and if a cop kill you, he's not gonna get penalized for it.
Speaker 1: He might lose his job, but he's not going to jail?
Speaker 2: He's not going--nothing's gonna happen.  We knew that, we knew that.  I--when I (laughter) was working, I was working for the Dobbs Hotel [ph.], as what we call a shoeshine boy.  So here I am shining shoes and one night I go down in the basement to change into my little old jacket I'd put on.
Speaker 1: About how old are you then?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How old are you then?
Speaker 2: I'm probably nineteen, twenty.  I go down in the basement.  So, I get ready to leave and guy says oh--there's a police officer down there, I guess he's a security guard and he says, "What are you doing down here?"  I said, "Well, I work here."  And he got onto me so bad and I just--I said, "Well look all I can tell you is I work here, you know, I'm leaving."  And when I start to walk away, he put his hand on his pistol like this, and called me the word, and just repeated it.  And as I walked away, he said, "Nigger, nigger, nigger, nigger."  I knew, see--the thing is I'm not--I can control my emotion enough to not get killed because my mother--parents--have taught us, we gonna keep you out of trouble.  Okay, here's what you do in these situations.  So I knew all I had to do was turn around--all I had to do was turn around.  Now shooting me in the back wouldn't probably look good, but all I knew to turn around.  So I just kept walking, I walked right out.  But, back then, all kinds of cases came up, and here in Texas, where one person's getting killed.  When you hear about it, it's just--it's the way it is.
Story_ID: 483110
Speaker 1: Changed a little bit now, but not as much, and I guarantee you right now if you leave here and a cop go up to you and say, I don't like you I'm just gonna kill you, and he shoots you and there ain't nobody else around, you was resisting arrest.  He pulled you over and you started to wrestle.  Well the first thing they say in Texas, "I'm the law."  You always hear that.  They stop you, "I'm the law."  They don't say, "I'm executing the law."  They say, "I'm the law."  So that's the way it is, you know.  So we was taught, you know, from West Dallas [Dallas, Texas], you know, to stay in our place.  My mother [Bertha Penton Jones] being a Christian, my father [Eunice Jones], and they helped us grow up rather than dying in the process.  Because once something happened to you, even in jail, I mean you don't have to die in the process, they just lock you up and don't have money for an attorney, you go to jail.  If O.J. Simpson hadn't had money, he'd probably--he'd been--history probably--a different type of history would've been written about him.  But you--money, we didn't have.  So we couldn't defend ourselves.  If we'd gone to jail as kids for the minor-est thing, drugs, they'd say this would pu- let's say you had drugs, go to jail back then, they'd send you away because they need you.  They need you to work these crops down in Huntsville [Texas], in Louisiana.  You know, and I heard this story about, well when you need some more blacks to work, these are getting old, we need some more blacks to work.  We got crops down here we got to do.  Well, let's go out and drum up some charges and get us some more.  So it's a lot of things go on that we don't really understand, that we are not in depth enough to go in and find out why there's 85 percent, they say 85 percent and they show this little thing of us--black people, in jail.  Now if we in jail, working these farms, what's happening to us out here, what's happening to our women.  And then you say, woman looking for a black man as a husband, what happens.  Half of them, the ones that's left they done picked out a white woman.  The few that--the others have turned gay, you've got the gay ones.  And then you say well where are the rest of them, are they in jail.  So, so, where's our men for the women.  And then you got--you can't discount the ones that are very unreasonable and don't even wanna be bothered, you know, and is not gonna get married and not--
Story_ID: 483111
Speaker 1: We'll get back to some of this other later.  But, when did you first start drawing?
Speaker 2: Seven, seven years old, remember on Vilbig [Road] in Ok- in West Dallas [Dallas, Texas].  I lived with my cousin Helen [ph.].  So, I painted the picture, and cousin Helen died about four years ago.
Speaker 1: Was she older than you, was she?
Speaker 2: And I got that picture back.
Speaker 1: Was she older than you, much older?
Speaker 2: Cousin Helen, yeah.  She was an adult and we was kids.  We lived with her for a short period of time.  But I ended up with that picture.  When I grew up I thought about that picture, and I went and I talked to her right before she died, and I said, "Cousin Helen," I say, "look, let me give you a much better picture then the one you got."  And she said, "Oh, I like this one."  And so I said--I said, "Well look," and I took this picture over, and I said, "let me give you this one."  And I had it all framed and everything and she said, "Okay."  So I gave her that one and I got the first picture that I painted (laughter).  That's the first picture that I painted.
Speaker 1: Well, what was it of?  What did--was it?
Speaker 2: It was a scenic picture with a deer and water and trees.  And it was done in watercolor.
Speaker 1: And you painted that at what age?
Speaker 2: I painted that about seven, seven, eight years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So would you--would you watch your mother [Bertha Penton Jones] paint and try to do what she was doing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother--that gave me a lot of enthusiasm, encouragement.  I liked what she did and she was kind of a loner.  And I ended up spending I guess most of my life behind the easel, so far, you know.  Since I started on this new project, but if you look around and you get you a pencil and start adding up these paintings and figuring out, just estimating the hours that are in the paintings that I've done, you'll find out that the bulk of my life has been sitting behind an easel.  And some of my paintings individually have caused me--I spent nine months on one single painting.  So it doesn't take long to spend a lot of time.  And this is not infrequent painting, this is consistent, so.
Story_ID: 483112
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the grade school you went to?
Speaker 2: George Washington Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary School; George Washington Carver Creative Arts Learning Center, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to C.F. Carr [C.F. Carr Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], that's R-R, C.F. Carr.  And I went to Fannie C. Harris [Fannie C. Harris Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], is the last school I went to prior to going to high school, and from there James Madison [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: Is that James Madison High School?
Speaker 2: James Madison High School, and from there, Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], and from Texas Southern University to Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: That's Columbus--
Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio.  Columbus College of Art and Design [Columbus, Ohio] is the name of it.  And from there, University of Texas [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas], and from there, El Centro College [Dallas, Texas], and University of Dallas [Irving, Texas] for special education in lithography, and Eastfield College [Mesquite, Texas] for printing.  I bought a printing press, real big printing press and I had to find out how to use it.  So I went to Eastfield College for that.
Speaker 1: Did you print your own work?
Speaker 2: Did that, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the grade school.  So you go to grade school and you--I suppose you're the best artist in class, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't like bragging and stuff, but (laughter) I was probably wa- I probably was the best artist there because see, I'll tell you I end up doing things for American Education Week, Black History Week [sic. Negro History Week; Black History Month], and I didn't get a lot of study in because the teacher was very lenient.  Said, "Well if you do my room, don't do the term paper."  If you do this, you don't--and I thought it was the greatest thing in the world.  But when I entered college, I had to go and take all these special classes in speech, English, math, all this because I had missed it.  So it--it caused me, I was in school for over ten years in college alone, not school, but college alone just learning things, catching up with things.
Speaker 1: What you say is true.  I remember the same kind of thing in school.  If you could draw or paint or had a skill, a lot of time the teacher would let you do that in lieu of the other work.
Speaker 2: That's what happened to me.
Speaker 1: That's what happened, that's okay.  So, now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math, yeah.  I still have that subject.  I love math.  I keep lots of numbers and records and stuff.  And it's helped me too with my business and you know, getting along in life.  Yeah, without math I don't know what I'd rather be able--if I had to delete reading and writing over math, I don't know, I'd probably take math.  I knew this guy, named--we called him Fat Ivory [ph.].  And this guy could not read or write, but he was wealthy in the neighborhood.  Everybody admired this man.  He had money, cars, houses, but he was good in math, could not read or write.  So, and numbers, I enjoyed my numbers 'cause you know little things stick with you.  You say, you know, if you--you're good at numbers, you can get buy.  If you're gonna buy a house you better know something about numbers, mortgages, percentages, you know, for the note.  You wanna note they fluctuate on you.  They got these very unstable notes, and then they got permanent financing and stuff, and fixed, and you need to know that.  And I'll tell you something people should really know, everybody in this world that lives in the United States should always look at the bottom print on their credit card statement to see what the rates are.  What the rates they give you the first day when you sign up, maybe 3 percent.  You look at it three months later it may be 21 percent.
Story_ID: 483113
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes growing up, or any mentors?
Speaker 2: No.  That is, none whatsoever, absolutely.  None.  I--but there's a lot of people that I like what they were doing, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I liked what he was doing, you know, as he did it.  I remember driving from school when they--I had a little ole MG, I was driving from school when they announced that he was killed, you know.  And Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] wasn't bad, Kennedy was--he really--they killed him, but of course I liked him too.  But as far as someone to--as a role model, no.  Because what I was doing, I was doing these artifacts, and my art was normally black in nature.  You know, all the little characters and the study things that I did.  And I didn't really think that anybody would ever give me a dollar for them because they was black in everything, style, little character studies.
Speaker 1: Now did you know about any other black artists, any of the famous black artists then, like Aaron Douglas or Charles White [Charles Wilbert White], any of those people?
Speaker 2: The only artist that I knew about was Dr. Biggers [John T. Biggers].  He's the only artist that I knew about, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) John Biggers, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I call his wife [Hazel Biggers] infrequently now, and she's always telling me to visit with her when I come.  I visited with them once and ended up buying one of his works that I have that I really like.  It's a big--it's a lithograph, and it's a very nice piece.  But he's the only artist that I can--that I know of that that I, you know, had any association with that I--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you found out about him?
Speaker 2: Biggers is when I went to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--you're grown actually before you really find out about a black artist or black artists.  So you're doing work as a kid you had no idea that the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I studied.  What did, I studied all the great artists that was required of me.  Michelangelo, Leonardo Da Vinci, Raphael, Matisse [Henri Matisse], Manet [Edouard Manet], Picasso [Pablo Picasso], Salvador Dali.  All these guys I studied, it was a requirement, so I learned about them.  The Eiffel Tower [Paris, France], these things was on our menu, we had to learn.  And so it was just a learning process.  It wasn't like you're going, you got to get through this to get your degree.  So, this is what happened as far as learning about other artists.
Story_ID: 483114
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers in grade school or high school that were special or who, you know, tried to help you in particular?
Speaker 2: I went through school for--I was almost to graduate from high school when--now there're two lessons I learned.  In the elementary school, there was a teacher, a principal, he says--I had gotten in a little altercation with a girl and we're both huffing and puffing, and we're still looking at each, you know, like we wanna tear into each other.  And so the teacher says to me, he said, you know, says, "You need to apologize, both of you."  So he taught us that if you don't apologize you're small in nature.  You apologize and you forget it and you go on.  I apologized, but I guess the girl she was so upset she never did.  So he told us about this, so I learned that.  So it's hard to apologize, really, it's just really is.  I mean sincerely apologize to people.  But you need to have that, you know, in your vocabulary, just decide, tell them, incorporate some words that if you really mean it, to do it.  So that was one little thing.  The other thing that really helped me a lot and it's kind of helped me get along with people.  But the other thing was I was--I had taken this history class, and I've taken a lot of different classes in high school, but history was one of them.  And there was a teacher, her name was Rose Burks [ph.], and she was my history teacher.  And I wasn't very talkative at all.  I wouldn't say nothing.  I only used words after I got out of school, and went and studied more, tried to learn things.  But I wouldn't say too much in class.  She'd always call on me (laughter), I can't answer that, don't even ask, anyway.  So at the end of the semester, she gave me an A.  And that probably motivated me more than anything because I say in myself, I say, hey I'm as smart as the rest of these folks in this class, I got an A.  Really, she was trying to tell me something.  Because she asked me something before I got out and I happened to answer the question.  And she says, "I'm rewarding you to let you know that you didn't earn this A from all the other work that you should've done, you earned this A because you finally had enough initiative to answer this question that I've given--that I asked of you.  And you'll get a lot more rewards if you learn to answer questions instead of evading the issue."  So that helped me more, I think, then probably most things because right from that point on, I started learning things.  I realized that heck, I'm as smart as the rest of these folks here.  I got a brain, legs, eyes, feet.  Only thing is we don't look the same, but I'm pretty smart here.  So--I really wasn't smart at that time.  But anyway, I smartened up as I went through life.  So she helped me more than I think anything, just by giving me that A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was James Madison [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas] an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now you graduated with--what, in 1960?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], okay.
Story_ID: 483115
Speaker 1: Did you think you were gonna go to college when you were a senior in high school [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well I only decided after I got that A.  That's why I say she [Jones' teacher, Rose Burks (ph.)] did more for me than anything.  But as far as all of my friends, course they say, you just--you're not going anywhere, you're not going school, you're not, you don't, you're not active enough.  You don't participate enough.  You're not on those honor rolls.  You just a person that's quiet in the corner.  You don't answer questions.  You don't hold your hand up when there's a question asked.  So you gon- you know, your life is gonna be, maybe normal, maybe a little less than normal.  You may be--instead of being in the middle class or the lower middle, you may be in the lower lower.  So it was that kind of a thing.  But after I got that A, I learned something from that A, a whole lot.  It's amazing what you can do when you--when something like that happen.  So I realized that I needed to reconstruct my life at that time and then I started buying books.  How to read faster and better.  How to improve your vocabulary in thirty days.  All these kind of things.  I really got into it.  And the man that I worked for, I'll always ask him, he was worth $42 million.  They printed that in the paper and I still got the clipping in my dictionary.  This guy helped me through school.  But every chance I get I'll ask him, "How'd you make your money?"  Because I felt that we're both men, if he can do it, I can do it.  So, with that kind of attitude, I was able to sell over $2 million worth of paintings.  So, it's just how much determination you got.  Because with determination, it means initiating things.  Anybody that's determined they gonna have to show initiative.  You can't have determination without having initiative.  So, you gotta have those things and those things go hand-in-hand.
Speaker 1: So, when did you sell your first painting?  Did you sell any in high school?
Speaker 2: I drew pictures for people in high school, their faces.  They sat and I drew them for $2, $3.  They just sat.  And oh you--when I was on the job, I had a little job that, you know, when we have lunch break, people would come by and sit and I'd draw little pictures of them.  You know, that's.  And they were more or less profile pictures.  And so--but these paintings that I did of, you know, black nationalities, what I call character studies, I never thought anybody would buy them.  Why should they, the way people are, you know.  I figure my people probably won't buy them 'cause, you know, we have really reached a peak of higher education appreciating things the way we should, and we sell paintings worth five, eight, five, six thousand dollars, who you gonna sell it to.  So you figure heck you're not gonna sell them anyway.  But one day a girl named Delores Martin, she says, "Nathan [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], I think you ought to get in the Reverchon arts festival [Reverchon Park, Dallas, Texas]."
Speaker 1: Now how old were you, were you still in high school?
Speaker 2: I had--I had just got out of--I had--I was almost out of college [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Well, let's hold off on that story and let's get you through high school first.  Now when you were in high school as a senior, how did you decide you were going to college, ho--how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well actually I did a painting called 'A Sophisticated Lady' [ph.].  And I went to my instructor 'cause we had an instructor in high school.  She had posted all these little things on the wall on entries where you could enter paintings, okay.  And by the time I got that painting finished, I wanted to enter it in this contest.  So she taught us something, she said, "I'm not gonna permit it because you're gonna be late with this painting."  "In painting," she says, "you got to start your life off being on time," prompt and all this.  She was, you know, a stickler for that.  So I had gotten this painting, I was very disappointed because--her name was G.I. Collins [Gladys I. Collins], is her--was her name.  Anyway, I was very disappointed.  I had this painting, I go back home and I got this painting.  And I've worked all this stuff, so I got the--I went back and I copied off the bulletin board the address, which was Columbus College of Art and Design [Columbus, Ohio].  And I packaged that painting and sent it off.  And they sent me back a letter, it said, you've won a two-year scholarship at the Columbus College of Art and Design.  That's how it began.  But I was so happy about that two-year I didn't realize what I had really done to upset Mrs. Collins a little bit.  I really should--I upset her a little bit.  She was right about that, we should've done things on time.  But I rushed back to the school with the letter to show her what had happened.  And she did get on to them about it because there were two other guys, Ron Jones [ph.] and Alfred Gibson [ph.], also were to send things to--but we had not--neither of us got there, but I did things, you know, I went above--what they call going above her head, and I sent it.  So that's what got me kicked off.  But, like I say, I don't blame her, she's probably right, I probably shouldn't have done it because it did get there late.
Story_ID: 483116
Speaker 1: Well, it's--it's better late than never.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I--I thought you told me that you went to TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] first before you went to Columbus College of Art [Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I went there first.  I went there first.  That was my first thing--packed up a bunch of suitcases, trunks of food, my mother [Bertha Penton Jones] wanted me--make sure I ate.  And we put all these canned goods in this inexpensive trunk.  By the time we got to Texas Southern, canned goods was everywhere.  They broke the suitcase, everything 'cause it was so heavy.  I mean we should've taken the money and bought the canned goods after we got there.  But my mother was so afraid I was gonna take the money and wouldn't buy the food she wanted me to eat.  So she--we packed all this stuff.  That was my first trip, yeah.  So, anyway, so I was there for a while.  Dr. Biggers [John T. Biggers] wrote me a check for some money.  I remember him writing me a check.  And I remember the exact--
Speaker 1: You had just run out of money basically?
Speaker 2: School--school had ran out of money.  And Dr. Biggers wrote me a check.  He said, "I could help you," and he said "I'm gonna write you a check for twenty bucks [dollars]."  Well, you may not--twenty bucks is not nothing now, you get couple gallons of gas, but then, twenty bucks was pretty good money, you know.  So all I needed to keep adding to it, which I did.  I saw Dr. Biggers at the Hyatt Regency [Hyatt Regency Dallas], downtown Dallas [Texas] here.  We all did a show, there was about six of us artists and he was one of them.  And I walked up to him and I had already prewritten the check and I said--I gave it to him with no interest (laughter).  I say, "Dr. Biggers, here's the twenty dollars that you gave.  I was so happy that you gave me that twenty dollars."  And he looks at the check and he says, "Well I don't remember giving you any twenty dollars, but I sure appreciate this twenty."  So, he says (laughter).  That was really funny.  He said, "I don't remember any of that."  (Laughter) But I do 'cause when I went to his home he had this piece of carpet down on the floor on an easel and he was painting a picture.  And his wife [Hazel Biggers] was sitting there and they was--they was younger people then.  I mean, he, you know, got aged.  But he did give me twenty dollars, I remember.  It's just as, you know, how can I forget it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're at TSU first.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then you went to Columbus College.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Columbus College.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you finish TSU or did you--
Speaker 2: No, I just--it was just temporarily, you know, like going to school.  You have a class or two a semester, whatever, then you--see the thing is, I wasn't planning on using the scholarship, see.
Speaker 1: Oh from Columbus College of Art?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because it takes money to go there and it's way away from home, and I had never been out--away from home before.  Not on my own.  So, I--my mother and I felt being close down there that she could watch me a little better.  But, you know, we got to thinking, the school is out of money, they can't give me any money and all this kind of stuff.  So, it was a short period--
Story_ID: 483117
Speaker 1: Then the Columbus College of Art and Design [Columbus, Ohio] was different.  Because when I went there, there was this rich guy that really liked my art and he liked my ambition.  So he says, "If you need money just contact my office."  And he said, "In fact what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna send you a check, tell me how much you want.  You're gonna need to eat, sleep and drink every month."  So he sent it to me.  Every month, every month, right on time every month.
Speaker 2: So, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he helped me.
Speaker 2: What--did you take the train to Columbus [Ohio], or you fly, or how did you get to Columbus?
Speaker 1: No, I took the Greyhound--Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.].  I enjoyed that trip because I sat up in that--what they call that double decker, and it was real nice up there.  You know, I could sit there and look down on all the cars and the land, and the--you know, everything that's going on.  I remember getting to Dayton, Ohio, going through there or something, and it was snow everywhere.  I'd never seen so much snow.  See, we don't get snow down here often.  But that was a lot of snow.  By the time I got to Ohio there was so much snow, it seemed like it'd never go away.  I bought some boots and a big ole black coat that I used to wear all the time.  It was cold there.  But I enjoyed.  I'll tell you something that I enjoyed about Ohio, it seemed like people were not prejudiced there.  I--there's a couple living--a mixed couple living next door, there's an interracial couple living here.  People go down the street hugging up.  And I was going like, god dang, I can't believe this.  I mean, they're going down the street, just all hug, interracial.  It was just a shock to me.  That was one of the biggest shocks I had about people.  Because living here [Dallas, Texas], if you go down the street you better not be hugged up too much around here, not with the opposite race of people.  It's just like that.  And I'm referring to white, black versus white versus black.  And even if there's something going on, people kept it, you know, at night or secretly or whatever how they did it, but.  Of course when I went there, it was just open, everywhere I went, I was just--really.
Speaker 2: This is ni- 1963, '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: That was '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2: Three [1963], yeah, 1963, 'cause you spent a semester at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] at least, right?  So you were--so this is--is this like the fall of '63 [1963] or the winter?  Well the winter, yeah you said it was snow, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was the winter--yeah, there was snow.
Speaker 2: So you spent a semester at TSU then went to Columbus?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And it was very interesting there.  I liked it, but I never went out, never.  Only places I went was to school, to the library, and back home.  School, library, back home.  That's at Columbus.
Speaker 2: Now were there many other black students there, at the?
Speaker 1: There was, maybe there was a guy named Henry [ph.] something, he was my roommate.  He was in the arts.  And it's--wasn't many, wasn't many.  And I was real excited we had live models.  That was the first time we ever had live models, you know.  It was just really great there, even though it was cold.  But what I like about it, is I learned so much.  It seemed like I learned a lifetime or acquired a lifetime of knowledge during my stay there.  Out of all the time I've lived up until the time I got there, it was a minimum amount of knowledge I felt like I acquired.  But there, library, school, home.  School, library, home.  I just learned so much, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Now, who are some of the teachers that stood out there?
Speaker 1: Oh I don't even know, it's been so long ago I can't recollect the teachers.
Speaker 2: Now it--was this the first time you used oil paints or did you use them at TSU?
Speaker 1: Well, I used--actually I used them way before I even entered well--the elementary school, college.  I used oil, water, it just--a lot of that stuff was available, it was given to us, the school supplied some of it, you know.  It was--in elementary school we didn't have to buy it.  So, it just gave me a kind of a cross section of mixed media, so I used a variety of things during that time.
Story_ID: 483118
Speaker 1: I guess, what was the most important thing that you learned at the Columbus College of Art [Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio] in terms of your work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think it--I don't even think it's related to art.  I think it was related to being able to express yourself in some kind of means or way by the use of the English language.  To be able to write a good letter and respond, and stuff like that to communicate with people.  This is--was one of my main things there.  I spent a lot of time, you know, acquiring education based on mostly literary type education.  It wasn't--I felt art, it was no challenge to me.  I was just there to get the--acquire the paper and the degree, the certificate or whatever.  But, it wasn't--was no challenge, so I wasn't there.  The professor always--a lot of time he--they have me get up and do things, and even the class, he will walk out the class sometime and say, "Mr. Jones [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], will you conduct this, and I want you all to continue to do presentations."  And he maybe will not just call on the people in order that we give presentations, because we had to explain our paintings.  You couldn't just paint a picture, you had to go in and dissect it, and interpret what you painted in terms of value, hue, texture, proportionality, what is abstract, what is Impressionism, Dadaism.  So we went through all these kind of things in order to express ourselves.  So we didn't get out of that class just by being a painter.  Because obviously if you gonna just be a painter, someone else is gonna have to manage your life.  That's why they say a lot of time, artists are not businessmen.  Artists is--they don't know nothing.  Well, to me, I paint pictures, but I'm certainly not an artist.  I'm more into the structure of making money and the business part of it.  That's why I say that math is very important to me, because I am not interested in--painting is something God gave me.  That's a talent that, you know, I can--I've never been really challenged as far as painting.  Even when I went to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas], the instructor was a Caucasian.  At the end of the semester, he says, "I'm gonna give you--I'm gonna give one person in this class an A, only one person."  And it's shocking because this was in our class at UTA.  One person's gonna get an A, and he says, "Everybody knows who it is."  I knew who it was, everybody else knew who it was.  I received the only A, the first alumni award from the University of Texas in the field of art as long as they've had the art program.  So, it was--and things like this all resulted from me going school, library, home.  No girls, no dates, no nothing, no nothing.
Speaker 1: Now that's pretty tough now, no girls and no dates?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no girls, no dates, no nothing.  School, library, home.  That's the way it happened.  And you know, it's all right, I'm catching up now.  If there was, you know, a need to catch up.  The females will be around (laughter).
Story_ID: 483119
Speaker 1: Now when were you drafted?  You said now you resisted being drafted (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me see what year that was.  That was after I had gotten out of high school [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas].  I got government papers.
Speaker 1: Was that now--now you were in school.  They wouldn't--they couldn't draft you if you were in college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had just got--I just gotten out of high school.  I think I'm pretty sure I'd gotten out of high school.  But then the draft was different I think.  They needed you, and you was over twenty-one and you required, wasn't nothing physically wrong with you.  You--I had to now--six o'clock now is not the same as six o'clock when I had to go down.  Six o'clock it was dark.  Six o'clock now, it's light, it's daylight, you can go play a round of golf going at six o'clock now.  But we had to be down there at six o'clock for all those examinations.  They had everybody stripped nude, line up against the wall, face the wall and a doctor came down and examined us.  And I didn't wanna go, really.  And I had a lawsuit then riding on a deal called the Wild Mouse at the state fair out in Texas.  One of those things hit my car from behind and it kind of jarred me up a little bit, but it really wasn't enough to damage anything.  But I did use that report as a damage report.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said you were injured, you were--okay.
Speaker 2: For my back.  They don't take injured back people, you know.  So, it was good that the accident did happen.  It was authentic.  I had a lawsuit going and everything else.  But just to be honest with you, I could--if I, you know, chose to, if I didn't have that attitude, that report would've never gone there.  I never would've sent that report.  But because of all the things that I know is going on and we just--and I discussed with you earlier being denied things, and being called bad names, and can't live where I want to.  Attempt to buy a house, and can't do nothing.  I mean, it's--you, Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas], South Dallas [Dallas, Texas], West Dallas [Dallas, Texas], that's where you need to be.  And it doesn't make sense and never made sense to me to fight for something that's not yours, you can't exercise your right.  So why else should you fight for it?
Speaker 1: Now were--were you reading some of the black authors in those days like [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and I don't know, Stokely Carmichael's [Kwame Ture] writing, Charles Hamilton [Charles Hamilton Houston], people are starting--Malcolm X's speeches were becoming popular.  We--
Speaker 2: None of them.  None of them.  In fact, that was taboo.  I didn't read any of that, especially Malcolm X.  There was a lot of people doing things.  I admired Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because he was orderly.  He hurt nobody, he was smart.  He manipulated and planned his move to try and keep people out of jail.  On the other hand, you have these rebellious type men that say they're helping the blacks, but they're really doing more damage because they're not using any kind of tactful ways and hounding themselves out there.  Use guns, and riots and burning buildings, and you know, all this kind of stuff.  I mean if it's necessary, it's necessary, but I just felt like you can get there by using other means.
Story_ID: 483120
Speaker 1: So, you're in Columbus [Ohio], and now when did you graduate from Columbus College of Art and Design [Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Two--I would say--
Speaker 1: Or how long were you there?  I don't know if you graduated from there in a year or two?
Speaker 2: I--two years, I would say '65 [1965], '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  It's only two years.
Speaker 1: It's a two-year college?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then they accepted me right in the middle of the semester or something because I had gone to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], so they really liked what I presented.  They felt it would be great to have me in case, you know, I make a mark.  Then they use that to, you know, help their educational system too.
Speaker 1: Right.  So after you graduated from Columbus College of Art and Design, you came back to Texas to go to University of Texas at Austin [Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the University of Texas at Arlington [Arlington, Texas].
Speaker 1: Arlington, okay, I'm sorry.  What was your goal there, to--
Speaker 2: My goal there was to finish out.  I had my credits transferred from Columbus College of Art and Design and to finish out my education there.  And--and initially when I went to the Columbus College of Art and Design I didn't realize it was a non-credited college.  And by the time I finished, it was still a non-credited college.  So I went to the University of Texas.  When I got there, I didn't have any credits to transfer.  So what I did, I repeated everything.  When I finished repeating everything, Columbus College of Art and Design became a credited college.  So, so now I spent a lot of time in school, a lot of time.  It wasn't, you know, sometimes you say, well two years of architecture, how was that, was that wasted, no, because I use it in everything.  I use it in my business design--
Story_ID: 483121
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you took two years of architecture at University of Texas [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I took two years and then I changed my major.  Then a four-year program.  Then six years.  And, (laughter) you know, I'm there, it's like a fixture, you know, I'm there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why did you decide to take courses in architecture?
Speaker 2: I was gonna be an architect until I went down to Harrell and Hamilton [Omniplan, Dallas, Texas] architecture firm to get a job temporarily while I was involved in architecture.  And Harrell and Hamilton, found out that you got an apprenticeship, you got a two-year apprenticeship.  They treat you like a stepchild and they don't pay you any money.  I had a daughter and a wife that I wasn't willing to change over to doing--I was working for the city part time, City of Dallas [Texas] at that time.  And the City of Dallas, I was an engineer's aide there.  And I just didn't want to--I found out so much about architecture.  I found out that somewhere in life, if you got a family member that can build up the architectural level that you're trying to reach, it's easy.  But say for instance you're out of college, how long it takes a man in Texas to get a good contract to design a building or structure.  You're not trusted with that kind of confidence, you're not gonna get it.  I found out a lot about architecture.  I know I had two bright guys, friends of mine, who had degrees in architecture.  I know one now that calls me all the time.  He left Texas.  Don--Don Magneils [ph.], he's an architect.  But the deal is, it's not like--it's like being a psychiatrist, it's hard, it's hard to get to make money.  You got to have somebody that's gonna trust that you're gonna do the right thing.  To build a building, to design a building that falls down, then the confidence is not there.
Speaker 1: Now did you know John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase] in Houston [Texas] then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He was at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and has--he has his own firm, but he designed a lot of the buildings on campus here, John Chase.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we get--it's kind of like picking and choosing, nothing is conclusive.  You always can find somebody that'd done something great.  But when you start talking about the majority, you start saying that well, who is [HistoryMaker] Nathan Jones.  Nathan Jones, he has made a lot of money in art.  He lives in this aristocratic neighborhood.  But say, how many Nathan Joneses.  Of course you can select--be selective.  If I had to tell my son to pursue a field like this, I would not advocate that.  I would say, do it, but you use me as a stepping stone.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that even though John Chase was--had some notoriety, that--what, it's not easy to know everybody, all the black people that are doing things or to, there's not that many of them.
Speaker 2: There's not many of them, there's a limited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 483122
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met your wife?  And when did you get married?
Speaker 2: Actually met her in high school [James Madison High School, Dallas, Texas] and we got married in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't--
Speaker 2: I knew her pri- five years prior to marrying her, before we got married.  So we've been married exactly four-O, forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when you got out of the University of Texas [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas] in architecture, I mean, you had a four-year degree in art and architecture, is that what it was?
Speaker 2: Well actually I had a two-year certificate in architecture.  That's all they gave you there.  You had to transfer to Rice [Rice University, Houston, Texas] or somewhere if you wanted to continue your education in architecture.  But, architecture was not my field 'cause I don't have the type of background, family background to get the kind of contracts that I want.  Now you can always get city contracts.  In fact, I had a guy call me about two weeks ago knowing my background, offered me a contract to do a building.  'Cause see, I've done--I've built office buildings and everything.
Speaker 1: When did you start doing that, what was it right out of school or?
Speaker 2: No, when I--I stuck to my art when I first got out.  Now the first venture was architecture.  That was my first.  When I--it--I was still kind of into--you know, I've never given up art, but my first venture into another field was architecture and it always--I always wanted to do architecture 'cause I had, I felt I had this ability to do it.  So, I built a doctor's office, like I say, this studio, my home and several other buildings I built, homes.
Speaker 1: So, was it--did you form a consultant--I mean a company or something, or did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My company's called JK Properties.
Speaker 1: When did you form this?
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute, I messed that up.  NJK Properties [NJK Properties, Inc.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: When did you form that?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Out of school, let me see, that was about fifteen years ago I would say, at least.
Story_ID: 483123
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you see, what I'm trying to do, is trying to find out in a chronological way what you did next.  So we're jumping too--we're jumping around too much I think.  So I'm trying to find out what you did after you got out of the University of Texas [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas].
Speaker 2: Well after I got out of University of Texas, I continued to--that's when I did my Reverchon [Reverchon Park, Dallas, Texas] art show and made all this money, and then after that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell me the story of that--okay, yeah all right.
Speaker 2: See I--
Speaker 1: Let's tell that story and then--
Speaker 2: Well, the way that happened, a girl by the name of Delores Martin is the one that intro- asked me to participate in this show.  And I said, "Delores, I shouldn't do it because it's in--right there in Highland Park [Texas]," where it's the most prejudiced place in the United States I feel right there.  And she said, "No Nathan [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], I think you ought to do it 'cause, you know, they're a little bit open-minded."  And I was very hesitant.  And I went down and I did that show, and it was a three-day show.  First day only lasted about a half day, sold all of my paintings except one.  So I was rich (laughter).  I felt rich.  I had money, lots of it when I bought me a Continental [Lincoln Continental] and all kinds of stuff.  But that was my beginning right there.  So, and my wife and I got to move from Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas] to North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] and--and we played with the money and we--I mean, it was just a real exciting.  You know, we made all that money.  And I kept this one painting--
Speaker 1: About how much money are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Oh, about thirty thousand dollars at least.
Speaker 1: And off of how many paintings sold?
Speaker 2: I probably had no more than probably twenty-five paintings.  My paintings was never inexpensive.  People used to laugh at me (laughter), but my teacher told me, Mrs. Collins, Gladys Collins [Gladys I. Collins], she said, "Set your price and don't negotiate it."  She always said it, set your price.  So what I always--what I do I put the price that I think it's worth and then I put the price that you can get it for.  Now if you don't like the price that you can get it for, I go back and tell you, look, here's what you're getting.  Here is the actual price.  Now I got two prices, I got one.  I used to have these six thousand--I was hung up on six thousand dollar prices way back then.  Tell you what happened, while I was out--I was out--while I was on the Reverchon--out at Reverchon Park, here's how I made a lot of that money.  A guy called me after I had gotten home and I had paintings that I would not take out of the house 'cause I didn't think I was gonna do any good with those.  But these were my private things.  Guy named Ray Ives [ph.] called me and he says, "Nathan, my brother," that's the way he talked.  Nathan, my brother.  And he's a white guy.  He says, "I love your work and I wanna buy some."  Now this guy's rich, okay.  Lived on Turtle Creek [Dallas, Texas] in Highland Park again.  So, he says--I said, "Well, what do you want."  What, do you want an appointment or whatever.  He said, "No," said, "I'm gonna leave it to you."  He said, "You pick out me four paintings and bring them to me."  And I said, "Well what price range?"  He says, "Whatever you think."  Now I'm really messed up because I don't wanna take him the most expensive paintings obviously and I don't wanna take him something that's gonna offend him.  So I'm really messed up.  And so all the time I'm sitting here thinking now how much, what should I do with this guy.  I don't know, I really don't.  So I put--I took some paintings that--these are my love things that I mean, I don't wanna sell.  But here's an opportunity.  So I took about two paintings for--from three thousand to five and then the highest one I took was seventeen thousand.  Why not, it's seventeen thousand, that's what it's valued.  And when I got there, he wrote me a check.  He didn't say nothing.  Just wrote me a check for those paintings.  And he and I became friends, friends for years, years and years.  I don't care where he go in the world, he calls me.  But that was one thing that took my way up approximately thirty thousand dollars.  And a--and a Lincoln Continental back then cost around eight or nine.  So and you can get it loaded for everything.  So, I'm just telling you how money, you know, money will buy a lot, thirty thousand dollars would buy a lot.  In fact, that house over there that I was telling you that I couldn't buy, it was thirty-two thousand.  But, anyway we was able to buy anything, we paid cash.  We got plenty of cash, we just bought stuff.  So that was my first big break.
Story_ID: 483124
Speaker 1: All right, so I went on through life having shows in Houston [Texas] and what, private shows, people buying their very expensive paintings from me.  I mean, just buying, buying, buying, it was like living in heaven, you know, they're just buying.  Got plenty of money, buying paintings.  And then I got this urge to build.  I say, why I wanna build something, I got this education and--and so forth.  Now I've won all kinds of awards.  I got all kinds of awards in architecture, designing buildings and stuff.  So, right after that a few years ago--say after '70 [1970]--'70 [1970], '75 [1975], '80 [1980].  In the '80s [1980s] I was building houses.  But I knew it wasn't gonna last long because of my art.  I've, you know, there's a lot of work in building houses.  You got to be up early.  You got to have contracts for everybody.  You got to make sure they show up.  Doorknobs got to be picked.  You got to have soil samples and your soil test done.  It's a real--it's a something building a house.  You'd think building a house is fun, but it ain't no fun, you know.  I was making eighty, eighty-five thousand dollars a house, but it wasn't enough for the headache, you know.  Takes you roughly four or five months to build.  I can paint one picture, eighty-five thousand dollars, I can paint one picture and get the prints made, and I got three hundred thousand dollars with art.
Speaker 2: So, is that really--say for instance, we have several paintings in here, I mean, is that how it generally works?  The original goes for a certain price and then you make lithographs of it and prints?  And you can get about three hundred dollars off of a good painting?
Speaker 1: No, well see, let me tell you, the picture that I was telling you, I'm looking--any one of these Buffalo Soldier pictures that I got around here.  If you take one of those pictures what has happened is, just say sixty-five to eighty-five thousand dollars is what I want for one of these pictures.  I take that picture and I produce it.  I got twenty-five hundred graphics that I've already printed, all ready, they're all nice, nice big graphics of that.  And I got them printed in such a way that it's costly, it's very costly to do because they--they're cheap.  The quality has got to be like, I don't know, twelve colors, thirteen colors, they separate them.  So, it's a lot of work in putting that.  But each one of those pictures, $185 each.  I just shipped some off about a week ago.  So you take that $185 and multiply it by twenty-five hundred.  Take two hundred and multiply it by twenty-five hundred, so let's double it.  What's that, it's $500,000 in graphics.  Now they got to be sold, but they don't have to be sold in my lifetime.  Whoever acquired, they'd be even worth more.  That's how Picasso [Pablo Picasso] and all these artists--dying, a hundred million, two hundred million, three hundred million.  The cost of money is there, the value is there.  Where is our assets measured.  How you measure your assets and how you maintain them and how you preserve them.  Gold, silver, art--art, you may consider antiques maybe art.  But you can't say furniture, nobody cares about furniture.  Cars, they're gonna depreciate and go, unless it's an antique, but see that's how you, that's how artists die with so much.  That's why you have to have--you got to really do something to protect yourself and your family from all that tax, you know.  So you need to get with your attorney and figure out what you're gonna--well how you're gonna arrange that, because otherwise half the paintings are taxable.  And if my wife can't pay taxes on it, then they take them and sell them.  So, artists usually die very, very rich.  So, if you say to me, Nathan [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], why you doing this.  I don't know why I'm doing it, I like it because I'm doing it and you're only gonna spend so much money in your lifetime, I don't care how much you get and you ain't taking none of it with you.  So you--some things you do isn't gonna make sense financially.  'Cause if I wanted to increase my wealth, I would never do anything but paint, do museum shows, art shows, and I leave life alone because that's, you know, that's what's a peaceful life.
Story_ID: 483125
Speaker 1: But nobody wants a very peaceful life.  We're all cantankerous and anxious to do something that--and we want things that we can't have.  What you got, you don't want.  I remember and this, I'm gonna tell you this because you're sitting here and you want answers, I remember when I wanted a Rolex watch.  I wanted a Rolex watch and I don't care what.  Well a Rolex watch doesn't mean nothing.  It meant something before I got it, but it means absolutely nothing to me.  And I'll tell you what, a lot of time if I'm trying to get--now in business, if you go in a business meeting, depending on the meeting, if you go into business meeting begging, don't wear your Rolex watch.  But if you go in the business meeting and you're trying to get things done and you want to impress whoever else, and--and it's a good tool, that's what it is.  It's just like a man owning a Bentley or building a big house or whatever, it's a prestige symbol, that's all it is.  So--and then some of it, nobody--I have to say this because I don't wanna appear ignorant on this, but a lot of it you can protect your wealth, you know, by buying the big house, 'cause that's the biggest deductions you can get to protect your wealth right now.  So, a lot of people do that.  But, I found out that things that you want, once you get them, doesn't mean nothing.  Absolutely nothing.  'Cause everything's gonna burn, according to God, it's gonna burn.  All these paintings are gonna burn.  All these antiques is gonna burn, because God says it's gonna burn and I believe in God and I believe it's gonna burn.  So we're using it while we're here, but it's gonna burn because the world is promised to burn.
Story_ID: 483126
Speaker 1: While it's still here--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --I wanna ask you about your technique, and are you--well describe your art and what you're trying to do with your art, and what your technique is?
Speaker 2: I'm a realist.  I started out doing--I've done a spectrum of different types of art.  I've done even Dadaism, Surrealism, and I've done Impressionism.  I'm--really I've done a lot of that.  I've done abstractionism.  But when it come back realism, that's a people painting.  That's what people--you get in the--majority of people when you say realism because we understand real.  We see real.  Now symbolism is a lot different than any other types of painting.  Now I--that's one type of painting I haven't done is symbolism because it never made sense to me.  Why should I paint the most beautiful apple you've ever seen and say that's a snake?  Because in my mind, I'm gonna symbolize that apple as a snake.  And you say, well why is that apple a snake?  I see an apple.  And I say well, it's a snake because I'm associating this with Adam and Eve, so it's a snake.  So symbolism is different.  It's so mixed up until it's hard to understand.  Dadaism, easy 'cause you just put dots on paintings [sic.] and you get back and it looks like something.  It may be very real after you move back from it, but up close, it's a bunch of mess, just messy, lots of little dots.  But mine is different, the type of painting I chose.  Now I like Impressionism, I've done some.  I like that because you're not too far from realism.  Abstractionism, you're so far from realism until it's so--it's unimaginative.  So, I do what's real.  I like imitating life, capturing what God has created.  You know, I like capturing things, you know, moods of people, how they--how they move, put them in a different situation, you know.  So, realism--and I mix a little abstraction with it, just total abstractionism, I put a little design.  I started designing some things behind my paintings because those--now that's abstractionism, but it's also add balance, you know, a little rhythm.  You wanna--if you--if I just paint a picture on a--say a character study on a board and nothing else, it's really incomplete, it's just a stagnant painting.  But say I started designing around it.  I design it so that I fill up the format, now I got a complete painting that has complete format, even though part of it is abstractionism and the other part is realism.  And what I paint with, you asked me that, I paint with watercolor, oil, mixed media, tempera sometimes, it depends on what I'm trying to accomplish.  Some paints work better.  You see all paints, paints are all different.  Some works better with different subjects.  Now, if you just doing--say you want a quick suggestion of a landscape and you--and you wanna do it fast and you go--you don't wanna spend a lot of time, then you take watercolor, that's your media.  You go out and you wet the canvas or you wet the board down and you streak it with the sky and you put a little color in there for the land and so forth, and water and you're finished.  And if you do a house, you many spend a little more time, but it's a fast media.  It's a fast-drying media, and I use that.  But if you notice my water colors, they're very detailed.  I put the basic color, shadows and shades down and they call that wet, wet on dry.  Then I come back with a dry media, which is the detail.  Which is I come back and I work on top of the wet and I pull out things, make it very detailed.  So sometimes you're looking at one of my watercolors and you wouldn't know whether it was watercolor and oil unless you get up really close and find there's no texture.  See, the watercolor you have no texture, but it is a transparent paint.  Now a lot of time, like I say, each paint requires something different because if you're doing something that you don't want certa- if you want to paint over something it's hard to do with watercolor, because watercolor is like putting two glasses, two sheets of glass on top of one another, you see through them.  I don't care how many pieces of glass you stack up, you can see through them.
Story_ID: 483127
Speaker 1: With oil, of course, it's opaque and you make mistakes you paint right over it.  Now I don't like too much oil painting, the smell, you know, it has a smell to it.  The turpentine situation.  I use Varsol, which you buy from a service station to mix in my paint which doesn't give me a headache.  Varsol has no smell to it and it cleans good.  It's hard to find, but you can find it at Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] service station.  So--
Speaker 2: It's called what now?
Speaker 1: Varsol.
Speaker 2: Varsol?
Speaker 1: V-A-R-S-O-L.  It's--and you can find it at service stations.  But it's--it's clear like jet fuel.  You know, this is very clear and you can use it to clean other things but it's highly flammable.  It's just like jet fuel, very high.  And that's why a lot of people don't keep it around, it's like gasoline, you know.  But it's very good for cleaning and so forth.
Speaker 2: There's no smell.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no smell.  So if you got asthma or something you don't have to worry about so much fumes and stuff.
Speaker 2: Like turpentine (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The turpentine is really bad.  And then when you leave, if you're an artist and you go to the store, you're gonna smell like turpentine.  It gets in your clothes, you know.
Story_ID: 483128
Speaker 1: The room is filled with character studies of black people doing various things, some contemporary, some historical.  I notice you do a lot of historical studies.  When you started off--when you started out, were you--it seems as though you didn't do as many as historical pieces, those came later, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I started out doing character studies.  Portraits, I don't do.  I despise portraits because they're stagnant, they don't have no character.  Whoever the portrait is done for, the immediate family is the only person--of someone that's a loved one--who's gonna appreciate it.  Often the person that you do the portrait of hates it.  He said, that doesn't look like me.  So, the deal is I do character studies, that way I can mold and shape and give some kind of character to show some emotion in--in the picture.  So the picture is not done for anybody specific.  It's a picture that most people can understand, appreciate because of the mood or the expression that's portrayed in the picture.  So, that's why you see these character studies, because that's what they are.  They're not portraits.  Some people refer to them as portraits, but I think that's just a figure of speech.  The historical pieces are very well orchestrated in the fact that every button on the soldiers' shirts or coats are painted precisely like the button was when it was made.  In other words, I buy the exact replica, I buy the exact, actually authentic piece of artifacts, I buy the artifacts and they all--
Speaker 1: Like the Civil War buttons or the buttons from the 19th century?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Civil War buttons, any kind of buttons that, you know, people wear.  Shirts, you got a button on his shirt.  Historians look for mistakes.  They love to find them.  They love to say, oh, that's not in the same era.  This gun was in--was made--wasn't even made before this coat came out.  So, you know, you have to be careful when you're painting things.  Like the show I did at the Gilcrease Museum [Thomas Gilcrease Institute of American History and Art, Tulsa, Oklahoma], they had historians.  You know, they got Remington [Frederic Remington] and Russells [Charles Marion Russell], they got millions of dollars of Remingtons and Russells.  You--probably more than anywhere you're gonna see in the world, at the Gilcrease.  But, I had a show there with these paintings that I've done.  And what they do, they look at mistakes, any kind of mistakes.  So the Buffalo Soldiers that I've done, the reason why I've invested in the authentic artifacts is so that I could paint an authentic picture.  So with the--so no one can say, well this is not of date, or so forth and so on.  So you have that, and I did nine years--nine--well nine months of research before I started.  I put a hundred thousand miles, right at a hundred thousand on a brand new van I bought and I drove all over Texas.  I just left, didn't have no direction in mind and I stopped at these little towns and antique stores and I went in.  And I actually had to beg some of the people to sell some of the things that I bought because they was commemorative things to them, but I explained what I was gonna use them for, you know.  So, I was able to acquire a lot of this stuff.  In San Antonio [Texas] I bought a slave document there and I bought a carbine rifle there.  And I just went on around and I'm buying things as I go.  But they were very difficult to locate 'cause people that have them don't want to sell them.
Speaker 1: They don't advertise them necessarily either.
Speaker 2: No they don't, they keep this.
Speaker 1: So you have to ask around I guess.
Speaker 2: So that's how I end up and that's how the paintings are put together now.  I do a combination of a character, and I get a person that I like, his face and I dress him in--in the artifacts the--whatever, but whatever I'm gonna use.  And then I photograph, I do a lot of photography because when they can't sell or they're not here, I'm not stopping, I like to continue to work.  So sometimes I have the men, a lot of time I don't.  So the pictures are put together through a conglomeration of things, whatever I need to make up the picture is what I use, you know.  So a lot of things are available to you, but that's how I've done in order to document these Buffalo Soldiers.
Story_ID: 483129
Speaker 1: Your first commemorative stamp, I think it was the Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] stamp, was that the first one that you did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dr. Charles Drew.  I was, you know, I told you I don't get up before ten [o'clock] when I was painting.  Heck, nobody called me, they know not to call me before ten.  And so I was asleep and my wife comes to wake me up and she said, "You got a telephone call."  I said, "Gee, you know, I don't get up before ten, just get a number."  She said it--it's--I'm trying to think of the guy's name, it was an easy name, he's the postmaster general.  Anyway, she says it's someone wants you to do a postage stamp, she says.  And I sat straight up then.  I said shoot, what--who was that, I say.  So I got up and I talked to him and he just said, "Mr. Jones [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], you have been selected, if you would like to or agree to do a postage stamp of Dr. Charles Drew."  So, naturally I wasn't sleepy anymore.  Shoot, we talked to them, we made the deal and everything, they pay you for doing it.  Once it's done, they have a--the ceremony's in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]  They give you a Naugahyde binder with four sheets of stamps with this--with their logo, post office [U.S. Postal Service], postmaster general, whatever, they give you that thing.  And you get up and you make a speech and then you spend the rest of the day signing ten thousand envelopes.  There're people in line, you just have to quit at some time 'cause you're never gonna sign them all.  Everybody's collecting stamps and you have to do that, and they cancel them and you sign them.  So that's how.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year is that when you did the Charles Drew?  That the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: I don't know, wanna say '70 [1970], I don't know why I wanna say '71 [1971], but maybe it was later than that.  I should've looked at all those 'cause it--
Speaker 1: Were you out of school yet?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was out of school.
Speaker 1: All right, so it had to be after '77 [1977] or so I guess yeah, early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere.  Yes.  I think it was '78 [sic. 1981], is on--maybe on the--maybe it's printed on the deal, and I think I saved--
Speaker 1: I know, we've got it written down for somebody who's watching this and wants to see it on camera, but that's, okay.  So Charles Drew commemorative stamp.  Now, what size did they have you use for the stamp, I mean, what size is the original?
Speaker 2: The original is probably four by--four inches by six.  They want you to do it very, very small.  The specifications that they give you, you have to stay in there because the engraver, there's some kind of way your specs have to match his specs when he engraves this stamp, you know, and so forth, so, they have their specs.  And I did the stamp twice actually.  The first time I did it, they called me--the post office called me and said I need to redo it because they couldn't get the approval for, I think thirty-five cent stamp, or maybe it was a thirty-six cent originally.  But they had to--we had to do a little change, but we completed it.  I met Charles Drew's--Dr. Drew's wife [Minnie Robbins Drew] and kids, and the whole business.  You know that old story about he died because he couldn't get a blood transfusion, but his wife straightened me out on that.  She said that was not true.  No truth to it whatsoever.  He was already deceased when they brought him in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed his daughter, [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, she's the president of a school [Southeastern University] in Washington D.C. now and she was telling us the same thing.  But it's one of these stories that just won't--it sounds like it ought to be right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we like believe that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like it ought to be right, some people like it.  Yeah, that was eigh- '81 [1981] the commemorative stamp, 1981.  So, now you did some work with the Franklin Mint too, right?
Speaker 2: I actually, I've done some work--we did a duck stamp.  The duck stamp is, it's a whole different ballgame 'cause they make money from the duck stamp.  The government makes money off of their stamp, it's a different kind of money.  You have to have a sponsor and all kinds of stuff, even though you're selected to do certain things.  So that didn't work very well because the work was there, but the sponsorship and all the money have to come in to--you really kind of promoting yourself, but you get some recognition from it, but anybody that, you know, that does certain works for certain organizations, certain government facilities or entities, you have to be real careful about that too.  And that's why I say a lot of time, you say artists are not businessmen because they don't look into stuff to find out what they're getting into.  And you really need to know what you're getting into.  So, I don't--like I say, I don't consider myself as an artist.  I consider myself a talented person, you know, in that--as far as the other part of it.  I rather consider myself as being the businessperson that's gonna look out for things, numbers, money, what I need to do.  And I'm not in love with money, I just know you can't do anything without it.
Story_ID: 483130
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite work of art?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's--I did a painting of my son I really like, when he was real young.  And the other one is that 'Now What Did I Do With That Nutmeg?' [Nathan Jones] that I did for Mrs. Paul's Kitchen.  She does the frozen sticks, the frozen foods.
Speaker 1: Yeah, fish.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I did.  She in fact, she said she--I had an opportunity to go and an opportunity they did a, you know, a news release and some kind of way it ended up in New York [New York] and she'd seen it.  I'd done a lady.  She was really, you know, one of my character studies, really.  'Seven Days a Week' [ph.] she liked it.  And they wanted me to do--they had selected Norman Rockwell and myself, and six or seven other artists.  They wanted me to do this--this picture.  So I gave them a price on the phone.  So they called me back and said, no, guess we'll have to pass on you and get somebody else.  Okay.  So that was one of the things that really bothered me a lot because I got to thinking, now if I'd said less money, I wonder if I'd gotten that job because I really wanted to do that commission for Mrs. Paul's Kitchen because it was--the way that thing was structured, she selected these artists and she would do--and she would buy all these paintings, have prints made and--and make these prints available to people who couldn't ordinarily afford art, that's what she wanted to do.  But anyway, I went back to sleep thinking I'd made a bad mistake about the price.  But anyway, she calls me back and she said, "I'm gonna get you to do that for me 'cause I love your work and--but I want you to don't--whatever you wanna paint is fine with me.  But now don't do anything obscene (laughter)."  Why she--that was real funny (laughter), don't do anything obscene.  She thought maybe I'm gonna do her--I don't know.  But anyway, the picture I did for her is right there.  That was really good.  But the thing is, I learned something too, that I gave a price and I stuck to it.  And I got the job.  So not--Norman Rockwell and myself was put on the same page and the same--they did this catalog and they put us on the same page because she said our work was very similar and she paid too much for both of our pictures (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was kind of good.  So, remember, stick to your price (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's good advice to young artists, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Story_ID: 483131
Speaker 1: Can you tell us now about the Multigolf [Multigolf Systems International] and how did you become an inventor, now you're an architect and artist and businessman (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually I've been wanting to invent all my life, ever since I was a kid.  I said, if I invent one thing, I'm gonna just get rich.  I would see--I didn't--you know, that's putting it a little before--cart before the horse.  But I said, I'm gonna get rich if I--and so I used to write just all kinds of inventions.  I got a whole file of things that I've invented.  I invented this calendar and I said I'm gonna get rich with this thing because it's real unique.  It's got pockets, it's just a big thing, it's got pockets and it's got dates and they're interchangeable, each.  And so next month, all you do is interchange--just change the date, okay.  And so you don't have to ever buy another calendar.  You change the dates and you change the month.  And this thing's got big pockets.  Now these pockets are for, say for instance you want to mail a letter today and but you know that it's not due until three weeks from now or two weeks and you want your money to stay in your account.  If you mail the check now they're gonna cash it, right.  So what you do, you stick this letter in this slot when you're gonna mail it.  So meanwhile four or five, ten days pass, you don't have to worry about it getting there late because it's sticking in this pouch, right.  So when that time comes, you just take it out and you mail it.  It gets there on time, your money stayed in the bank longer.  So, this was a great calendar, I use it.  I got one right now in front of my desk.  I made this calendar, I went to get it--apply for a patent from one of these people, attorneys and things.  And when they finished telling me how much money it was gonna cost me, I said, "No forget it, I'll just use it myself."  So that's how I got involved with the patent things.  And I did the--I went to play golf here about--it's been about ten years ago, maybe eight years ago.  I was playing--I started playing golf 'cause I said, "I don't why anybody'd hit a ball and chase it for five hundred miles--for five hundred yards before they get to the green."  So I didn't understand that.  I didn't wanna play golf.  But I started playing golf and when I got on the course, I had these new clubs and there was nothing to clean them up with 'cause I hit, you know, these golf course are moist, stay moisture--they keep moisture in the ground because what they do, they irrigate them all the time, they got to, to keep them pretty.  So the grass is soft, and there's usually a little mud underneath the grass once you hit down.  So I went to golf stores and I wanted to buy something to keep my clubs clean.  Couldn't find a thing.  So I had a patent search done by an attorney, nothing existed.  So I then, that's when I went on through with my design.  I designed this product that does ten things.  Cleans balls, cleans clubs, cleans shoes, cleans grip, cleans hats, cleans--and provides water.  So, this was a good product because all you do is take this product and you slide it on your golf bag.  It's very small, does all these things.  Not cumbersome, easy to install in just seconds.  When you're finished, you just slide it off, put it in your golf bag, tighten it up and you got it.  But then again, the functionality of it, you'd--you know, you need to know what it does, you know, all these ten things.  But basically you need to clean your clubs.  So everybody wants to clean their clubs.  They pay--you pay eleven hundred dollars, eight hundred dollars for a set of golf clubs, you don't clean them, the dirt really grinds into the metal and wears your clubs out, wears on your clubs.  So you need them clean.  So, I designed this product that does all these things.  So since I've done that, I got really seven--I got six patents, and I got seven or eight products that I've--two of them are not patented.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the golf product is called Multigolf, right?
Speaker 2: It's called the Multicaddie, yeah.  The company that I established is called Multigolf Systems International and it looks like--it looks like this product should do really well on the market 'cause it--it's innovative, there's nothing like it and every golfer needs to clean.  There's not a golfer that plays golf on earth that doesn't need to clean.
Story_ID: 483132
Speaker 1: When I came in you were showing me an infomercial that has been made, you went out and got talent, soap opera stars to be on the infomercial.  You got animation now you're developing where you can rotate the product around and this is--I mean, so this is a--this is real, you went all out too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I have--I've shown this product to a number of people and they've liked it.  And they've given me--raised a million to, close to a million, three hundred thousand [dollars].  And the people that gave me the money that invested with me are just everyday people.  Person at the school, teachers, lawyers, a person retired, they put fifty thousand, twenty-five thousand.  I think the highest amount that's been invested from one individual was a hundred--about a hundred and sixty thousand [dollars].  But they all gave me their money.  Now that tells me something.  That if I can raise, I'm not a fundraiser, I'm not a professional fundraiser by no means.  But if I show you something and you're willing to write me a check of your hard-earned money, now you think about it.  Would you do it, fifty thousand dollars of your hard-earned money that you have worked and probably took some time to save over some years.  You're not rich, none of these people are rich.  They are people that work for a living, but they took their checkbook out or they went to their teacher's retirement and they got this money and they brought it back and they said we think this product will do great and they gave me their money.  Now, I maybe--people say that's your baby.  I don't like that 'cause I'm not in it for that.  I'm in it for the money.  You keep the baby, you fall in love with it, give me the money.  So I don't--I never liked people telling me this, but they say that's your baby and you think a lot of it, but that's not true.  I'm in it for the money.  Now if you don't believe it, I'll give you--I'll let you be the designer, I'll say I never had nothing to do with it, you designed it, just give me the money.  So here's what I decided to do with all these people giving me their money, I'm not the only one.  If I was, say, if I was alone in this deal and I presented this to all these people and they all says no to me, majority of them say no, then I would think twice about my inventions.  So the reason why I've carried this thing so far in the commercials, and I can say animated product.  I got a computer full of it.  I got a manual that's thick with all our documents and stuff in it.  There's a lot of work been done on this project.  But I'm not the only one.  So if you wanna look at it that way, I would think this product [Multicaddie] is a good product and I--we estimate it'll make anywhere from $100 to $150 million before it's over.  But, you know, those are projections, so but that's how people make it.  That's how IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], all these companies.  See they come up with something good and it comes out.  And we feel that this is good because nothing exists on the market like it.  Now, if there were no toothbrushes, there was absolutely no toothbrushes, my product is a toothbrush.  And someone come out with a toothbrush, I would think you would do with that toothbrush, 'cause everybody needs clean teeth.  Well a lot of people are not gonna clean them, but you know, we need to clean them.  The golf course is the same way.  If you hit a ball and you look at your club, it's dirty and you can't prevent it.  Now how you gonna clean it.  If I can show you a fast, very fast efficient way of doing this, why wouldn't you give me $39.95 for a product that's gonna last you, if you take care of it, a lifetime to protect your investment.
Story_ID: 483133
Speaker 1: Now, plus the fact, saves time on the golf course, you don't have to go to the water sprinkler system, the clubhouse.  You don't have to go looking, dousing your towel in these water holes, you gonna play golf.  But that's what happened, we'd take our towel down to this old mucky water hole, mosquitos and stuff.  The water is still and we wet our towel, we don't think nothing of it.  We don't think of the typhoid or the dirt.  Look at Tiger's caddy [Steve Williams], did you see what he did?  Okay, a few months back, he needed a wet towel, there was no water.  The reason for this wet towel because he wanted to--he wiped Tiger Woods' clubs down.  So he takes Tiger Woods' 9 iron down to the creek and he douses his towel, and while he was dousing, he--he trips and almost falls in the little creek and the club went out in the creek.  So now Tiger Woods don't have a 9 iron to play with, okay.  I got the article right there, I'll probably show it to you before you leave.  I got pictures and everything.  But they talked about this.  You know, anything that happens with Tiger Woods they're gonna talk about.  So his 9 iron is out in the creek.  One of the participants in the--that came in, they got a--they went diving.  They got a diving suit and went and got that club.  Wasn't that important, but it's Tiger Woods' club and they gave it to him.  But, the thing is, if you'd have the Multicaddie is my point, the water, if he needed it, he just punches a button, water comes out.  And it's small.  If he needs to clean his grip, which he's doing all the time, he's consistently cleaning Tiger Woods' grips.  You just take my little deal and rub it up and down a couple of seconds, put it back and you towel dry.  The grip is clean.  I think this thing is gonna do good on tour.  People, they're playing golf.  Caddies, they're trying to keep, you know, the fellow golfers and things, the clubs and things clean.  I think it's gonna do good.  And remember I told you this, when you see [HistoryMaker] Nathan Jones, you see Multigolf System [Multigolf Systems International] just made $200 million in two years.  I think it's gonna happen.
Story_ID: 483134
Speaker 1: Do you have any--well I can't ask you that 'cause if you did you wouldn't tell me if you have any plans for any inventions that haven't been patented (laughter)?  So, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah you--I can answer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have plans to patent these inventions.  I got two that haven't been patented.  One of them I think is extraordinary, simply it's not complicated, it's not gonna take a lot of time and effort to do, but I think it's a very good invention.  I mean, that--yeah, I will patent that.  But basically what this one is, I would like to--we had a number in mind.  We'd like to sell this, sell the patent or license a company and we'll take a certain amount of dollars and some royalties.  Otherwise, we have a manufacturer right here in Dallas [Texas] that has already bid on it and so we'll go forward with the molds and make the product.  And we'll get POs, purchase orders, and we'll drop ship it to Edwin Watts [Edwin Watts Golf], Titleist, whoever needs it.  But we've already met with these companies and we know they want the product.  So it's just a matter of making it, whether we make it or whether we license someone else and they make it.  So we're pretty well sure that there's gonna be money.
Story_ID: 483146
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That African Americans, themselves, get more involved in integration.  We're not involved in integration enough.  I think that this neighborhood here, I think that maybe three, four blacks at the most in this neighborhood and I've noticed one is selling.  So, and I'm here, and I'm trying to stay here.  I'm trying to maintain my position here because I feel like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I go back to that, died for open houses, free, live where we want and unless we start doing it and now people with money, people that I know, personally that I know that's not gonna spend it.  They'd rather go to Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas], or Cedar Hill [Texas], or DeSoto [Texas], where things are much cheaper.  They can buy ten times with their money.  But that's not the point.  I would like to see them integrate, come in here and start making some move.  After all, like I say, people are dying that we get these rights and once we get them, it's like I was telling you how bad I wanted the Rolex watch, but once I got it, now it's nothing, I don't, you know, it's the same thing.  As long as this structure, our--our social structure is saying you can't move in this neighborhood, we'd do anything to get here.  But once the structure change and say okay, now you can move, you got your rights.  Now it's different.  I got my rights, that's all I wanted.  I'm gonna go to Oak Cliff now, I got my rights, that's all I wanted to know.  See, once you get it, it's not like, you know, once they're saying no, you know, it's like you got a girlfriend saying no to you and once she says yes, it's not as--it's not the same, you know.
Speaker 1: I guess I'm kind of--now are you saying that you wish more black people would move out here because it's been denied us so long?
Speaker 2: Yeah to integrate, period.  All of North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] is the high dollar.  We know that everything moves this.  All the biggest dollar amounts out here.  The convenience, all the amenities, the theaters, the restaurants, all these out here.  Yet, we have money.  We have worked to get this money, we have it.  There are lawyers, that's black lawyers, doctors in this neighborhood that lived here in Texas, but they prefer to leave this place, segregate it than to spend a little more money and to integrate.  Taxes is high, nobody likes taxes.  I hate taxes, they are extremely high, forty, fifty thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 1: But do you think if they did move out here it would bring (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If this brings--
Speaker 1: --the--everything back to normal all over the city or?
Speaker 2: It, what it would do, it would make it better for us as a whole, as a people, because it gets rid of the demarcation lines that were set way back in slavery.  And that's wha- that's our main purpose, we wanted to get rid of those lines.  Okay, so what's the purpose of getting rid of the line if you're not gonna cross it?  So that's where we are here and I know that this neighborhood, these people can do without me, and I can tell you a whole bunch of things, but we ain't got time for it that done happened while I've been here, that's not wholesome, but I insist on being here.  But if you be here, it's gonna cost you a million and a half plus, probably, to move into the neighborhood.  But to have people with the money that's black that have been--this privilege is here.  So that's, you know, all of these other things I--you probably would've enjoyed me saying, well I probably wanted to be a great artist or a great inventor.  No, no.  I like to see things happen for us as a people.  Now when that happened, these great artists and great inventors, they're gonna come.  You can't stop that.
Story_ID: 483147
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this one.  When you look back at everything you've done to this stage in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: I thought about that, been thinking about it for the last three months, way before you guys even called me.  I even asked my wife.  I ask God, I say, you know, and I ask her the same question you just asked me.  I told her that I wouldn't do nothing.  All the hard times that I told you I've had, all they have done is make me a better person.  If I hadn't had those hard times I couldn't appreciate things.  I couldn't appreciate, one to make this thing a success to help people, because I wouldn't know what it mean to help someone, because I would've been in good shape back there so I wouldn't have no concept of what it is to be hungry.  If you've never been hungry it's kind of hard to say, oh I can imagine how hungry you are.  Get hungry and then say that.  So what it made me a better person is because of my past experience.  I wouldn't give that up for nothing.  So I wouldn't wanna change that.  No, there's nothing that I would've changed.  I told my wife, I said, I wouldn't wanna change anything because I feel like I'm a good person, I would help people.  You can't get--keep me from giving a man money on the street if he's begging.  I will build signs, I work with signs, some people just keep right on driving.  I say no, it's not my money anyway, it's God's money, but that's something else.  That's everybody got their own god.  But I think that we need to try to maintain some stature and to try to move in and try to integrate and do things.  'Cause integration is very important.  It's important as voting.  You vote for the right to move here.  But when I tell you you can, you say well all I wanted was the right.  Now I got it, so I don't want it.  You know, it's just that kind of a thing.  So, that's really what I'd like to see.  That's why I'm staying here [North Dallas, Dallas, Texas], that's why I do a lot of things I'm doing, because I'd like to see more privileges exercised by us as a result of like you say, Malcolm X, and you mentioned some other guys, Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], all these, what are they dying for?
Story_ID: 483148
Speaker 1: Likewise, if you look back at everything you've done to this stage in your life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Probably my fine art and my art career, my inventions.  They--the architectural background, the designs that I've done as a black person, building, I've built some structures and they're not going to go away 'cause I built them independently.  I've done them myself.  I built them.  I've gotten contracts.  I've hired people.  So I've done all these things.  And so I look at basically three things, my education 'cause I have so much of it, my architectural background which is things that I've done, which is reality, sticks above the ground.  My fine art which you can't deny that because it's just spread all over, people collect it, I've museum show, the awards and honors.  Presidents have got it, you know, just a slew of people have got it, Dallas Cowboys, so lots of stuff.  So you can't deny, so that's another thing.  And then lastly, is the inventions.  I feel like, you know, the inventions are great for us to do to use our mind and our talent to come up with some things that--and I'll tell you this for sure.  If you go to an art--a golf store, there's a golf store, you know golf is one of the biggest businesses in the world.  There's 28.6 million golfers, just golfers.  But now, you say now where do we fit in.  Well I tell you, we don't fit in.  Tiger Woods is great, he's coming along, everybody look, they love Tiger Woods.  We're comfortable.  We got one black man.  Vijay Singh, Tiger, Vijay Singh, oh yeah, I'm not black don't even--don't even look at me.  You all look somewhere else, I'm not black, I'm Fijian or whatever, Fiji or whatever.  Tiger Woods said, "I don't wanna claim either one."  Said, I can't claim black, I can't claim nothing because my mother is this and my father is this, so I'm not gonna claim it, I'm not gonna offend either one of them.  I'm not black either, so I'm gonna get me a blue-eyed blonde and I'm gonna be happy ever after.  But anyway, we still got two blacks, we got Vijay and we got Tiger.  Okay, regardless, they're still black.  So, you start looking at all of this and then you say to yourself, how much money is blacks getting from all this golf.  You go in a golf store, next time you go in there, you say, if you go in there, can you show me a product that a black has designed?  Over $60 billion, I met two months ago with PGA of America [Professional Golfers' Association of America] in Florida.  And we finished--over two months ago, [HistoryMaker] Earnie Ellison with PGA, the director, he says, "Nathan [HistoryMaker Nathan Jones], I wanna help you as much as I can because there's $60 billion being spent every year and we don't get any of--," Earnie Ellison happens to be black, but we don't get anything.  He's the director there, but we are not getting any of the money.  It affected me so bad until when I'm doing these commercials or whatever, there's no way I'm gonna say I did that product, no way.  We are gonna leave it just the way it is as a product that we don't take--participate in.  And perhaps some people say it'd make more money, people say it'll make less money.  Some people say if it's black, blacks would participate.  Blacks don't participate too much now, so why would I think it's gonna be any different.  So, the thing is, that's a field of its own, that you, me, the blacks are not getting the money from.  Every other field, you can name almost every other field and we're involved in it.  But this one, this elite field, we're not involved in because we don't invent no golf things that I know of.  So, right now not only--this is a historical move, unless you look back to George Grant [George Franklin Grant] who invented the golf tee.  Now he invented that, what--in 1899 and I wanna tell you this, 1899, I invented the Multicaddie in 1999 and your company [The HistoryMakers] was established in 1999.  So we got a hundred years, you know, difference in the time Grant did the tee up until now.  But we're all in this '99 [1999] bracket, there's something about that '99 [1999].
Story_ID: 483149
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family now.  You have a--you have a wife and a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: I have one son and I have one daughter, and one wife (laughter), and that's it.  And they're both, they all--I can say this, they highly respect me for the way I've raised them and a lot of time they come and sit, which makes me feel good.  They sat down, they talk to me and they tell me, "I'm so glad to have you as a father."  But there's one thing that they won't--I can't get them to leave this house.  If I could do that I'd be better off.  But they'll go out and rent an apartment and stay for a while and then they decide it's too rough and here they come.  But, you know, they're good kids.
Story_ID: 483150
Speaker 1: --Is there anything I have not asked you that you need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think we've pretty well covered most everything.  If I--I think this is what you guys should do, you know, you all have these questionnaires, I think that the talented people that have something to offer to this society, I think you guys should include in your filming a sample, doesn't have to be, but a sample of their contribution.  Such as if it's a painter, maybe two or three of his best works.  If it's a movie star or actress or actors, maybe a couple of their works, maybe extract the scene from maybe something they have done.  If it's an architect, maybe one of his most glorified buildings.  But I think an example it di- you know, talking is fine, but there's nothing better than a picture.  They say a picture is worth a thousand words, and for every word that we have spoken, we got to speak one thousand of them in order to cover one little picture.
Speaker 1: Well, we do that (laughter).  You're right, and--but we do it.  So, let me ask my last question then we'll get to that, part.  Sir, this question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Actually as an artist, yeah.  As a fine artist that had spent a lot of time because most of my life has been spent producing paintings.  Paintings because--as well as you know, there may be a void in the art world.  There's been a void in the art world for a long time.  It's not as--we're not as plentiful as we wanna imagine.  And especially a good artist that, you know, that people gonna respect and recognize like they did the Renaissance.  The Renaissance period, they picked out some artist and they said these artists are the ones that was recognized.  There's a lot of artists, but then a lot of them are not really artists, they paint but they're not artists.  But I would like for that to be a reality.
Story_ID: 483152
Speaker 1: That's a Buffalo Soldier of the frontier.  And that particular soldier is--had lost his horse and he's evidently on feet, walking with all his gear.  The material that he's carrying that the way this picture was executed of course, painted, it was executed by means of using original memorabilia, Buffalo Soldier memorabilia or Civil War memorabilia.
Speaker 2: That is called the 'Modern Day Cotton Picker' [ph.].  And she was--I'm trying to project an image as though we were still picking cotton today, how we would look.  After all, I picked cotton, and my sisters, and I kind of relate that picture to my family when we were coming up in the fields.  We used to wear rough, dry clothes and something to keep the hair out of the face while you're picking.  And those--that little flap on the right side by her right hand is a knee pad.  That's what people use on their knees for crawling when they're picking cotton.  And there's a cotton sack on her shoulder which further emphasized the fact of what's she doing.
Speaker 1: This picture here was used for the cover of the Southwestern Bell [Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; SBC Communications Inc.] phone cover.  They printed five hundred--over--I mean to say 5.8 million books to cover Texas in its entirety.  And that particular picture is a duck scene which I call 'Louisiana Mist' [sic. 'Morning Mist,' Nathan Jones].  It's a picture that was--the scene really came from Louisiana early in the morning when the mist is up and the ducks are flying.  So it's a simple landscape done in watercolor.
Speaker 2: This picture is an obvious picture of me.  I did this picture, kind of posed in a way.  It's got a little bit too much posing for me, but that's when I first started really making money, had a little more hair and a little younger.  And I use this picture basically for press releases, but it is a picture of me that--early in life.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Dr. Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], the first rendition that I did for the U.S. postmaster general who hired me to--on a commission, who commissioned me to do this picture.  If you notice, it says U.S.A., thirty-seven cents.  Well, that was not approved, so I had to alter it a little because the stamp that was approved was for thirty-five cents.
Speaker 1: Okay, what media is this in?
Speaker 2: That was done in pencil.  It was a black and white that they required in pencil.  They did not want color.
