Story_ID: 614607
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is a Harry G. Johns.  That's H-A-R-R-Y, G, as in George, J-O-H-N-S [HistoryMaker Harry Johns].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is December 7th, 1921, in Alliance, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm a--I'm retired.  Formerly, vice president of Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio] for thirty-eight--twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay and, what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: A day--I'm--pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh--February 27th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008].
Speaker 2: Two thousand and eight [2008].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at--we are located right now in Xenia Township, Ohio.
Story_ID: 614608
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five light weight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer.  First one is: what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  I would say, potato salad, and in the meat category, steak and some barbeque (laughter).  That's about it for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Anytime between April and November, where it's the fishing season, yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is a shade of brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Bahamas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, that one--that phrase would be, "Be not worrying, well doing for in due season of the week, if you faint not."
Story_ID: 614609
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ewing Johns] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is, Iona, I-O-N-A, Huskey, H-U-S-K-E-Y, but that's her maiden name, and Johns, J-O-H-N-S [Iona Huskey Johns].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I believe it's a--I have on the sheet there.  Can we get that or?
Speaker 1: Well, you can just get us close to it as you can.
Speaker 2: I think it's, its July it's, its 1884.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: I think Springfield, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything.  I don't know anything at all.
Speaker 1: Is there any tradition that they would--you know, what, of what they were doing in slavery or how they, you know, did after Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any information.  Only thing I do know that, she worked in the tobacco fields, but that on--in Tennessee, but that's the only thing I know.
Speaker 1: So you think her family were primarily farmers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were primarily farmers and, and--I think probably, sharecroppers in the tobacco industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where is Springfield, Tennessee?
Speaker 2: It's not too far from Nashville, Tennessee that's about all I can tell--I've never been there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there, there is no stories about the family at all.
Speaker 2: No, there was never any stories about the family.  Unfortunately my father passed away when I was nine, and so I didn't have that long period of time with him.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about him, but your mother's side first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, no, matter of fact, that's all I can tell you about my mother's.
Speaker 1: Do you know--Did you ever meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they, were they--had they passed away by then?
Speaker 2: They probably passed away by then.  And see they--my mother moved with my father up to Ohio, and I was one born--first one born in Ohio so, I don't have any, any information on that part of the family.
Speaker 1: So do you think--was, was it that your mother didn't like to talk about her side of the family or do you think she didn't know much either or what?
Speaker 2: I don't know--I wouldn't say she probably didn't like to talk about them, I just don't know--maybe she didn't know that much about it--I--I'm not sure.  I mean I'm sure she knew who her mother and father were, but.
Speaker 1: She never discussed them?
Speaker 2: She never discussed that with me.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like, one would suspect that maybe, you know, memories that--they weren't that pleasant if she never talked about them.
Speaker 2: Well, she never talked about it, so I, I, you know, I--and I never even thought, you know, thought about that back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you mother talk about growing up at all?  Did, did she have a chance to go to school down there?
Speaker 2: She was a--went to school up to third grade, and--but she was very intelligent.  She could read and write and--but--she never talked about that schooling except that, I remember her saying though they had to go out and--during the growing season, whatever, or whenever the harvesting time came and they had to go out and leave school and go and so that's--I think she only completed that grade, that particular grade.
Speaker 1: So they had to go out and work when the crops were coming in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Work, yeah, the crops.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she, she had no stories about growing up in Tennessee at all?
Speaker 2: No, No.
Speaker 1: How--when did she leave Tennessee?
Speaker 2: It had to be right after, I believe after 1918, and, and--because I was born in '21 [1921] and, and it was soon after they were at Rodney, in Rodney, Ohio, so that was about the time I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, All right, Okay so.  Did you ever meet any relatives of your mother's from Tennessee?
Speaker 2: There was, there was an aunt I remember, who moved up to Ohio, and that's about the only person I, I ever knew and I beli- because she would talk about--I believe that was on my, my father's side.  I ne- never receive--met anyone who was a relative on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 614610
Speaker 1: Now--well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Ewing, E-Ewing, E-W-I-N-G, Johns, J-O-H-N-S [Ewing Johns].
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I would say, as far as I know Springfield, Tennessee and if I recall, it was 18--1877.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he was a little bit younger than your mother [Iona Huskey Johns]?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was eighteen eight-- 1884.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was, you know, maybe.
Speaker 2: Not younger, he was 1877.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, a bit older, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1877.  Yeah
Speaker 1: Yeah about seven years older.  So--what do you know about the ancestors on your father side?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything, except for that one aunt.  If I recall her name was Emma [ph.], if I recall, oth- but other than that I don't know--there was--again, I have no information on that side of the family either.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  This is really unusual, that--yeah cause you're, you know, highly educated man, professional and nobody in your family talked about their--
Speaker 2: No--not--no, the, the only thing that--I don't remember 'em talking about any the experiences or anything of the Southern aspect of their life at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, did you ever ask them when you were a kid?  Like, like daddy what, what did you do when you were a little boy or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I don't call--I don't recall that at all.  I, my--as I said, my father worked in a mill and at age of fifty, I think fifty-three or fifty-four, he passed away.  I was nine years old and, and I never had a chance to really to get into even, you know, discussing with him, his background and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he lived, you know--he was in Springfield for a fairly long time.  He wasn't--1877 to 1918 that's--he spent some time there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, and I, I, I did hear that he was a, well he buil- a carpenter and builder and so forth, that he built a number of houses and the church in the cit- in the city.  But other than that I don't have any information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had some, some con- contracting skills?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, there's no question about that yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's something that we didn't know, you know, before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 614611
Speaker 1: So, is there, is there a story at all that your mother [Iona Huskey Johns] told about how they met?
Speaker 2: I remember she--I remember one thing she, she told us about.  They were seeing each other but evidently, evidently, he [Johns' father, Ewing Johns] was seeing--also seeing some other girls (laughter) and I remember her talking about, that's interesting, about saying to him one day--one evening.  She quoted this biblical verse, "Choose ye this day whom you shall serve" [Joshua 24:15], and, and that's when he made up his mind.  I remember her telling us that, and that's about it.
Story_ID: 614612
Speaker 1: What kind of personality I guess--what kind of talents and--or personalities did your parents have?
Speaker 2: Oh, mother [Iona Huskey Johns] had a--mother, what a beautiful personality.  She had a wonderful voice, she could really sing.  She was a, a member of the--I remember her dressing up and, and being a member of the church quartet.  And, then at the time, the churches in that town had a number of quartet women and they would have contests at the various churches.  She was a seamstress, and she was a quilter, she--one of the things she would do in the summertime would be to cut pieces of--patterns out, out of cloth all during the sum- I remember her doing this doing the summer.  And then in the winter, they would have these quilting bees, they'd set up a quilting horses and stuff in one of the rooms and women would come and they would quilt during the winter and make these beautiful--so she had a, a, a talent for art and probably that's one of the reason I guess most of us inherited that, that particular talent in terms of art 'cause she could--she did some beautiful work, designs and so forth.  She also, she also raised and bred canaries.  That was interesting.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Now did the canaries have anything to do with life on the Alliance [Ohio] at all--I know in some of the coal mining towns (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I, yeah I know the, the--far as I know, I've never--I didn't never knew the--that--I knew about that use, but I don't know that.  She just would breed 'em and, and then she would sell 'em or give 'em away, I don't know, don't remember that, but she would breed 'em.  She, she, she carried on what--the whole idea with my father [Ewing Johns] said that all the children must get an educa- get an education.  That was paramount in our family.  That was one of the real strong efforts that we had to get an education.  And so she--after my father died she made sure that we, we carried on that tradition.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what about your father?  What kind of personality did he have?
Speaker 2: What I remember, not too much, now, seriously I don't 'member too much about my dad.  He was--he'd gotten ill from working in the mill--and it got--I really feel that what happened was that, he was suffering from black lung disease really, from the work in the mill.  But, he was a, he was a, han- a real handy man.  He could build things.  He built part of the house, he was sort of a doctor in terms he can--he--I don't know how he did, but he, he'd make--he had--out of certain herbs and things, he could--he'd made certain medicines that the neighborhood would use.  He was quite a, a man that would do anything, as I understand, for people.  He was very helpful and, that, that was--I learned that from my sister, told me when I was trying to find some things out about him.  But he was very tolerant and very kind person, that, that's and, but he made--he--the big thing I think, even from moving from Tennessee to Ohio, was that he had heard that they had--that you could go to school up there and that's the reason why he moved his family to, to Alliance.  And there was, and there was jobs in the foundry [American Steel Foundries; ASF-Keystone, Inc.], yeah.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Well I had three, I had three brothers and three sisters.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall?
Speaker 2: I'm the fourth person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm number four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you consider your parents' personalities and talents and the dispositions.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother because I knew her more and her disposition and, and the way she raised us, and the kinds of things she wanted us to do, so I, I really feel that I probably took after her, her quiet demeanor, and not letting things rough you up and, try to take things as they come and then look at what can we do about them without getting all excited and torn up about it.  So I think that patience, prob- I, I, I have no question in my mind about I picked that up from her.
Story_ID: 614613
Speaker 1: Now do you think it was, it was hard for them to move from Springfield, Tennessee to Alliance [Ohio]--I mean did you know how they actually made the move?
Speaker 2: I don't know how they made the move, I often thought about that.  How they made the move, but no, I, I evidently, well I say evidently, I don't know how hard it would, would be, but I guess to move a family in the time there was what, what three brother and I had a sister [Lena Johns] and two brothers [Haywood Johns and James Johns], there were three, three children and to move them and get a place to stay and, and all that--could be rather--it could've been pretty difficult.  I would think--yeah I think it wasn't easy, was not an easy move.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But they, they never discussed how?
Speaker 2: They never discussed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you grew up in Alliance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was born in Alliance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: No.  Our neighborhood though, was a neighborhood made up of immigrants, and as I stated--I may have stated the, the Allia- the town it was a factory town, a foundry and--so everybody--everybody in the town worked in the foundry.  America--the name of the foundry was American Steel Foundry [American Steel Foundries; ASF-Keystone, Inc.].   And there was one, another one called the Morgan Engineering [Morgan Engineering Systems, Inc.].  The--my neighbors were Italians, Romanians, Hungarians and Syrians.  And across the street were the, were the Italians and each side of me were the Romanians and the Hungarians were up the road and Syrians up the road, and that was sort of like the pattern of the town.  In one section of the town when you ask about, was there a nickname or so forth.  There was one section of town, called Goat Hill [Alliance, Ohio], where the Polish moved and they--but they all worked in the mills and, and the, the young people, most of 'em was--that didn't graduate from high school and then that wasn't that many would go to high school to about the tenth, eleventh grade, quit and go to mill, get married and would start raising family.  So that's--and--so there were no--for instance, no professional black people in the town except, there was one who was an African--physician, who was an African.  But as far as teachers.
Speaker 1: Who was an African?
Speaker 2: African physician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now that, that'll be--was kind of unusual (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Dr. Thomas [ph.], that was his name, and he was a black--and of course then you had to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was he from?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he was from.
Speaker 1: A name like Thomas you would wonder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dr. Thomas was his name, I don't know where he picked--it might've been probably Liberia.  But that was the only professional person in town.  The other--when the young man, who was a farmer's son got into--finally got a job as a clerk in the hardware store that was a big celebration.
Story_ID: 614614
Speaker 1: So we were--so, so those of us--the young, young black, young men there were no, you know, really no one to look up to in terms of what the professions were, and my sister [Lena Johns] left home about--I think she left, left high school at ten--tenth grade, and went to Wilberforce.  I don't know how she knew about Wilberforce but she left Wilberforce, enrolled--and worked her way through the academy and college.
Speaker 2: So she was--how old when she did this?
Speaker 1: She left when--after tenth grade.  See Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] at the time, they had--Wilberforce had a kindergarten grade school academy, which was a high school so you could go the whole bit and so she left home, and--at tenth grade, and worked her way through.  She worked her way with--she was a maid--in some of those houses and worked her way through to college.
Speaker 2: And she--you, you never had a discussion with her about how she, you know, found out about it?
Speaker 1: No, I never asked her about that all.  My--and she persuaded my brother to do the same thing.  Cause his, his ambition was to ride the rails.  And we'd laughed about--he and I use to laugh about that--that was his ambition--ended up being a colonel in Tuskegee Airman in the [U.S.] Air Force (laughter).  But that was his ambition but he left Alliance [Ohio] 'cause there was nothing to do in Alliance.  There were no--nothing there, and he came to Wilberforce too, and did the same thing.  So--then my oldest brother [Haywood Johns], he left, well he was grown.  He left--he, he opened up a automobile car washing business in the town but he eventually left there and went to New York, and began operating a couple of beauty parlors, you know, that's what he was doing when he went in the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 614615
Speaker 1: So, the black community basically--there, there wasn't a separate black community but it, it was part of the ethnic community?
Speaker 2: It was part of the ethnic community.  Basically the black community was church, church and lodges.  Now the, the--
Speaker 1: Now what-- how many black churches were in town?
Speaker 2: There were--well, let's see one, two, approximately three.  There was a--I know that--I remember--because Triumph Church of God [Triumph Church and Kingdom of God in Christ, Alliance, Ohio]; St. Luke A.M.E. Church [Alliance, Ohio], that was Methodist; and Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church, Alliance, Ohio], that was the Baptist, that was the three churches, and course those professionals--ministers were--we--were so called, I guess they were professionals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your family attend the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?
Speaker 2: Well--my family initially attended the Triumph God, Triumph Church of God.  And then I, I eventually--I grew up in that church and then eventually, I somehow, I don't know how, I, I became a member of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it was of the--and became very active in--I was very active in the Triumph Church too because that's where I learned all the, you know, we had to go to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union]and it would start in the morning and we stay out all, all day, (laughter) you know, and you--but we, we learned a lot.  We learned all the Bibles' books, you know, the books of the Bible and all the attitudes, you know--every--you know all the things that you might memorize.  They had these programs you memorize all these things, which was an education, cause I remember stuff now, you know, but somehow I guess maybe the younger people was joining the Methodist church and evidently I must've joined.  Then when I did that, I became the assistant superintendent in Sunday school and that's how I--well I knew about Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], but I, I came down here as a member of the--what they called a Tawawa assembly [Tawawa Sunday School Assembly and Theological, Scientific and Literary Circle], which was the assembly of Sunday school people--young people had for a week at the Wilberforce, that's how I came down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 614616
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanted to ask you about--some questions about growing up.  Now, what did your neighborhood look like, was it--I know Alliance [Ohio] is kind of hilly isn't it or?
Speaker 2: No, well yeah it is in one section, it's a little hilly.  The neighborhood--everybody kept their houses very well.  We had a big backyard.  Originally the street was dirt, but later on it got--years later it got paved.  Our house, we did not have electricity, or no telephone, so we didn't have a radio, all that.  We, we--most of the people didn't have electricity.  I think there was one house on the street that had a telephone that I recall, and one of the jobs--one of my jobs on Saturday was to clean the chimneys, go to corner, corner filling station and get kero- gallon kerosene.  I think it was a dime, and fill the lamps, trim the wicks, so, so, so I do all my through high school [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio], just about I, I--just before I guess my senior year, we finally were able to get electricity, was the reason I studied by, you know, kerosene lamps, you know.
Speaker 1: So, so you're talking back to almost 1940, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right '39 [1939], '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a long time.
Speaker 2: But, but, everybody had a nice--houses were nice and clean and we--of course we raised, as part of raising the food, we raised--my mother [Iona Huskey Johns], we raised chickens, and I had rabbits.  I raised rabbits, sold rabbits during the Depression [Great Depression].  So--and we had a big garden in the back.  So that--that was about the railroad and I'll probably have to tell you about that.  The railroad was about two big long blocks, you could walk down the hill to the railroad going through town, cause Alliance was a very--was a, was a railroad center, railra- railroad center, and they, and they changed--they had a round house there and then they changed the crews there a lot, so they had a big, they had a big, down in, in the area, we called it downtown, a great big hotel, I guess for the railroad men.  And then way across the tracks, now this, this is across the tracks from where we live.  We lived up, the tracks where the railroad station was and so forth was about maybe seven or eight blocks, and then across the tracks, there was a big rail light, red light district, legally red light district, where the railroad men were on this side (laughter).
Speaker 1: They were across the tracks.
Speaker 2: Cross the tracks yeah, but the--so it--the neighborhood was a nice neighborhood, yeah, you know, we didn't have any problems and we lived comfortably together, wasn't no, not getting along.  It was almost like, Columbus--I lived on Columbus Street [ph.], it was a short block, but we knew everybody, everybody knew everyone and on that block was what one--there's two black families and the rest were, as I told you, these are immigrants, immigrants families.  When we were--you know all friendly, at one time I could talk Italian and talk to them in little Italian, a little Romanian, you know, this--that's the way it was and we visited each other houses and pick--someone get sick, everybody would be there to, you know, it was, it was--growing up there was, was pleasant.  It was pleasant growing up.
Speaker 1: Now what do, do you think the immigrants treated you better than the regular white population?
Speaker 2: We had no problem with the white population either, so, but, so called, quote white.  I didn't have any problems.  We never had any problems with 'em.  We just went did our, did our thing and, and everybody--well, we were really kind of together, you know.  There's only one, I would say one so called white family lived on--further up on the edge of the street, but they didn't have any children but, going to school, you know, was a mixed school, not a segregated school, so you were with them all the time.
Story_ID: 614617
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells growing up?
Speaker 2: Not many sounds, some of the, some of the things we--well, we had--they had a lot of, on, on particular on holidays and so forth.  We had big parades, Fourth of July and Christmas, (hiccups) pardon me,  didn't have parades, but they had a lot of decorations and on Thanksgiving they had parades, that was the big thing.  I think--then we had vi- black baseball, you know, professional baseball team.
Speaker 1: Oh, there's a professional team there in Alliance [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Homestead Grays would come and play.
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of the Alliance team?
Speaker 2: I was telling, as we were talking, as I mentioned, see I never think about this, but as I was thinking about it, I, I was trying to think of what their name was.  I know the, the coaches name, the last name was Snodgrass [ph.], that was his last name and they--
Speaker 1: They would play, the Grays would come over from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah, wherever they came from, I didn't know where they came from, but I remember that name, Homestead Grays would play 'em, you know.
Speaker 1: They did a lot of barn storming in those days, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so they would do that and they maybe play doubleheaders, you know, circus would come, that was another big thing, was the circus would come to town.  Now I remember my father [Ewing Johns] did take me to the circus one time and then the circus have a big parade.  That was a big thing, too.
Speaker 1: Those were the days, yeah the circus would come to town, and set, set up.
Speaker 2: Set up, and then have a parade.  Yeah, with animals, and all that, and then go back, you know, and then you go.
Speaker 1: Was it exciting to see--I mean what was your favorite part of the circus?
Speaker 2: Just see the animals, the different animals.  That was, that was, that was a big thing, you know.  The other big thing on Sunday sometimes if we had the money, we had street cars running from Alliance to Canton [Ohio], to Salem [Ohio], and you could get a pass, and you could ride the street car all day back--it's like a circle, from Alliance to Canton, or Alliance to Salem, and then come back through Alliance and go to Canton.  And if you had the money, Canton was a sin, sin city.  Because their movies were open on Sunday (laughter).   Cau- in our home town, in Alliance the movies closed on Sunday.  But you could go to Canton, and go, go to movies on Sunday.
Speaker 1: Sin city?
Speaker 2: That was sin city (laughter).  Yeah that was it, that was the sounds and stuff that's about it.
Speaker 1: Lot, lot, lot of trains whistles and such or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of trains came through because it was a main--I didn't hear--that--the train whistling stuff didn't impress me.  I guess that didn't impress me much 'cause I don't remember that much, you know.
Speaker 1: What about the air, did it smell like the mills.
Speaker 2: No, well--yeah, well you didn't pay any attention but the mills were spewing smoke, and stuff.  But you didn't pay it any attention.
Speaker 1: People just kind of got used to it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, depending on how near you were to the mill, you know, too.  But that--the only thing I remember, you know, is I--as I said before, I believe my father's illness came 'cause he was working on them shake outs so they call, where you shake out, and dirt, and dust, and stuff.  They didn't have all them respirators, and stuff back then.  But--so that kind of pollution was one of the things that I think, you know, caused his early, his early demise.
Story_ID: 614618
Speaker 1: What school did you start at?
Speaker 2: I started at a school named Seneca, Seneca grade school [South Seneca School; 3rd Ward School, Alliance, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Is it S-E-N-E?
Speaker 2: S-E-N-E, Sene--
Speaker 1: E-C-A?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Seneca?
Speaker 2: C-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how'd you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh well, I liked school 'cause I had to like school (laughter).  That was just tradition in our family.  You, you got up, and went to school, and, you know, it's hard to think about it now as a young person but, I would have to get up sometimes at four o'clock in the morning, and help my mother [Iona Huskey Johns] wash clothes as a kid and then we had to, you know, it was a wash board.  It was no washing machine and we washed clothes and then, so five or six, four, five or six and then change your clothes and get ready to go to school, you know, so, and I liked school, I had--my, my recollection of school was in my mind was that I enjoyed it, you know, I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course my mother made sure that we got our homework--she'd ask if we had any homework to do.  We couldn't go out until we finished our homework if we wanted to go out.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or subjects?
Speaker 2: I guess math, math was my favorite subject.  I don't remember having at school a favorite teacher.  I remember, I don't remember her name, a third grade teacher seems to be stick in my mind, but I don't remember her name at all.  But math was in grade school my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Early on it was yeah, yeah.  I think I learned a lot at the church.  I learned a lot of discipline at church and by going to bible study and learning, having to remem- like you said, you said your dad, remember learning the books of the Bible and certain passages and that type of thing, memorizing those kinds of things and learning how to do that, I think held, held me in good stead later on when I went through going to school, because I had that facility to study in cause we had a study and then we had to get up and perform in front of the church, you know and so part of that I think was-that was part of my education, too, yeah.
Story_ID: 614619
Speaker 1: Now did you have middle school?  Or did you just--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have middle schools then, you went right from kin- we didn't have kindergarten either, we went from first grade through eighth grade and then eighth and then our high school [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio] started at ninth grade to twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is it--before we leave grade school.  Is there any particular thing that you like to do more than others?  Did you display any of--you said you weren't an athlete.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't an athlete
Speaker 1: Did you like music or, or?
Speaker 2: I like music, but I don't remember, I like music, but I don't recall--I was in I guess a couple little school plays something like that, but other than that not much.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you all have a radio?
Speaker 2: No.  I built, I built a crystal set.
Speaker 1: Tell us what that is. I've heard of those--other people have mentioned those, but tell us what a crystal set is?
Speaker 2: Well, first you gotta (laughter), been so long ago I don't remember, remember how I did it myself.  First you gotta, you took the little roll, you know the toilet paper, you took that roll, you wrapped that with wire, that was your wire, your coil.  Coil for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You took copper wire and--
Speaker 2: Copper wire, you gotta--had a certain width of copper wire, little old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Certain gauge of copper wire.
Speaker 2: Certain gauge of copper wire and you that around this cylinder.
Speaker 1: Insulated or?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't insulate.
Speaker 1: No, insulation?
Speaker 2: No, insulation just wrapped around that.  Then you could buy a crys- the crystal.  And you had a little--another little wire, I don't remember now how we used to set that up there, and then you had another little wire, you had to move it around once you got it all set up.  You can move that little, little piece of wire on that crystal, and, you begin to, you could pick up stations.
Speaker 1: How would you hear--would you hear them through the toilet paper roll or?
Speaker 2: No, you would hear--well you could hear it.  We had little earphones like, you know, attached to this crys- I think to the--I'm trying to remember now, I don't remember.  But, you could hear it through ear- if you attached earphones to it.  And otherwise you could hear it without having earphones.  But I don't remember now how that worked.  But that's what I did.  I remember the first night, I was playing with it, and I got KDKA Pittsburgh [KDKA Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that was the nation's first radio station.
Speaker 2: Was it?  Well that's what we got, that's what I got, KDKA Pittsburgh.  And that's what we used until later we got--of course later on we got a radio, but I grew up with no radio.  But, as I said I--one of my--couple of my friends--these crystals they say made 'em so they were really, really sophisticated, you know, so.  But that's what we used that's what I did anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that--how old were you when you, when you did that?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in gra- I wasn't in high school yet.
Speaker 1: Okay so they, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably may have been later, wasn't in high school.  I might've been just getting, getting ready to go to high school.  Probably.
Speaker 1: Okay, so only one person could listen to that at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah just one.  Yeah it didn't have no speakers around.
Speaker 1: All right so, did you like to go to the movies.  Did you go to over to sin city [Canton, Ohio] to see--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go, oh I couldn't go there.  My mother [Iona Huskey Johns] wouldn't let me go over there to see the movies, not on, not on Sunday, (laughter) you go to the movies on Sunday.
Speaker 1: Well did you go in Alliance [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went in Alliance.  But interesting, see movies were ten cents.  I didn't have money, money during the Depression [Great Depression], I didn't have any money.
Story_ID: 614620
Speaker 1: Well, when you were--
Speaker 2: And after that, see from '33 [1933] when my father [Ewing Johns] died I was nine.  All up until 1940--seven years, I worked at, well I worked as a junkman, and that's how I got my extra money, I built, built me a, push cart, and I pushed that cart down the al- on weekend down the alleys, and picked up junk, you know, copper, zinc, iron, and then would sell that at the junk yard.  That's how I made extra mon- extra money 'til I was about sixteen, sixteen, and then I received a--I got a job working, at a country club, as a shoe shine boy, and locker attendant, and then that, the manager of the club asked me one day did I wanna learn wait to tables because they had one girl that did the waiting tables, and sometimes she couldn't get in, and so I said yeah.  So he taught me how to wait tables so, I began waiting tables too.  Plus the--taking care of the locker room, and the gentlemen who hired me, after about, I was there a year he left and I took over the operation of the locker room, and I--part of that was also to keep--shine shoes and the locker, the tennis, the--not the tennis shoes, but the golf shoes.  So I set up a program where I would charge--I could keep your shoes shined, and keep your golf shoes shined for a couple dollars a month.  So I signed up a bunch of men, and so I was--the pay was a dollar a day, and we worked ten, twelve hours a day.  'Cause at that time the, the, I guess the minimum wage was twenty-five cents an hour or a little less.  So a dollar a day was once money.  So I would--so I got paid, when I start waiting tables I got paid fifteen dollars every two weeks.  And we worked about ten hours a day.  And then I had this little side hustle I had shining shoes, for, for--if you wanted your shoes shined every day when you came into to play golf, and keep your golf shoes dry, and clean your cleats and all that, I only charged them two dollars a month.  But I signed up maybe twenty, thirty guys, so I was, I was rich.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--did--so when, when your father passed, it kind of--I guess things really got tight huh?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother [Iona Huskey Johns] didn't have anything and this is nothing.  She had four children.  Four still at home.
Speaker 1: He died just at the beginning at the Great Depression (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At, at the beginning of the Great Depression.  That's why I say my mother is my hero and my--the person, the person I think about all the time in terms of person of courage.  She had four--so we had--when--I guess we, we won a relief and later on I guess aid of dependent children, and, and then we, you know, had to stand in line to pick up and get-the federal government often give meat, fresh meat out, you stand in line to get that and you get some other commodities and for the shoes and your clothes.  The social worker had to give you a slip to go up to the warehouse and to get any kind of clothes, you get shoes, so many shoes, a pair of shoes.  I done had 'em last a long time.  So oftentimes, you, you'd have holes in the bottom of your shoes, you'd put card board in there.  That was--that's what went on, you know (laughter).  I remember, I told you about the railroad, that--I don't know, I had a wagon, I don't know where I got it, but the little wagon.  We would go down, walk down, down to the railroad and pick up coal, off the railroad and bring that back and sometimes when we knew a coal car was coming through, some of the guys would go-men would go and get on top of that car and threw coal off, as long as the detective weren't around, you know.
Speaker 1: So this was just piled up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it was piled up and then we'd pick up the coal that fell off--normally would fall off and bring that, that's what we used (unclear) it, it was tough, but we never went hungry 'cause my mother canned stuff all summer.  We'd pick blackberries and she'd make jelly and things like that and we, we grew potatoes and we had enough potatoes to last all winter.  So we just, you know, you grew your own food and you just made do, yeah, and we did.
Story_ID: 614621
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student, student in high school [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, I was a good student. I was--I didn't--I was not--I didn't make the honor society, but I was, I was a very good student.  One of the things I remember most as a senior, one of the things we had to do was write a, a paper, a study and a paper on what we were gonna do and we had to do research on what it would take to do that, what profession we wanted to go in, and there were no professionals.  There was not--I, I had no professions as examples in front of me and see, when I graduated from high school, that was a stellar event, 'cause blacks, few black kids finished high school.
Speaker 1: Two of you graduated the same year?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Two people, two black students graduated the same year?
Speaker 2: There was two or three.  Two or three at that time yeah.  I think it was two.  So as I began to look around, I had no role models and so I wrote my paper, they call it a little dissertation on becoming a counselor, to be able to counsel with students on different com- occupations and so forth, and so therefore, I--to do that I probably should be a teacher, and so that's what I, I actually wrote to do.  And, and that's what I--my whole treatise was trying to be able to help other students make up their mind on the careers that would be available to them because I didn't know.
Story_ID: 614622
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio] did--were there any special teachers or mentors that were there that took a special interest in you that helped you, helped counsel you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  As I said it was very, you know, very few in either, in any of our classes, very few Negroes or blacks now, or colored students.  And I, I don't recall teachers, you know, encouraging you, and so forth.  Although I was, I was on the debating team.  I was a member of the--I sang tenor in a quartet.  I was in the high school glee club, and in the number of musicals that we, we put on.  But, I don't remember any--the only music--I remember the music teacher was named Sackett [ph.]  But, I don't remember, you know, her mentoring us--me or anything, you know, at all.
Speaker 1: Well the debate team that's now--you know, recently we had the movie 'The Great Debaters' about the debate team.
Speaker 2: I remember the debate team--one of the, one of the things that--subjects we debated, and I was on the pro side, was whether or not Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] should have a third term.  Yeah, so that, that--those are just the extracurricular things I did in high school.
Story_ID: 614623
Speaker 1: Now, you were saying that--we were saying off camera, that Alliance, Ohio of course, along with Canton [Ohio], and Massillon [Ohio] are like football, like a football triangle right?  And, of course, Canton is the home of the Pro Football Hall of Fame, and the home of Paul Brown, and a lot of other people.  But when you were in school, was, was Marion Motley--you mentioned Marion Motley.
Speaker 2: Yeah Marion, yeah Motley, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was the first black player on Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he was--yeah I knew him, you know, knew of him, you know I didn't know him but I knew him 'cause he played, you know high school.
Speaker 1: So he was, he was at Canton [Canton McKinley High School, Canton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Canton, he was at Canton.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Bill Willis--
Speaker 2: I believe I, I think Bill--was Bill in Massillon [Massillon Washington High School, Massillon, Ohio], I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but Bill--but, they, they were both contemporaries of yours.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: Bill Willis I think was the first pro football player, black pro football player in the country I think.  Him or Motley I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Motley real well I think, because him more than Willis.  But as I say, I had some relationship with Willis at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] when he was in--dealing with the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] someway, I remember that, but I don't remember the details on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was, was football considered a way to achieve, you know, in those days?
Speaker 2: Not really, not for--well not, if I, I couldn't tell you whether or not there was any black players on the Alliance High School [Alliance, Ohio] team.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it didn't make you that much difference?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't make that much difference 'cause I was not an athlete anyway, and I wasn't that much interested in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Except I'd go to the games.
Story_ID: 614624
Speaker 1: You were working all through high school [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio] right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  So when you were a senior in high school, did you--I think you established you wanted to be a teacher right?
Speaker 2: That's when, that's what I ended up determining I was gonna have to be if I was gonna carry out what I thought ness- had to be done.  Because I had no help determining what I wanted to, you know, what I wanted to be, or--and then since there were no black teachers in the system at all, so you know, so it was something which I had--I said well if I, if I got in something where I could help some other young, young people, I would--not to have to go through the kind, kind of thing that I went through, trying to determine what I wanted to be.  I remember a long time when I was a little, little kid I, I thought about I'd like to be a dentist, and things like that.  But there was, you know you didn't have any role models in that--to look to.
Story_ID: 614625
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from Alliance [Alliance High School, Alliance, Ohio] in 1939 right?
Speaker 2: Forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nineteen forty [1940]. And-- so you went on to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  Now how did you make that connection?  Was it through the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?
Speaker 2: Well, a way was teaching my sister [Lena Johns], and my brother, see I was down here, a year before I came through the A.M.E. church, but basically I--that connection was through my sister originally, 'cause she would bring the yearbooks home.  And I'd see all these black people, and this banker, who was a bursar at the time, and I saw coaches, coach, and all these track men, and man I said, "Man, this is something," you know, and so I left--well--so my, so my--I knew my senior year I was gonna--I was coming to college, course my, course my, encouragement of my mother [Iona Huskey Johns], and because my father [Ewing Johns] back then he was saying that's what he wanted us do, you know, and my mother kept--even though we were on relief and all that I was going to college.  And one of things that happened was the, the social worker told my mother that when I graduate from high school that I had to go work in the mill, to help take care of the family.
Speaker 1: Social worker just told your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, and said if I didn't that she--might be--may have to take her off, that's the truth.  And so my mother told me, told me this, and--but she told me you're going and I said, "Well, what are you gonna do?"  And she said, "Not to worry about that, the Lord will make a way."  So when I got ready to graduate, and got graduated and all that.  I'd saved some money from working in the--working and I, I gave my mother all the money I'd saved except seventy-five dollars.  I bought a nine dollar railroad ticket to Xenia [Ohio] and left.  I never went back and, so and I worked all the time when I was here at school and then I'd work in the summers.  I worked the holidays and so, that's the way I got, that's why I came back, came to college and then I worked my way through until my senior year, my junior year and I got here on the campus four o'clock in the morning, by twelve noon I'm at a job waiting tables 'cause I could wait, and so I waited tables and I worked parties and then I, I found out fellas coming over from Wright-Patt [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] needed waiters to wait in the officers club.  I got in that and hotels and the old Biltmore Hotel [The Dayton Biltmore Hotel] in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Downtown Dayton?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think I might've worked along at the Van Cleve [Van Cleve Hotel, Dayton, Ohio] when it was a (unclear).  So that meant--a little money, extra money, that'd pay my tuition and stuff, until I left, going in the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was Wilberforce like for you--you'd been here before with the Tawawa.
Speaker 2: Tawawa Assembly [Tawawa Sunday School Assembly and Theological, Scientific and Literary Circle].  That was just a Sunday school convention yeah.  So I just--I attended that, but I didn't know anything about the university, but when I came back--when, when I came to go to school, this was a whole new world.  First time I saw a black teacher and a black professor, god, you know, it really was a, an eye opener.
Speaker 1: It was impressive?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Impressive for you?
Speaker 2: Impressive, no question about it.  And one of the other things impressed me much was, I saw these fellas in these army uniforms the advanced ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] guys and they had these officer's uniforms on and pink pants and the, the coat with the belts on it, and boy they were, they were just--I thought they were the sharpest (laughter) guys I'd ever seen.  I wondered who they were, that--didn't know that--course at that time, every student, every male student had to take two years ROTC and then you was chosen for, for advanced ROTC from that group.  So I made up my mind that I wasn't--I was gonna be chosen for one of that and I did.  But, I noticed that those men were the leaders on the campus, you know, so forth and very impressive and so I gave you the lis- you know, get chosen and at the time then, we were supposed to stay 'til we, we graduated, but then the [U.S.] Army ca- called us active duty at the end of the junior year, and so I didn't get to finish.
Story_ID: 614626
Speaker 1: Who were some of the-well who were some of your fellow students here at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] then?  Any, any, people we would know now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know this, and you know when I think about it, a lot of them have gone, passed away, but some of my fellow students are, George F. David, II [sic. George F. David, III] who, was vice president of Park Sausage [Parks Sausage Company] in Maryland, I don't know, can't remember.  There was Raymond, Raymond Haysbert [HistoryMaker Raymond Haysbert, Sr.] became president of Park Sausage, you know Raymond?
Speaker 1: I interviewed Raymond, Raymond Haysbert.
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was my buddy, real close buddy.
Speaker 1: Ray Haysbert.
Speaker 2: Ray Haysbert, oh yeah, he and his wife [Carol Roberts] yeah.  Ray interesting aside we, we--Ray waited tables with me in Arnett Cafeteria, at Wilberforce.  And, one day we were in the cafeteria we I--he was coming out of the kitchen with a tray full of food and I was coming from the dining room with a tray full of dirty dishes and we were coming right at each other, you know, and, I, I went down on my knee, Ray pushed his tray up and put it around the pole, got it with this hand and we kept going, didn't stop moving.  The dining room just (laughter) that was a fun thing yeah.  Ray, he--Ray, I haven't talked to him in a long time now.  Joe--David, I, I talked to him pretty regularly and there's another fella in Washington, D.C., Ray Lyons [Raymond Lyons], who I ended being best man at his wedding and there's a, Bob Cunningham, Robert Cunningham [Robert M. Cunningham], who's, who is a, ophthalmologist and his son is also now an ophthalmologist, lives in--last time I heard was New Jersey, I haven't gone to New Jersey, but I haven't been in contact with him recently and there's a Orlando Baylor, in Washington, D.C.  These, these are fellas at school, of course, one of my--three or four of my best friends who are classmates are all deceased now, and so, one of my, my roommates, two of my roommates.  One was Big Jim Miller we called him.  He was All-American football player.  He had signed a sort of pro contract, he never got to play.  And then Paul Bell [ph.] who became a chem- a science--a chemist really, scientist.  He was one of the, he, he was doing a dissertation piece, and he took dissertation using radioactive gold determined the--what would happen to the--whether or not the offspring of mice who had been treated with this radioactive gold, what would it do to them, you know, and he didn't get his--he--his dissertation--when his, his advisor asked him to change one portion of his dissertation, he refused to do it and he never got his Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  But Paul's dead now, and another one, fella is Puerto Rico, call him Nito, Roca Nito [ph.] from Puerto Rico, he's a physician--became a physician, and colonel--I mean a general now--was--became a general in the [U.S] Army.  Puerto Rican National Guard and all that.  He's still living, he's still in Puerto Rico.  I haven't seen him for a while.  Talk with him, but it's a bunch of--saw some of the guys.
Story_ID: 614627
Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers or mentors, at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], people that looked out for you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  I think one was--remember I mentioned to you about this--I said this picture of a man that I said was the banker, 'cause he was behind this bank.  He's name was Melvin Johnson, Sr.  He became my mentor when I got here.  He was the bir- he was the (unclear), your, your, your, brother probably knows him, knows him.  He was the (unclear).  He became my mentor.  George David, II, who was a father of one of my classmates [George F. David, III]--he--and was a doctor.  Dr. McMillian [ph.], forget his first name, so that was those three and of course I'd have to mention Dr. Wesley, Dr. Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley].
Speaker 1: Now did you--you ended up working very closely with Dr. Charles Wesley didn't you?  So he was the president when you came out here as a student?
Speaker 2: He was the president when I was yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what was Dr. Wesley like?
Speaker 2: For me--to me, I, he was probably one of the most intelligent men that I've ever known.  He--and--he--and he was a real--I feel a real administrator, but I think most of all, he conveyed to you, that you really could do anything that you made up your mind to do, because he--and as a member of his cabinet and you could not go into that room when he had a meeting and talk about one--maybe and he was a dreamer, I mean he, he dreamed things that people thought may--would, would not be possible, you know, but he would dream them, he would think of them and dream, and then he would say, "We got to do this," and, and you would look around and say, "How in the world could, could you possible do what's he's asking you to do?" But you could never tell--he never would accept the word can't, you could never use the word can't in his presence, no matter--I don't care what the situation was.  You can, I mean, I guess (laughter) not today, you hear that, but that's the truth, I mean, and, so that--I think--he conveyed that, so that when we decided we, we wanted to have a radio station on campus--I mean I know the day I walked in his office and he says, "Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Johns], I've been out to California and I ran into one of our students, former students who's running a radio station and I think it's time for us to have a radio station," and I, he said, "don't you think we can have one?"  Well, I couldn't tell him we was short of money, I didn't see how we could--we didn't have any money in capital improvements budget to build a radio station, but I couldn't tell him, no we can't, I said, we'll, I just said we'll look into it (laughter) and we ended up--I ended up talking to Bill [ph.] who was a fella out in California.  He sent me a list of all the supplies.
Speaker 1: But he was never able to get a Ph.D. in his discipline. His discipline was African history. He got a master's degree but there was nobody that could give him a Ph.D. in it because nobody else knew anything about it after he got the master's. That's what they told him. They said, "You know more about it than us. We're not equipped to give a Ph.D. in African history." So he went back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, so what, what happened was that Bill sent me a list of all the info--all the equipment we needed to have, to have a radio station and so what I began doing was buying pieces of it, piece by piece so, in, in the meantime, I--we had, we had carpenters on our staff, they built the cabinets, we picked the building to put it in and built the cabinets in there for the turntables and all that and once I got all the parts purchased, cabinets built, then Bill said he would talk--he'd promised Dr. Wesley that once we got all that together and, and he would come and put it in--make sure we got it together.  He did, and that's how we built the first station [WCSU Radio, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Now, that was like--that was after the war [World War II, WWII] right? After the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. After the war.
Speaker 2: This after the war--that's after I'm back.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is, what, '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 614628
Speaker 1: As a student, now did you know Hallie Q. Brown who was a student?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew her.  See, it was interesting, I knew her as a student and then when I came back to the campus, I built one of the building--a lot on the buildings we built, we called the--now is the administration building, but it was Hallie Q. Brown Library [Hallie Q. Brown Memorial Library, Wilberforce, Ohio], one of the new--one of the main new buildings we built, which I--supervised construction of.  I and--she passed away and I went over at the auction for her property and bought her cha- a rocking chair and a couple other--personal pieces and put 'em in the library yeah.
Speaker 1: So you, you developed a real sense of history around the, the Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and what it means and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is good, not, not everybody goes to a school develops that sense of his--history about it and what it's about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I know we all knew the people, you know, the people who help build the university.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hallie Q. Brown was one of the pioneers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well she, she went overseas in London [England] and she was an elocutionist and she raised money and she--I think she raised what $250,000, I think it was and built Emery Hall [Keziah Emery Hall], which was originally a girls' dormitory at Wilberforce.  Right now, it's, it's been deteriorated now and but  Wil- Central State University [Wilberforce, University] has received a million dollar grant, begin the restoration of that building to make it as I understand, Convention Center for the Afro-American Museum [National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Story_ID: 614629
Speaker 1: In nineteen for- now did you graduate before you went off to the service or did you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tell you they called us in active duty at the end of our junior year [at Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  That was in 1943, so I went in the [U.S] Army in '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: That's interesting how--when you were giving your birthday, but, you know, the U.S. entered World War II [WWII] based--
Speaker 2: December 7th.
Speaker 1: Yeah, December 7th, your birthday, 1941.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Yeah, I was coming off--I was just coming off the--on the line--off the line--just--not coming off, going on the line for the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] (laughter) and I was hoping since the war broke out, that maybe they would stop hazing (laughter) it was rough (laughter), they didn't but anyway that was(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't stop the hazing?
Speaker 2: But, that was one of the things that, that morning we went on the line that midnight and, and that morning we heard about the war, the war.
Speaker 1: A lot of other things were going on in--well you know, Ohio here--well I didn't ask you about this earlier, but, what was the black community reaction to Jesse Owens, you know, winning the '36 Olympics [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany], you know, did you --
Speaker 2: I don't--not really, I don't recall it much.  I don't know what happened here--that was in the '30s [1930] wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what happened with you, that's what I'm---you know, whether you, you were here or not but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I wasn't--I don't--I-that, that--I didn't--I knew that he had--that, that--I knew that he had won all these races, and Hitler [Adolf Hitler] had ignored him.  But, other than that I wasn't that much--I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Didn't seem like a big deal?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] student at one time and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so in 1943, you're a junior I guess?
Speaker 2: I'm a junior.  I finished my junior year.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, you all were called up?
Speaker 2: Called to active duty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause see we were already in the Army.  See because in order to, to accept the, the acceptance of being a member of the advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], we had to join the Army, so they just called us active duty.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what were feelings in those, at--those days?
Speaker 2: Well I was upset about it, because we thought we would be able to stay, and complete our education, and get our commission, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you had to go in the ar--you didn't go in as an officer then in a way?
Speaker 2: No, no we went in as a private.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Otherwise you'd go in as a second lieutenant (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that's what I would've done.
Story_ID: 614630
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what happened I mean what was your--was the [U.S] Army what you expected it to be or?
Speaker 2: No, the Army was one of the worst periods in my life, really in terms of treatment, opportunity, and so forth, that's a long, long story.  We, we were told as advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] students, once we, once we, finished basic training, then we would go to officer candidate--go to the officer candidate school.  Well, when we finished basic training, we didn't go, and, so at the time I don't know if you know they had set up--the government had set up these training programs around the country at various universities.  The ASTP arm-Army specialized training programs.  So they said we're gonna send you to, one of the ASTP schools so you're gonna go Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  So, we left Fort Sill, Oklahoma, that's where I did the basic training, to go to Ohio State to their ASTP program.  We arrived at Ohio State, and then we were refused enrollment in their program.  They didn't tell me why we were refused.  We stayed in the--I remember we stayed in the horseshoe dormitory up in that, in that where they closed that--in--where we had rooms up there, when we stayed up there.
Speaker 1: In, in the stadium?
Speaker 2: In the stadium, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, the horseshoe stadium, the famous horseshoe stadium [Ohio Stadium, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, we stayed up round over-about a month or two, didn't do anything but drill, drill.  Like, we--they would not permit us to go.  And they were--they told they, they were gonna set up, a ASTP, which they, which, which they eventually did at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  But, it was too late for us, so after this period of time I don't recall how long we stayed there, but we stayed there a considerable time.  We--they sent us at West Virginia State University [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], which was historically black university [HBCU].  They had an ASTP program in engineering, so it was two or three month program, accelerated engineering, and so we--they sent us there.  Then they told us once we completed that, that we would go--they sent us to artillery officer candidate school.  Because we'd done our basic training in--it was about oh I don't know fifteen, twenty of us.  So we finished the training program at West Virginia State taking all math, you know.  Advanced calculus, and I don't know what else we took, trigonometry, calculus, something--I don't all that stuff, you know.  But, instead of sending us over to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, they sent us to Fort Benning, Georgia to Infantry OCS, Officer Candidate School, and that's where I had a messy time, and I don't know whether you want to know that story or not.
Story_ID: 614631
Speaker 1: Tell us what happened in Fort Benning, Fort Benning, Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Fort Benning, Georgia.  When we arrived, this one fellow I don't remember is nam- name.  He had some relatives that lived in Columbus, Georgia that's where the train station was, and you know that, that--down there the train station was segregated.  There's one white section, and then there was a black section.  Black section was very small, (clears throat) pardon me, so I told--he asked me would I call him, we didn't know what time the trucks were gonna come pick us up to take us out to Fort Benning, Georgia so we got out, we had to stand around and talk, he said, "Give me--call me, and let me know what time--when they tell us the time so I'll get back in time."  I said, "Okay." So then we--once we--I found out the time, I start looking for a telephone, and I saw the booth, you know.  I just saw a booth in the room, in a--through the window, so I open the door and I go in, someone hit me on the shoulder said, "You can't go in there.  That's, that's a white station."  I said, "What?" "No, you can't go--use that phone."  So I came round--so then I went round the--he said, "You gotta go around there."  So I went in there, and I--black folks were in there.  Like this tight, so I was pushing through the people to try to find this phone, and all of sudden, I heard this per- heard this voice, say, "Say, nigga, you must be in a hurry." And I whirled around, and I said, "What did you say?"  And I--and it was just big--I guess--I don't know--to me it look like--big white policeman, and he said, "Nigga. I said you better say excuse me," and every--all them people in that room they got up against the wall, just me and him in the center of that room, and I was so mad.  I feel--it's like a feel it today, and I-- man I gritted my teeth, and I looked at him, and I didn't--he said, "Nigga you better say excuse me."  Then I realized--he opened his coat back, and pushed his coat back, and put his own on his pistol.  Then I said--I guess it must have dawned on me that he might shoot me, you know.  So I said, "Excuse me, man," and I turned around, and went outside, and leaned up against the wall, start crying.  And this--I don't who--I guess it might've been a minister or something I don't know--somebody, put, put his hand on my shoulder, and said, "Son, the Lord was with you." (Laughter) And I never went back to town, and not too long after--just before--not too long--Charity Adams, you know Charity, Charity Adams, was with-commanded the black WACS [Women's Army Auxiliary Corps]--'cause she's from Dayton [Ohio], you know, she just died a couple years ago.  Charity Adams, she got slapped.
Speaker 1: She became Charity Earley?
Speaker 2: Yeah Earley, yeah Charity Adams Earley.  She married Dr. Earley [Stanley A. Earley, Jr.]. He died a couple weeks ago.  Got slapped by at white officer, down--policeman or something down there, you know, anyway I never went back to Columbus, Georgia, and--but then, we, we got in the, we--so they put all of us in a, in a dormitory barracks, and when you went to Officer Candidate School [OCS] supposedly you were not to be segregated, you know, wasn't supposed to be segregated.  But, they put all of us in one barrack, and everybody in that barrack, was three year college--had three years of college, you know, what happened was--see--what began to happened was they, they call us out for breakfast in the morning--you had to go to breakfast in the morning, we'd always be at the end of the line, and sometimes we didn't have time--chance to eat before we had to go--had to roll out they called it, you know. So, I, I guess I complained about that, you know, and one other time we were marching up to go to the movie, and by the--just before we got to the movie house, another company was driving--marching in, and the officer stopped us, and this, this company moved in, and went into the movie house first, and sat in the front of the movie house, and then, we were proceeded, and we sat in the back.  Found out later that company was a company of German prisoners of war, and we were (laughter)--I talked about that, I'm what about twenty, what twenty-one, twenty-two years old.
Speaker 1: This, I mean it sounds like it might be disillusioning to a young person.
Story_ID: 614632
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, and then, then what happened I got a call--no--the last week--the week before graduation, see, I got a call to come to the officer's office, and was told that I was being washed out, and kicked out or whatever of the program, said I--didn't think I was officer material, and I said, "Well, I think I am."  He said, "Well, you can't take orders, you don't seem to be interested." I said, "I don't understand that sir." "Well, one day you were out in the field, and some instructions was going on, an airplane went over, and you looked up at the airplane, wouldn't pay attention to the instructor, you can't, you can't follow orders, you were on the, on the firing range from the, the machine gun firing range, you were told to fire slow fire, and you fired fast fire."  Well you that, that butterfly trigger on the machine gun, and if you touch it--so I couldn't--I said, "I don't, I don't see that sir," I said, "I've done everything possible to do in this training." Anyway I was washed out, not the only one, it was whole bunch of us.  It was almost like Tuskegee Airmen, it began to systematically wash us out.  One of the other things that happened--the same things happened in Tuskegee Airman, was that we were given an exam to do in the barrack, and we did it, and then they brought it back, and said we--that we had cheated.  The same way they did at Tuskegee, they had to do it over.
Story_ID: 614633
Speaker 1: Anyway so I got washed out, my buddy--one of my best buddies who we went through the war [World War II, WWII] and that stuff together--went to basic training together everything.  Went through all our training together, he was washed out too, so this--so we were then shipped--the two of us was shipped to, Camp Butner, North Carolina to the 999th Field Artillery Battalion, and trained to be--with all our mathematical background, and so forth, we were trained to be computers in the fire direction center of the battalion so our job was to compute all the data to fire the guns.
Speaker 2: So you could keep the trajectory of the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the, the atmos- you know, the--and the, the, the--I forgot now what that was left and right, whatever, and the weight of the projec- the weight of the powder that we used and the shell--our gun, I had some pictures of the gun--our gun was the largest ar- land artillery piece in the U.S. Army, what they call eight inch howitzer.  We had a range of ten miles and a project of two hundred pounds.  So, we were trained to do that and, and maybe, I guess couple months, two or three months I guess it was.  We were on our way to France.
Speaker 2: So this is 1943 still for you?
Speaker 1: This '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Forty-four okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we landed in Scotland D-day, yeah so.
Speaker 2: If you were that close on D-Day, you were in Scotland when they were hitting the beach in Normandy, France (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were in Scotland on D-Day, yeah, yeah, we were landing then.  We, we were--we actually went over on a--unescorted on a cruise ship, wasn't no cruise then, but they took a cruise and converted to a troop ship and, but went to England on it.  There was a lot of stuff, we--I 'member I had a friend in Winston-Salem, North Carolina and I knew we were getting ready to ship out so I wanted to go over there, so I--we went to that town, and there was only two buses, bus--one bus going over and one bus coming back in Winston-Salem and, so I'd got in line, a long line, I don't know--hot and I guess maybe stood in line an hour maybe.  Anyway, time I got to the door of the bus, the bus driver said, "No more niggas."  I'm in uniform and all that, and I said, "I'm not gonna move."  He said, "Well, you're gonna move or I'm gonna call the--put in the call to the MPs [military police]."  Now I'm in trouble so, I just got out, got back on one of trucks and went back to the base, and we left I think two days later.  I never did get to see him.  You see, you know, I could easily have killed that guy (laughter) you know, I was that mad, but, you know, you had to not--you just had to take that kind of stuff and it--so yeah I--it was--so my--that was in the states and I had--then I had some problems when we got to Europe and particularly when I got ready to come home.
Story_ID: 614634
Speaker 1: Let's not jump, you know, all the way, leap all the way through it but, what, what was the trip over to--what was the trip like?  How were you treated on the trip over?  Did, did the black soldiers--was it a all--
Speaker 2: No, no, it was a mixture, mixture, I don't rem--only thing I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they segregate the black soldiers on the trip?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all on one part of the ship, but I remember I didn't have a bed.  I slept in a hammock going over on some of the decks they had, had hammocks for people.  I don't remember eating or--guys were sick throwing up, you know and all that stuff, and so I don't remember much about that crossing, except guys were sick all the time, we, we--everybody was sea sick.
Speaker 1: Did you get sick too?
Speaker 2: Yeah I got sick yeah, so I don't remember--other than that I don't remember much about it because we were all in one section.
Speaker 1: What did it take about week or two weeks?
Speaker 2: No it took--no I know, we got over there--I got--I have that listed.  I think it was about ten days cause we--see we had a fast ship and we weren't escorted so, we, we had to kind of out run the German, German, submarines cause they were sinking troop ships across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean], and North Atlantic.  So we got over pretty fast.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in Scotland?
Speaker 2: Scotland, and I--then we moved from Scotland to, to the main area of England, and began preparation to go to France.  And during that time, you know, we ran in all these things of discrimination in terms not being able to go to any town you wanted to, particular after the [U.S.] Army kept separating the town's putting up with crap.
Speaker 1: So, they separated the towns--you were telling me earlier I mean off camera about the town separation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what happened was, happened there was the, the prejudices and stuff that existed in America, American troops brought those to England, and told them all kind of crazy tales about us, that we howled at night, climbed trees, had tails, and all kinds of stuff, smelled, and all that and--But when the fellas would go into the pubs into the towns, and white guys be sitting there to--a picture they had of a young lady, cause of--with, the, the ladies--girls, you know, saw no difference, so just--so you date a girl, and take her to the pub, you know, and white troops see that and really get upset and insult you, and then there'd be a fight.  So we began to have so many fights, so the Army put certain towns off limits.  So, blacks had a town, and whites had a town and that's the way it was, and--but, and you would often see the girls from the white towns walking to get to the black town, because the black troops treated them better.  At least they said they, were, were kind, and more gentlemanly, so that happened.  So we went through that a little bit, that phase.
Story_ID: 614635
Speaker 1: And then got ready--finally we got all of our equipment and everything, put on the LSTs [Landing Ship, Tank] and left one night to embark for Omaha Beach, no u--not Omaha Beach--Utah Beach [Normandy, France] that's the other beach, that was the French sector.  And one of our LSTs got bumped they had to go back to England, and, and repaired, and then start out--we started out again.  So, we la- landed at night at--on Utah Beach.  And that was when--why they got all our stuff assembled and, and, was attached to the French Seventh Army, we fired with them, and--but, the armies and the, Allied forces were held up by, by the Germans at Saint-Lo [France], Normandy [France], and Saint-Lo, and Patton [George S. Patton] came up from North Africa to command a Third Army, and when it began to break--what we call break through, at Saint-Lo to try the dislodge the Germans out of Saint-Lo, we were attached to Patton's Third Army, and at midnight we began--fired one of the first Salvo to--at the battle of Saint-Lo, and finally dislodged the Germans--destroyed the town, wasn't nothing left.  For artillery, bombers, everything, everything was unleashed on that town.  Every building in that town was down, I mean completely, and then we went from there all the way--just kept going, kept going 'til we got to Paris [France]. And matter fact we stopped at Paris, they wouldn't let us in at Paris but a couple of men did get to go in, but the bulk of the outfit didn't, and then we left Paris, and start on our way to get into Germany, and one of the men that went back to France with on the sixth anniversary was an engineer, was one of the engineer battalion.  Another place that's where black troops were in engineers, building the air fields, bridges, so forth, and he helped construct largest pontoon bridge across the same river, I mean across the Rhine River to get the tanks across, and so we got our stuff over there and we went on this--just kept going until we--the war was over.  So I--not too long--I guess in 1964 I went back to Saint-Lo, and stayed with a family for a week and--
Speaker 2: Is it family you knew before?
Speaker 1: No, no this was family with--this was I've I asked did you know Samuel Wooten, he's, he has a, a--he did one of these--and his was entitled a return--let's see--the return of, of the forgotten brothers ['Forgotten Brothers of D-Day'].  I believe that's the title.  I don't where--he has he completed that or not, I don't know, I haven't--I been trying to reach him, I haven't been able to--he was a--he was--is a French man.  He was born in Normandy, black--a white, you know, Frenchmen, and a black G.I., I guess he's about fifty something, and he was told when we was a kid he said that he would dress up and put on a little army uniform, and they told him, you know, there were no black troops in the war, and--so he was determined to, to find out about that, and so we--he--that's how he got started.  He's--matter fact he's a professional photographer so that's what he did he raised the money in on this, and got--he went over for a week.  But any way I, I was gonna say that Saint-Lo you wouldn't know that it was ever a war.  Everything is back beautiful, rebuilt.
Speaker 2: Rebuilt?
Speaker 1: Rebuilt, you know, but every year on the anniversary of the bre- break through at Saint-Lo, the citizens of the city, the reenactors, reenact and march the route that the Allied troops took going through the town.
Speaker 2: Where did the citizens of Saint-Lo go when the towns a being flattened?
Speaker 1: I don't know, a lot them got killed, yeah, 'cause I have some pictures of the parade and, and the--they have those two buildings.  One where the Germans had put prisoners, citizen prisoners and locked the door when the bombardment started they didn't take-didn't let 'em out, and I 'think that building was demolished 'cause all of those people were killed.  The only thing standing was the door and (unclear) and that's the memorial, that's the door and that's memorial and we, we marched there and put flowers on that memorial.  Then further down the street in, in the city is another one, another church that they rebuilt, but they left--there were two spirals on the church and they were both knocked off, you know, 'cause that's one of the things we would do.  We would knock off, knock out the spirals on the churches cause those were the places where the snipers would go and--
Speaker 2: Church in the bell towers?
Speaker 1: In the bell towers yeah.  Well this church--they rebuilt the church except for one tower and we got one tower--but that one is all--and then the side of the wall is a tac- is, is a shell, then they removed that and it's there, you know, in the church.  So that's my--was my story was from Saint-Lo.
Story_ID: 614636
Speaker 1: After, after the big battles, you started a newspaper right?  A newsletter.
Speaker 2: Well during--after, during--after the war [World War II, WWII] was over, then we decided to do occupation duty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was officially over when you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was officially over.
Speaker 1: What was that like when the official announcement that the war was over (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we were just happy, just happy it was over, then we just moved to, this abandoned airfield.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISSCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so, when the war was over--I was asking you about the--what do they call it V?
Speaker 1: V-E Day [Victory in Europe Day]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, V-E day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we just, I think we were on our way to set up for another, another battle, and we got word that the war was over and, and I don't remember after that, we, I guess we were all happy and jumping up and down 'cause we were--we thought we were going to be on our way to, you know, Japan or somewhere, you know, and, so, then we, as I said we were assigned to do occupation duty and was sen- we were assigned to this field--abandoned air field in Germany, set up there and, and, you know, set up, you know, just like you were in camp and nothing to do.  It was outside--not too far from Munich, Germany, we finally ended up where we were and what we would do as I'd said I think off-camera that we would periodically seal off the town and just go through the town and go through houses and looking for contraband and you know, you, you think about it now, you didn't think about it, but people be sitting getting ready--sit down to dinner and all that.  You had to get out of the house and food sitting on the table, you know, and kick them out of the house and, you know, that's what we did (laughter) and, I, I, now what we--if you ask me what we were looking for I couldn't tell you right today what we were looking for.  I just know we had to search the house.  I guess we were looking for weapons or whatever and, and so that happened for a while.  Then I read in the Stars and Stripes that the, the government was making it possible for you to attend the universities in Germany and France and, so I applied to go to Sorbonne, Sorbonne in France [University of Paris, Paris, France] because I wanted to study French and I could speak French I--pretty well, but I wanted to study French and, but I didn't, didn't get it, I didn't--wasn't accepted-something--I didn't make that and, so then I saw another one where there was, there was a--the Shrivenham American University in Shrivenham, England, so I signed for that and was accepted and left, so that's when I left my outfit and went to Shrivenham, England to go to school.
Story_ID: 614637
Speaker 1: Before we get you started there, you told me, I guess before we got started about an incident where--and this has happened to a lot of black G.I.s, where there was a--someone was accused of rape or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: We were--we'd been engaged I don't know how many days in combat and really bad and we lost some--we'd been counter battered by the Germans until we lost some men--got killed at night and, but we came out of that and, and went to--we got to a rest area, to get some rest.  I don't know how many days we'd been in combat.  One time--at one time we'd been in combat nine months and twenty one days continuously but this--we were in this rest area period, and the next morning, we were all called out in formation and lined up because some German woman, old snaggle (laughter) I'm getting mad when I think about it (laughter) still all this time.  This old German snaggle-toothed woman, said that one of the, sol- soldiers had raped her and that she had scratched him on his arm so this--a whole bat- battery, it was a headquarters battery was lined up, made to pull up our sleeves and this woman walked by looking at each one of us to pick out the one that, that raped her.  I--and to me--that was actually, of all the things that happened to me, that was the most humiliating so, she did finally pick one out and the only thing saved that young man, was that he was the commanding officer's chauffer and had been with him, driving him that night, and that's the only reason he wasn't hung up.  Because that we had heard the number of black troops had been hung in France on basis of--
Speaker 1: On the spot?
Speaker 2: Well not on the spot but, went through court martial and then hung because of rape, but that's--that, even today, is one of the, one of the experiences that I resent the most.
Story_ID: 614638
Speaker 1: Tell me this,  I mean that whole experience of World War II [WWII], when you look back on it now from--you were telling me when it came in that you never thought you'd see a day where we have a black candidate for president, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is running for president today in 2008.  What are your feelings about those days and, and where, where the country is--how the country is progressed?
Speaker 2: On those days--I think we, you know, we were constantly being reminded of the fact that we were fighting for liberties that we didn't, didn't have back in the United States, but we felt that, that was--we had to do that in order to try to prove that we were worthy of those things which were being denied us and, so we fought not as--the fact that we felt that we were Americans, we were soldiers and had the opportunity to defend the country.  That's what, that's the way we felt, they didn't--we didn't feel we ought not do it, we wanted to make that contribution hopefully that maybe when we got back, things would change.  Well, of course they didn't change and--but so that's my feeling is was that, we-I, I feel that none of us felt that we shouldn't be doing what we did because we were, we were a part of America and was doing our part at the time.  Although, we had to put up with all this--all these different kinds (laughter) all these things and hated it, at the same time though we did our job and did a malac- a marvelous job, you know, in terms of what we did.
