Story_ID: 633919
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our interviewer [sic. videographer] is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure. My name is [HistoryMaker] Hiram Jackson, H-I-R-A-M, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: No middle name?
Speaker 2: Eric. Eric is my middle name and I usually use it too, E-R-I-C.
Speaker 1: All right. And is there a story behind the name Hiram, even though--I mean it's not that unusual but it is a little unusual.
Speaker 2: I don't know what the personal story is. My dad's name was Hiram [Hiram Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my son's name is Hiram [Hiram Jackson III]. And I was told it was just a biblical name and it has many meanings to it and it's just kind of passed through family.
Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 4th, 1965, I was born in Highland Park General Hospital [Highland Park, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm the CEO of Real Times Media [Real Times Media LLC], multimedia company.
Speaker 1: All right. Now are you, are you still the publisher of the Michigan Chronicle?
Speaker 2: Yes. I am also the publisher of the Michigan Chronicle.
Speaker 1: All right. Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June the 23rd, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Michigan Chronicle headquarters [Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 633920
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food is--no, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't. I, I eat too much of everything so (laughter), no I don't.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Purple is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fall is my favorite.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would say Turks and Caicos.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's in the Caribbean right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a great place.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  Wow, I never thought about that one.  No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well if you think of something, we'll come back.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 633921
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Hiram Jackson] side, but separately and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is--my mother's name is Naomi, N-A-O-M-I Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N [Naomi Wooten Jackson].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Wooten, W-O-O-T-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Thomasville, Georgia and her birthdate was 12/19/1930 [December 19, 1930].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Thomasville is famous for furniture and--
Speaker 2: Well Thomasville Furniture [Thomasville Furniture Industries] is actually made in the Carolinas.
Speaker 1: Is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, is it Thomasville, North Carolina? Okay.
Speaker 2: Thomasville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right there on the border of southern Georgia and Florida, just about twenty-five minutes from Tallahassee [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, you're right (laughter). I got excited. So well, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing historically? What stories--?
Speaker 2: Sure. Gosh, I don't know a whole lot about, as much as I would like to know about my family's heritage. But on my mother's side I can go back the furthest. I can go back to slavery. I can go back to Jerry Jacobs [ph.] and Sylvia Jacobs [ph.] who were both born in slavery and that was my mother's grandmother's parents. Jerry Jacobs and Sylvia Jacobs had eleven children I believe, one of whom was Minnie Jacobs [Minnie Winn]. I believe Minnie was maybe the youngest, not totally sure, but Minnie was my mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Grandmother, okay.
Speaker 2: Minnie had a daughter--Minnie had three kids and one of the kids was Ruby, Ruby Winn [Ruby Winn Wooten (ph.)] and Ruby was my mother's mother. So I can track back that far on my mother's side and her mother's side but I know my mother's father, my mother's father's name was Wooten, Malachi Wooten [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's as far as I've been able to track it.
Speaker 1: Malachi Wooten. So all of the women that come down on your mother's side, were they all raised in basically the same area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, southern Georgia--well, and northern Florida, from Tampa [Florida] to the northern border of Florida, from Thomasville up to Bainbridge [Georgia] and Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And your father's side, I mean your--her father's side, Malachi Wooten's side, is he from the same area?
Speaker 2: Yes. They're all from Thomasville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now is your mother related to the football playing Wootens at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Wooten [HistoryMaker John B. Wooten] who was the pulling guard for the Browns [Cleveland Browns].
Speaker 2: Right, right. I'm familiar with the name, but I don't, I don't think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. I thought I'd ask. I thought I'd ask.
Story_ID: 633922
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that come down from this long, coming all the way out of slavery, are there any stories about emancipation or what was it like during slavery?
Speaker 2: No. You know we don't, we don't know much about, about the Jacobs [ph.] family. The--and quite frankly I just discovered all of this in the last couple of years. I always thought that we had a very small family as--you know my immediate family lives here with me in Detroit [Michigan]. During my early years we would go down to Thomasville, Georgia. But I was, I was primarily focused on my mother's [Naomi Wooten Jackson] family from my grandmother [Ruby Winn Wooten (ph.)] down but, up until in the last three or four years, I quite frankly did not realize just how large my family was. So the last three or four years I've been doing the research and contacting family members that I didn't know I had and really getting a better understanding of the extent of my family. And I'm not going to be satisfied until I really get a better understanding of my father's side as well because my father was actually adopted by his aunt and there's not a lot of information there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So I'm just assuming that your mother's family was raised in a rural, farming type atmosphere. Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah. You know it was, yeah very meager obviously. It was--my mother worked in the cotton fields and they grew up as sharecroppers and very little in terms of commercial atmosphere but it was very rural.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was she able to finish school and move on from there or--?
Speaker 2: My mother did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And moved, she moved to Detroit with my dad. They were married and they moved to Detroit in 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did your mother have any stories about growing up, about what her aspirations were or--?
Speaker 2: Well, she wanted to go to college. She met my father and they were friends in high school. I believe that she started being friends with my dad around fourteen or fifteen years old. He was a couple of years older. And she was being encouraged to go to college and she wanted to go to college and then she met this man, Hiram Jackson. And at first they were friends before they started dating, they were good friends and when she finished high school they ended up getting married and they stuck around Thomasville for a few years. And she decided not to go to college and they decided they wanted to have a family and move up north.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And so they moved to Detroit, this would have been in the 1950s (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They moved--yeah, 1955 is when--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they actually moved to Detroit.
Story_ID: 633923
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: No middle name, Hiram Jackson: H-I-R-A-M, Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Thomasville, Georgia as well and he's--his birthday was November 17th, wow it's--had to be--
Speaker 1: Twenty-eight [1928] you think?
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight [1928].
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll resume that later but, so your father, Hiram Jackson, born 1928 in Thomasville.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 1: You know I absolutely do not know a lot about my father's ancestors. He had a family that was--well, first of all he was adopted by his aunt. His mother was very young when she had him and wasn't really a part of his life at all. In fact, he didn't spend any significant amount of time with her until later in his adult life and when she had moved to Detroit [Michigan], he actually did not know that she had moved to Detroit. But his father was Frank Wilborn [ph.], and his father was raised in Thomasville as was he. And he ended up moving to Boston, Massachusetts as an adult. But quite frankly that's as much as--information as I have on his side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay. So was he--well, he's raise in--was he raised in the city or out in rural Thomasville?
Speaker 1: He was raised in a rural area, Thomasville.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Did he have any stories about growing up himself about--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there--my father had some pretty interesting stories. He, you know he was known as a great high school football player down there, very popular kid, could have gone to college but decided that he wanted to work and marry my mom [Naomi Wooten Jackson] and start a family. He started working at the local bakery, believe it's called the Sunshine Bakery [ph.] down there in Thomasville and started working with the bakery to start a union and that just didn't go over real well with some of the locals. And from my understanding he was actually given an ultimatum that he had to get out of town or here--he and his family were going to be in danger. It's a young, black male, Deep South you know in the '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s], late '40s [1940s], trying to start a union.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this is serious.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Serious business.
Speaker 1: Absolutely. So he took them up on it and decided to move to Detroit because he had some family here and he just decided to grab his wife, my mother, and move to Detroit because they had pretty much come to his mother's house and said you know, "You got twenty-four hours to leave town." And he took that as a serious threat as he should have and said, well I'm just going to go and give Detroit a shot at raising my family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now these are times when I think John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] talked about his father [John Conyers, Sr.] being beaten almost to death here in Detroit, you know over union organizing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I think there are white people killed, tarred and feathered and everything else in the country for organizing unions. So black men in the early '50s [1950s] in Thomasville, Georgia, these--
Speaker 1: Well absolutely. I mean you have you know the aspect of being a union organizer in general and then you have the aspect of a black man trying to tell, trying to organize a white work force, and you know it just didn't go over well. It was very--the folks that asked him to leave were a part of the establishment of the city and really wanted to see him dead. But thank god they said, "No we're going to give you a chance to get out of town before we kill you and your family." He decided that he didn't want to fight, fight it on that level so he decided to get out of town.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a time when basic human, civil rights and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --human rights were being violated anyway. So--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So any rate, so he moves to, they move to Chicag- I mean to Detroit in '55 [1955] you said?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].
Story_ID: 633924
Speaker 1: Now is there a s- well, I know they went to high school together but is there a story about how they met or how they fell in love that they tell?
Speaker 2: Well, from what I've been told my, again my father [Hiram Jackson] was a high school football star and my mom I believe was a year behind him. And you know my dad being a football star was, you know he had his eye on my mother. And she was young and playing hard to get and my mother's parents [Ruby Winn Wooten (ph.) and Malachi Wooten (ph.)] weren't that fond of my dad initially. But he kept after her, kept after her and because he was well known around town [Thomasville, Georgia] you know he was always present. But after dating other women, he decided that hey, you know I got my eyes on Naomi Jackson [Naomi Wooten Jackson]. So you know from what I understand it was a two or three year romance before they graduated from college [sic. high school] and got married.
Story_ID: 633925
Speaker 1: Now when you think about their personalities, their dispositions, their aspirations, how they look, how they walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know I think I have a lot of both my mother [Naomi Wooten Jackson] and my father [Hiram Jackson]. They--you know my father was very disciplined. He had an incredible work ethic, he was a very ethical man and he believed in family. He put others in front of his--you know others' needs in front of his own needs. You know I always said that my dad was like the morning sun. You know it's--you know every day that that sun is going to come up and you know where it's coming and what time almost it's coming. So in terms of being reliable, being dependable, having a great work ethic, putting others' needs in front of your own, I think that those are some of the aspects that I got from my father. On my mother's side, my mother is very dependable as well, very thoughtful. She is the type of individual that's going to think through all scenarios before she makes a move. She's very cautious. So I think that I've gotten some of those aspects from her. So I see as I've gotten older a little bit of, many aspects from both of my parents.
Story_ID: 633926
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us or--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --yeah, from the oldest I guess to the youngest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. There were three of us, my oldest sister, her name was Cynthia Jackson [ph.], she's deceased. And the middle child in our family is Sharon Jackson [ph.] and I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay. And tell us a little bit about your sisters and what are they doing today?
Speaker 2: Sure. My oldest sister, Cynthia, she died in 1997, I believe, January 1, 1997. She was probably the most gregarious out of the group, very outgoing, very talented musician, very dependable. She ended up graduating in 1979 from Highland Park High School [Highland Park Community High School, Highland Park, Michigan] and went on to Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. She's the first kid to go to college in our family and you know we're all very proud of that. She ended up also getting a master's [degree] from Xavier in Cincinnati [Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio] as well. Very talented, always the leader of the group, pretty much became the president of any organization that she was involved in. And she was a great big sister, a great big sister. She died of a asthma attack actually. She had asthma pretty bad and I had a New Year's Eve party one evening and she has an asthma attack. And we tried to get her to the hospital but it was just too late. So she had a daughter, she was married to Keith Wilson [ph.] in Cincinnati [Ohio]. Her daughter is named Keisha Jackson [ph.] and Keisha lives in Washington, D.C. today. My other sister Sharon Jackson is here in Detroit [Michigan] and, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's--she's not, you know she lives with my mom [Naomi Wooten Jackson] and she's currently in between jobs and she's primarily in IT [information technology], technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So it's just the three of you and then your parents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents live with you or any cousins or relatives or--?
Speaker 2: No, not really. Most of my family was in--still in Thomasville [Georgia]. We didn't have any extended family that was living with us. My mother--my dad's mother--you know as a child we would go back to Thomasville. I spent most of my summers in Thomasville and it gave me a great perspective on you know city life and southern rural life. And when I was coming up in the '70s [1970s], in the Deep South, you know many of the things that we heard about in terms of racism and, you know we would see some of it. But you know when you're a kid and you're with your family and there is a lot of love around, you don't notice the race, the subtleties that are out there. But, so when I--just growing, that's how I would see most of my relatives in the summer, going to the Deep South, spending time with them. But really none of them lived with us in, in Detroit.
Story_ID: 633927
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would probably be first grade. My teacher was Ms. Dobie [ph.]. And I remember Ms. Dobie because later on my father [Hiram Jackson] worked at the school that I went to, the elementary school [Cortland Elementary School, Highland Park, Michigan] and you know my fondest memories of elementary school were, we take it for granted now but back then obviously we used to walk to school (laughter). You know we don't do much walk--kids don't do much walking to school anymore because schools have closed and there's buses and things like that. But you know, I was always pretty excited about getting up in the morning and going to school and walking to first grade, yep.
Story_ID: 633928
Speaker 1: Now your father [Hiram Jackson], now he goes on to become a union organizer with Ford [Ford Motor Company], is that what it is? Is it with Ford or--?
Speaker 2: No, actually my father worked in shipping and receiving at Northland Mall [Northland Center] here.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: In Southfield [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, yeah he ended up working in shipping and receiving, in the shipping and receiving department. He worked there for several years and ended up going and working in the Highland Park School District. He was a custodian for Cortland middle school, which is the--I'm sorry, Cortland Elementary [Cortland Elementary School, Highland Park, Michigan] which was the elementary school that I actually went to. He started working there when I was in the, I believe the third grade, and he stayed--he worked in that system for about fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was a union man and loved being in the union and worked on some organizing. But for the most part, you know his union activities were with the Highland Park School District.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And was your mother [Naomi Wooten Jackson] involved in the union as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was. I mean you know my mother worked when I was a lot younger, as a, as a real young child at a nursing home. She worked in union organizing as well.
Story_ID: 633929
Speaker 1: All right, now did you live in the same place the whole time you grew up or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I lived in Highland Park [Michigan] on Sturtevant [Street]. It was a four bedroom apartment--I'm sorry, a four family flat. It was a four family flat and we had, there were two rooms, two bedrooms and actually it was a closet, a big closet that we made a bedroom (laughter). But it was basically a two bedroom unit in a four family flat.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a house and--well it was a four family flat.
Speaker 2: It was a four family flat (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you got like, got three other families there.
Speaker 2: There were three other families in this apartment. And very modest environment. My dad was a janitor, my mother worked in the nursing home and you know we were struggling but I didn't know we were struggling because I had both parents in the household. I had you know a lot of discipline, lot of structure and there were a lot of families on the street, lot of families that we knew, that we were tight with on the street. So it was just I believe, at the time, a great environment to grown in, to grow up in.
Story_ID: 633930
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, now when you consider where you grew up in the neighborhood and the house and, I mean the apartment building, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a good question. I grew up, there was a porch for the top two families in this four family flat. So I would go sit out on that porch with my dad [Hiram Jackson] and the freeway, the John C. Lodge Freeway, was right next to this apartment building. So we would go and sit on this porch and watch cars go by all day, every day. We lived not too far from a coffee manufacturer, Becharas coffee company [Becharas Brothers Coffee Co., Highland Park, Michigan]. And in fact, the founder [sic.], Mr. Becharas [Dean Becharas, Sr.], just died recently. But we could smell that coffee being manufactured from almost a mile away. And again there were a lot of families, lot of kids in the street, lot of families walking up and down the street. So it was a poor environment, lower middle class kind of environment but there was always the sounds of the city I used to say, in Highland Park [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Let's see. So now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school at Cortland Elementary School [Highland Park, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went there K through five [kindergarten through fifth grade], and actually went to Ferris middle school [George W. Ferris School, Highland Park, Michigan] for middle school and that was sixth grade, seventh grade, eight grade. And high school, I went to Detroit Country Day School [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan], started there in 1979, and graduated in 1983.
Story_ID: 633942
Speaker 1: So Cortland Elementary School [Highland Park, Michigan], now did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always, I always liked school. I was a--I've always been kind of a people person, kind of, kind of kid and adult. I would say probably there was only one period when I did not enjoy school and that was the summer after my fifth grade, I got hit by a car. And I--my leg was damaged pretty bad and I had to go to a special school to accommodate me because I was on crutches and I had a cast and I couldn't make it--go up and down the stairs at the regular middle school, Ferris middle school [George W. Ferris School, Highland Park, Michigan]. So I ended up going to kind of a special program and--for handicapped kids. I wasn't really handicapped but I was temporarily handicapped because I got hit by this car and the doctors were sure if I was going to be able to fully recuperate in terms of walking normal. But I had that cast on for about six weeks and going to school with kids who were, some were you know mentally ill, some were handicapped and I decided that I just didn't want to do that anymore, so I took my cast off and I went to the regular school and made it work (laughter). But other than that period of time, I've always, I always enjoyed school as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were you interested in growing up at school or otherwise?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed watching my parents [Naomi Wooten Jackson and Hiram Jackson] do their union duties. So I always thought that I would be a union organizer in high school [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan]. That was something that stuck with me. I was an athlete. I was always very active with athletics but I was, I thought in high school that I'd want to go to college to learn how to be a union organizer. But I don't remember having any specific dreams or goals you know coming through school.
Speaker 1: Now what was your strength? Was it math or reading or everything, or--?
Speaker 2: I think it was reading. I mean I loved to read as a kid, loved to read, loved to read fiction, loved to read biographies, loved to write. Loved to write as a kid as well, but--and I wasn't a straight A student. I was always kind of an average student. Looking back at it now, just, I don't think I applied myself as much as I could have. But you know, I always tell my kids [Hiram Jackson III and Grace Jackson] now that you only get one shot at that. And you know, I don't, I don't tell them I was a C student (laughter), but I tell them you got one shot at this and you got to make the best of it.
Story_ID: 633943
Speaker 1: Now were there any par- particular teachers who were special tea- teachers or mentors to you in school?
Speaker 2: High school or middle school [George W. Ferris School, Highland Park, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well, all of them. I mean, well let's start with grade school [Cortland Elementary School, Highland Park, Michigan]. Start with grade school.
Speaker 2: Sure. Yeah, I think the biggest impact, the biggest teachers that had an impact on me were when I was going to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I grew up in the Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America]. That was a big part of my life going to--there was a Boys Club in Highland Park [Boys Clubs of Highland Park; Fauver-Martin Club] that--you know Highland Park [Michigan] was beginning to change a little bit. It was becoming you know a rough place to grow up pretty much, and my parents [Naomi Wooten Jackson and Hiram Jackson] wanted me to still be active in all the activities that I loved. So they made me go to this Boys Club in Highland Park. And at the Boys Club there was one man, his name is George Brown, who ran the summer camp every year. And George was a very gruff guy who loved to yell at the kids but he would make you follow the rules. What I didn't know was George Brown was also the English teacher at Detroit Country Day School [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was--had an extraordinary impact on my life. He asked me to take the test to go to Country Day as a freshman in high school and I didn't know anything about Country Day. My world was Highland Park and I was planning on going to Highland Park High [Highland Park Community High School, Highland Park, Michigan] or some other high school that was nearby. But he insisted and he came by my house and he asked my parents if it was okay if I could take this test. Prior to me going, there were some, and I didn't know this at the time, but there were some very prominent people who had come out of that club to go to Detroit Country Day, Courtney Vance [Courtney B. Vance], the actor who's married to, he's married to--
Speaker 1: Oh, he's--I know who you're talking about, Angela--
Speaker 2: Angela Bassett.
Speaker 1: --Bassett, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Courtney Vance. Courtney is a few years older than me. He was one of our camp counselors and I saw Courtney actually go off to Detroit Country Day, he loved it and he encouraged me to come out as well. So it was a very interesting experience to come from a place like Highland Park to go to a school that was recognized as one of the best prep schools in the country. You know, twenty thousand dollars a year tuition, it's where most of the CEOs and the major corporate execs [executives] and athletes sent their children, so it was like walking into a new world.
Speaker 1: So who--were some of the children of some of the athletes, Detroit [Michigan] athletes there like--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the ones that people would know like--?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: I guess in those days it would have been the Pistons [Detroit Pistons], the Bad Boy Pistons were going on weren't they or were they?
Speaker 2: Well this is, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is about--
Speaker 2: --back late '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Late '79 [1979], yeah--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they were starting, they were starting to crank up.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think they got good until the late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s]. But you know I can't think of any names off the top of my head but these were--it was kind of like where--because it cost so much to go there and because it was so difficult, the actual curriculum was so difficult that it was a pretty tough school to get into and even more difficult to graduate from. So it was a blessing because I did not know what I was getting into. My parents said give it a try. I didn't want to go initially because it was new and it was foreign but my mom said, give it a try. And I went out there and was one of the few black kids that were there. I think there were seven black kids in my class. But I gave it a shot and every year I wanted to leave but you know my parents would encourage me to stick around and I ended up enjoying it.
Speaker 1: So you would have been there from like '78 [1978] to--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979] to '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979] to '83 [1983], okay. And once again were there any--this is an era where you said there were actually some mentors that really meant--made a difference, right in high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely. Yeah, I--you know another mentor at the Boys and Girls Club was a gentleman named Ike Hoover [ph.]. Ike was kind of like my dad outside of the home. He was the director of the Boys and Girls Club and Ike was the kind of, you know man that would make you take your hat off, make you say, "Yes sir," "No sir," make you play by the rules and wait in line until your turn. And Ike and I had a really good relationship. I was still in my formative years I would say and Ike, I believe recognized some potential in me and so he was pretty tough on me, but he was tough on me because he really felt that there were--I had an opportunity to move on above and beyond you know what my circumstances were. So I always say between Ike Hoover who is deceased now, and George Brown who recently passed, those two gentlemen, outside of my father, were two male figures that were tremendous in my life.
Story_ID: 633944
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in high school activities like, I mean office, did you, did you run for president or anything, or student council?
Speaker 2: No, I--you know Country Day [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan] had a structure that encouraged all of the students to get involved in community activities, civic activities and I was an athlete. It was mandatory for me to play three sports. I played football, basketball and track. I threw the shot put and the discus in track. I tried wrestling one year but that didn't work (laughter). But my, probably that was, those were my primary activities. You know they had things like the chess club and other kind of activities like that but I was an athlete, and you know it was pretty tough to play three sports and you know keep up with the academic requirements that Country Day had. But--and you know when I got there initially I would say that I really wasn't prepared for the intensity of the academic program but I managed. But I was primarily an athlete there.
Speaker 1: So what position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: I was an offensive guard and a middle linebacker--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a freshman. I played varsity, did pretty well as a freshman. And you know, went on to have a pretty successful high school career in football.
Speaker 1: Okay. So were you like all area or anything like--something like that?
Speaker 2: I was all-state (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All-state.
Speaker 2: --my junior and senior year and I was pretty heavily recruited, but I was short for major college football, although I did get recruited pretty heavily by many of the major universities and colleges. I didn't know much about that process. My sister [Cynthia Jackson (ph.)] was the only person that had gone to college in my family prior to, prior to that and so I really didn't know who to talk to or who to ask about you know the college experience, on top of just the normal college experience. I was being recruited pretty heavily and I--so that was a different angle. Schools like Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] or Central Michigan [Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, Michigan], Eastern Michigan [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], those were a lot of the schools that were initially recruiting me. Then some of the larger ones started recruiting me and it was pretty exciting. But you know, one day I got a call from the recruiter at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and I'd never heard of the Ivy League schools, did not know what an Ivy League school was. And you know, I--my first question was, do they have a really good football team (laughter). But you know a friend of mine who was on the team, he was a kicker on Country Day's team. He came to me in the locker room one day after a game and he said, "Hiram [HistoryMaker Hiram Jackson], my brother is a recruiter for Yale and he was here watching a player on the other team," said, "but he really enjoyed how you played and they would like to talk to you." And you know being what, sixteen, seventeen year old kid, not having heard of Yale before, I wasn't impressed. But I did talk to him and he told me, he said, "Hey, you can go anywhere you want to go. You're good and this is a great school and you're a decent student," and I think that's what really opened my eyes about the possibility of going to a Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] or a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or a Cornell University [Ithaca, New York].
Story_ID: 633945
Speaker 1: Okay. So by the time he said that, you actually knew what those schools were about or you, or you had an idea (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pardon?
Speaker 1: Did you have a better idea at that juncture about what the Ivy League schools were about?
Speaker 2: Well it created a situation that allowed me to further investigate what these schools were about. And there was a, I forget the gentleman's name but my--well Chuck Schmidt [ph.] actually, Chuck Schmidt was his name. He was our athletic director and I stared talking to him about the process and at--when you're recruited as an athlete, back then you got six official visits, which meant that these schools could pay for you to come on a recruiting trip to see their school and to hear their pitch. Well this athletic director, Mr. Schmidt said, "You know let's get in the car and drive up and down the East Coast and let's look at some of these schools that you know, you may not be thinking of." So it was me and Chuck Schmidt and another kid, Chris Mazer, we actually got in the car and we drove to Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and Lehigh [Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania] and Lafayette [Lafayette College, Easton, Pennsylvania], some of these small eastern schools that I had never heard of, but were really good schools. And he was really giving me context and perspective and trying to help me make the college selection because again, I was clueless. I really, I didn't know the difference between you know Highland Park Community College [Highland Park, Michigan] or Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio] or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time. But that trip really helped me understand you know the substance or the significance of the college selection process.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's--this is in 1983 when you're going on tour?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two [1982] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The spring--'82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, going into your senior year [at Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 633946
Speaker 1: Was there anything special about graduation?
Speaker 2: High school graduation [from Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I can't think of anything pretty--I would say my high school years were pretty incredible years. I walked into the school being a young kid from Highland Park [Michigan] you know, not being real sure of myself, not having confidence about my ability to be successful in an all-white environment, not really knowing what I was getting into in terms of the academic intensity, you know really struggling my first two years there. And then I think in my, in the eleventh grade, a light bulb went off for me and that light bulb was like, you can do this. You can do this, and so I think I started to really apply myself differently by the eleventh grade. I ended up developing some very special friendships with white kids and black kids and Asian kids and it really taught me a lot about myself and my abilities to express myself and develop relationships with people from other cultures. You know when I graduated from high school in the yearbook I was deemed as, the most respected kid in my class, most admired and respected, which I was you know, initially I was shocked by that because there were other kids that were you know more popular than I was. But I think I was voted most admired and respected because you know I found a way to get along with everyone and be successful in high school. But that, that's, that was very rewarding for me to get that title in the yearbook, you know realizing where I came from and how I started there.
Story_ID: 633947
Speaker 1: So now you go to Cornell that fall. I mean did you work in the summer before you went?
Speaker 2: Actually I went--I, I enrolled into Cornell pretty early. I was in a program, pre-freshman summer program. The program was designed to help urban kids adapt to the university climate early. Took some classes my pre-freshman summer and it really just helped me get a few credits under my belt so that I wouldn't be inundated with all these big classes during my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what do you think you need--did you need the most on at that juncture, I mean the most help with?
Speaker 2: Well by then, you know I tell people all the time, Country Day [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan] was much more difficult than Cornell. The thing that was tough about college is setting your own pace, setting your own timelines, dictating your own schedule. That was the hardest thing in the world for me. High school is pretty much cut and dry. There are deadlines. You know there are nightly rituals that you go through when you're doing your homework. You're interacting with your parents, your school. So, but I think that by the time I got to Cornell I was prepared for the academic piece of it. I just had to mature and grow into having a schedule that involved football, academics, extracurricular kinds of activities like pledging a fraternity and all the other things that came along with college life.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did you pledge--?
Speaker 2: Yep, I'm an Omega--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.
Speaker 1: So did you do that right away or did you give yourself (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I pledged in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spring, '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay. And like what was your major? What did you select as a major?
Speaker 2: My major was industrial and labor relations. I actually matriculated from the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your, the fact that your parents [Naomi Wooten Jackson and Hiram Jackson] were union organizers help you, you know any or inform your studies?
Speaker 2: Yeah. You know I don't know if this was--I don't know how this ended up that I was in labor relations. I remember Cornell has the number one hotel school in the world and I wanted to go into that school. But I also knew they had the school of labor relations, industrial and labor relations and that program is the number one in the world. And as I mentioned, my parents were involved in union organizing, so the labor relations piece really, really was attractive to me. But for some reason I wanted to get into that hotel school. I ended up not getting accepted into that program so they said look, why don't you go into industrial labor relations and if you choose to, if you do well enough by your sophomore year you can transfer into the hotel school. When I got into the industrial and labor relations program I loved it so much I didn't want to leave. The program is a very intense program that takes you through the gamut of labor relations, industrial relations, contract negotiations and things of that sort. And it's a pretty intense program, speakers from all over the world. Some come from the union side, the labor side and some come from the corporate side. It was just a very enjoyable program and many of the students actually use it as a precursor to go to law school and things like that.
Speaker 1: I wondered when I saw the name of the course, the course of study I thought well are they training him to be--to be able to deal with the unions from a management you know interest, you know and a standpoint? You know, I thought it was ironic you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they're training you to deal with you know labor negotiations, contracts--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --coming from a background where your parents are on the other side, on the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --union side of dealing with those.
Speaker 2: Well, it's you know it's--well two things. Number one, there were--it was pretty intense on both sides. I mean if you wanted to be a union organizer it was the best place to be, because it taught you all of the techniques that the company were, you know these companies were using to deal with union organizers or to deal in a union environment. And you know we were never told to--well let me just say two things. Number one, the--you could come out of that program and go either way. And what I mean by that is the fact that you know many of the unions hire folks out of this program just because of the knowledge they are gaining you know on the academic side about contract negotiations, contract planning. You know HR [human resources] is a very, very important piece to the corporate process. Now it's not like in the old days where it was just dealing with personnel issues. You know, you're dealing with performance, you're dealing with safety, you're dealing with discrimination, so it, it behooves both sides to have kind of a team that's thoroughly immersed in, in industrial and labor relations.
Story_ID: 633948
Speaker 1: So now--well who were some of the professors that you remember from that department?
Speaker 2: That's a tough one. I don't really remember (laughter). I don't really remember my professors too much. That's probably bad. But there was--the classes that I remember were some of my Africana studies classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there--this is--you're getting into sacred ground here with Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: With--
Speaker 2: Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan]. You know there are some phenomenal things that we learned in the Africana study classes and you know Cornell has a rich history when it comes to the African American experience. You know back in the '60s [1960s] when some young African American students took over the president's office to try to achieve you know some additional standing with the university. I mean, but you know I found the entire process to be a blessing. I'd be lying to you if I told you I chose Cornell because of the academic piece of it. My parents [Naomi Wooten Jackson and Hiram Jackson] were, you know they were getting older, I was going to college. I wanted them to be in a position to be able to see me play football and come and visit. And Cornell was the closest Ivy League school to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Really? Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it was a six and a half hour drive through Upstate New York through Canada.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Cornell was very unique in that it's public and private. It has six or seven different schools. Three or four of them are public, three or four of them are private. And the one I went to was the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations [Ithaca, New York], a public school. So there were a number of African American students from New York City [New York, New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Cleveland [Ohio] and it was just a very diverse kind of environment. And that along with the, you know, the opportunity to study industrial labor relations really kind of led me there. I--it was really important for me to be able to have my parents participate in my college experience. I had a chance to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and some of the other schools and people ask me all the time you know, how did you pick Cornell? But I think that industrial labor relations program and that--it being close proximity to home was what kind of sealed the deal for me.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you mentioned Africana studies department there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know John Clarke [John Henrik Clarke] and Dr. Ben, you mentioned--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --James Turner and all that group, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right. You're familiar with some of them?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. The classes were phenomenal. I almost changed my major (laughter), but I just you know, I--all through college one thing that was consistent with me was I wanted to make money. I wanted to you know be in a position where I was one day an entrepreneur and I just wanted that training. And so I just couldn't see Africana studies being my major but I enjoyed the classes and I--and people would come to the Africana studies classes from all over the world to participate with us.
Speaker 1: Now I can imagine that there'd be speakers from all walks of life, black political life and activity I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm thinking you know--
Speaker 2: And just being in Upstate New York we would get you know phenomenal folks from the city and come up and participate in Dr. Ben's classes and you know community leaders of all walks of life would come and participate as well.
Story_ID: 633950
Speaker 1: So, okay so at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]--well you know any other stories about Cornell? I mean you're, you're--it's quite a place you know, Cornell.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I guess going into Cornell I didn't realize, again, I didn't have much experience with Ivy League schools, didn't know much about the heritage and didn't have much appreciation for it. But by the time I graduated it opened so many doors for me and gave me a great education. You know I played football for three and a half years there, I pledged the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. So I, I really feel like I had a rich college experience, made great friendships that are still important to me today and just got a great degree that has helped me since the first day of my professional career.
Speaker 1: How was Cornell's football team? Did they dominate the Ivy League or--?
Speaker 2: No, we weren't that good (laughter). You know they've had better years but that--during my four years there we were not, you know we were not a very good football team at all. Thank god for the education (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The academics were top notch, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 633951
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, so at the end of four years now what were your prospects? You're coming out of Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] so they must have been pretty good. We, did--had you planned on coming back to the Detroit [Michigan] area?
Speaker 2: You know, I always wanted to come back home. I wasn't--you know it could have gone either way for me. I was hesitant about not going back because I wanted to be around my family. That was important to me. My mother [Naomi Wooten Jackson] and father [Hiram Jackson] were, had always been huge in my life. We're a very close family so it was very important to me to stay close to them. So I ended up not having a very long job search. I had a great degree. You know Detroit being home of the, you know being the automotive capital of the world I took a shot at a job at Ford [Ford Motor Company]. Ford had a great management training program in the ILR, industrial labor relations arena and I got an offer. So I was very pleased about that and took it and moved back home immediately. I graduated in--on June 1st, 1987 and I was at work by June 15th, 1987.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now how did you--now this is a time when the auto plants are downsizing.
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're--I remember three years after you got back to Detroit, Michael Moore's movie ['Roger and Me'] came out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about Flint [Michigan]. About--well I can't think of the name of the movie now but I know it was about Flint--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the loss of auto plants and how people were struggling. So was that the atmosphere at Ford when you got back, the downsizing, the moving plants out of the country and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah. You know that was really the time when you were seeing automotive companies look for--look to lower their manufacturing costs and they were becoming more global and wanted to build cars where they were selling cars as well. I had an opportunity to go to a regional office or headquarters or go to the plant. There were a few of us that had--that were hired around the same time and all of my peers took the opportunity to go to the corporate headquarters or the regional office. I took the opportunity to go to the plant, which at the time everybody thought I was crazy to do that. But I just felt that you know how can you develop policies and procedures that impact the plant if you've never worked in the plant? And you know the plant is where the rubber hits--the rubber meets the road in a manufacturing environment. So I you know took my opportunity. I went to go work at the Dearborn [Michigan] engine plant in the Rouge Con- in the Rouge Complex.
Speaker 1: They call it River Rouge [Ford River Rouge Complex].
Speaker 2: Yep, River Rouge Complex, and you know started my career there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well what happened? Now you were only there what about four years?
Speaker 2: I was there for three years.
Speaker 1: Three years, okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the Ford management training program, great program. I immediately you know received a couple of promotions. I was transferred over to headquarters and I was slotted to work on the 1990 national negotiations. Every three years in the automotive environment they have their national negotiations. I had developed some pretty good relationship with the union [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers (UAW)]. I had done a few major initiatives, but I just had this entrepreneurial bug biting at me. I always wanted to be a business man, be an entrepreneur, didn't know what I wanted to do in particular, but I knew that ultimately one day that I wanted to own my own business and kind of create my own future.
Story_ID: 633952
Speaker 1: There was a gentleman that I knew, who was actually was dating my sister, and he came to me one day and asked me to borrow, if he could borrow twenty-five hundred bucks, and twenty-five hundred dollars, I mean that was a lot of money obviously to me. It was this recent college grad, been out of college [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] for three years. And I asked him what he wanted to do with it and he said that he fixed cars and he did body work and that he wanted to use the money to go buy some cars from the auction, wrecked cars, and that he would go buy the parts, fix the vehicles and then put these same cars back in the auction and sell them for a profit. So I thought what the heck, I gave him $2,500. He took a couple of vehicles, put my $2,500 with someone else's $2,500 and fixed these cars and sold them and you know couple of weeks later--well probably a month later, he came back, he gave me my money back plus some profit and that was around the same time when I was getting tired of this corporate shuffle, working in Corporate America. And so I said, hey, this looks like something that we can do full time and he agreed. So I hooked up with him and another gentleman that I went to high school with [at Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan] and I quit my job and started New Center Collision [New Center Collision, Inc., Detroit, Michigan], was my first business and I really thought that it was a good opportunity for me to start my entrepreneurial career.
Speaker 2: Okay. This is in 1990, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now how did--we have a note here that you were deeply influenced by Bill Pickard [William F. Pickard], right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell us about him.
Speaker 1: When I was at Ford [Ford Motor Company], I was dating this young lady who--here in Detroit [Michigan] and I told her, I said, "Hey look, I, I'm going to quit my job." I--she said, "Wow, you got this great job, you get great benefits and live in a nice--." I said, "It's not enough." I said, "I want to be an entrepreneur." And she went home and told her mother that you know, "Hiram's [HistoryMaker Hiram Jackson] lost his mind. Hiram's going to quit his job, he's moving up, he's making--you know they like him at Ford, he's making decent money and he's going to quit his job to start a business." So her mother called me and said, "Look Hiram, if you're going to do this, let me introduce you to somebody who is an entrepreneur in this town," and it was Dr. William Pickard. I made arrangements to meet him at a reception and it just so happened to be--the event was called the Singles Mingles, and it was a fundraiser for the Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner, our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] annual dinner that we have here. He was chairing the dinner that year and--
Speaker 2: That is the largest NAACP dinner in the country I've been told.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah. It's the--
Speaker 2: And it fills up--
Speaker 1: Yeah, ten thousand people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's the largest sit down dinner in the world. It was in the 'Guinness Book of Records' ['Guinness Book of World Records'; 'Guinness World Records']. And he--it was--that was actually, I forget what year it was but he was, he was the first chair I met there. And so we sat down and he said, "Hey, my job is to tell you not to quit your job." He said, "But to be honest, you'd be a damn fool if you don't." That's what he told me. He said, "Now when you go back you tell your mother in law," see, we weren't married but he called her my mother in law. He said, "You go tell her that I told you not to quit." So I quit, I ended up quitting and he's just been a, he's been a great, a great mentor and a great friend and a business partner ever since then.
Story_ID: 633953
Speaker 1: Now this is a decision that, I mean I've--that people like Claud Anderson and others that speak--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of this around the country about you know our black youth going to college and being trained basically to take a job somewhere--
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: --and the whole entrepreneurial spirit being lost.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's not really discussed. And this--you know we think he's got a good job, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All that kind of talk.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: But it could evaporate in a, you know based on whether the company--
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, at any time. And so--
Speaker 2: Well especially today I mean there are no thirty year anniversary rings that these companies are giving out. I mean companies are downsizing and selling off divisions and laying people off so quickly that you know, you don't have the security, the job security that you once had back in the day so to speak. So you have to be nimble and you have to you know, you know be somewhat entrepreneurial because there are no jobs like there used to be where people could just work there for thirty years and retire.
Speaker 1: And the crisis is further compounded I've heard because we, you know black folks by and large, not everybody but most of us don't have an inheritance to fall back on.
Speaker 2: Right. Well that's true and you know very few people are creating wealth with a nine to five [o'clock]. You know most of our assets are if we buy a home or savings, if you, you know if you keep a nine to five job. But you know I didn't know what I wanted to do. I just knew that I wanted the freedom to create my own destiny. I didn't know what that meant quite frankly. I didn't know what I wanted to do. I didn't go to school to--for a particular expertise. You know I wasn't a, you know didn't get a--you know a doctor comes out to you know provide medicine for folks and the architect is, you know learns how to do a special craft. You know I had this degree in industrial labor relations [from Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. I knew I was good with people. I felt like I could be a good salesperson. I just did not know where that would take me. But when this man presented this opportunity to me, I knew it was better than what I currently had. And I had a great job and I, you know many of the folks who came in with me, some who are still at Ford, they're at the top of Ford Motor Company now, but I wanted to be an entrepreneur. That was very important to me.
Story_ID: 633954
Speaker 1: So, well New, New Center Collision [New Center Collision, Inc., Detroit, Michigan], how did it, did it work? Did you--did it work out pretty well?
Speaker 2: Yeah. We you know we started the business and my job was to go get the business and Willy [ph.], who is my partner, his job was to fix the cars. And initially we went and bought cars that were, that had been in car wrecks, we would fix them and then we would go out and find buyers, that--we continued to do that but we also worked with corporate fleets. So we would work with police departments and postal vehicles and delivery trucks. You know our biggest account and our biggest hit came when Mr. Don Barden [Don H. Barden] who owned the cable franchise [Barden Cablevision, Inc.] in Detroit [Michigan], he came to us and said I want you to fix all of our vehicles. And so that was kind of a great first account to have. The business grew. You know we worked 24/7 to go get clients, to bring them into our shop and then one day I was at a reception, in fact I was at Highland Park Community College [Highland Park, Michigan], and a reporter walked up to me. His name was Chauncey Bailey. He was with The Detroit News at the time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Chauncey said, you know tell me your story. He had overheard our conversation about my garage and he said, "Wow, you know, a young kid from Highland Park [Michigan] goes to Country Day [Detroit Country Day School Upper School, Beverly Hills, Michigan], goes to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], comes out, gets this great job and quits to go into business." He thought that was a fascinating story and he wrote about it in The Detroit News, great story. But the day the story came out, my business partner saw it and absolutely did not like it. You know the next morning I walked in the office and he had on a suit, and he had on a black suit with some black and white wing tipped shoes. And I said, "Where are you going?" I thought maybe he had a funeral or something. He said, "Well I'm--I want to go, I want to be in the paper. I want to go network like you." I knew right then that I was in trouble. You know somebody had to fix the cars, somebody had to go sell, but he didn't like that. So you know I--that was the start of the end of our relationship and I ended up selling my shares to him and you know I went on to start another business. At that time it was called DMC Technologies [DMC Technologies, Inc., Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Chauncey Bailey, just for the record, he went on to attend the Maynard Institute out in California [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education, Oakland, California] and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --he worked for the San Francisco, the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] papers and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was killed in a dispute over a Muslim bakery that became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was (unclear).
Speaker 1: --like a celebrated case--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Well you know Chauncey, you know after he left the--I don't know the timing of it, but he left Detroit [Michigan], he went out to Oakland [California].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he ended up working for a, I forget the name of it. It was an African American newspaper in Oakland. And he was writing a story about a group that was tied to the Muslim community and he felt that they were doing some criminal activity and he ended up getting murdered over that.
Speaker 1: Right. And he's--you know there's a fund I think that's been set aside for the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --by the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the name of Chauncey Bailey--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for scholarships for students and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He's a heck of a writer.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yep, investigator reporters--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --risk their lives a lot of times.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 633955
Speaker 1: So the new business, now this is--okay. So this is not GlobalView--this is DMC Technologies [DMC Technologies, Inc., Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay. So DMC Technologies comes first, then GlobalView Technologies [GlobalView Technologies LLC, Detroit, Michigan], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. What happened, I met a gentleman, his name was Kirk Dudley [Kirkland Dudley] and Kirk had a company called DMC Network [DMC Network, Inc., Detroit, Michigan] and again Mr. Barden [Don H. Barden], who is no longer with us, Mr. Barden gave Kirk Dudley an opportunity to assist him in building the cable network. So DMC Network was a minority owned company that helped to build out cable TV in Detroit [Michigan]. They hit some hard times in the early '90s [1990s] and I ended up partnering with Kirk and I launched DMC Technologies, and DMC Technologies ended up buying all of the assets of DMC Network. And, we did installation of local area networks and phone systems, computer networks, as well as cable TV. We had offices in Detroit and Atlanta [Georgia] at the time.
Speaker 1: So that--this is the age of--and I guess it's still important today when a business would, was--businesses were just trying to network all those things, all those features together.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean the technology is so much more advanced now. We were pretty much you know pulling cable, and you know towards the, you know a few years later we graduated into installing fiber optic networks. But it was a pretty simple business back then. You know companies and school districts and municipalities that were you know beginning to install a large number of computers we would be there to network them and install them.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a--
Speaker 2: My expertise was not in the technology per se. I was always good at kind of raising capital, sales, strategic planning. I saw IT [information technology] as a growing opportunity for us, so I kind of used DMC Technologies--Kirk was the president of the company and you know he was the guy that focused on the installation and the operations, and I was the CEO and I focused on the planning and the sales and the positioning of the company.
Story_ID: 633956
Speaker 1: Well GlobalView Technologies [GlobalView Technologies LLC, Detroit, Michigan], that's, that's important in this story, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. We, I would say we started DMC Technologies [DMC Technologies, Inc., Detroit, Michigan] in maybe '92 [1992] or '93 [1993] and we had a hard time. I mean it was--we were struggling. We were struggling. We, you know we had a very difficult time growing the business, and I would say somewhere around '96 [1996] we started having some good luck. We got a couple of major contracts with some local school districts and then there was a program called E-rate from the federal government. And E-rate was, were federal dollars that were designed to go into urban classrooms to pay for technology installations. We developed a, an expertise on how to apply for E-rate grants and how to install E-rate projects and that was around '96 [1996]. We started doing some major installations and that caught the eye of Detroit Edison [Detroit Edison Company; DTE Electric Company, Detroit, Michigan], the local utility at the time. We were--we had also proposed on trying to build a fiber optic network around the City of Detroit [Michigan]. Detroit Edison was looking at getting into some unregulated businesses and so we thought it would--we developed a partnership, Glo- and that partnership was called GlobalView Technologies. I owned 60 percent of it and DTE Energy owned 40 percent of it. And the company started growing immediately. We were doing about twenty million [dollars] in sales in '98 [1998], we were doing installations all over the country, in school districts and municipalities and you know for a few years the company was doing well. It's one of the fastest growing black companies in the country at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. What happened? Did you get--did you, I mean did it cease to you know generate as much profit or did you see it declining?
Speaker 2: No, actually we--you know I had developed an expertise at turning troubled companies around. I mean that was my craft, raising capital, finding companies that were in distress, turning them around. And GlobalView, we found a company called Clover Technologies [Clover Technologies, Inc., Wixom, Michigan]. At the time Clover was a company that had been around fifty years, highly successful, entrepreneurial company, and Ameritech [Ameritech Corporation; AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.] had bought Clover from a local entrepreneur. When Ameritech got to it, the company started to go down pretty much because you take this highly entrepreneurial small company, Clover was doing about a hundred million dollars a year and you put this big corporate bureaucracy on it, it kind of lost its step and it didn't work. It didn't work. So they never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's an interesting place--way to put that--lost its step.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), but you know the thing is, is that Ameritech never integrated into their corporate infrastructure because Ameritech had their own kind of department that did similar work. But when all this was going on, SBC Communications [SBC Communications Inc.] out of Texas actually bought Ameritech and they made the decision that they wanted to sell Clover Technologies. And you know we tried to buy it. We tried to buy it, they wouldn't return our calls. We were a competitor so they were--made it very clear that they were very uninterested in selling us that company. But we stayed at it and then one day I remember it very clearly, I was on the phone with Bill Pickard [William F. Pickard] on a Sunday morning and I was telling him that these folks would not even let us bid on the company. And he said, "You know what," he said the--Roy Roberts who was at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Roy Roberts was a, one of the highest ranking African Americans in the history of the automotive industry was at General Motors. He said, "You know Roy is on the board with the CEO of SBC, Mr. Whitacre [Edward Whitacre, Jr.]." He said, "Maybe we can get his attention that way." We ended up calling Roy and asking for his assistance and one thing led to the next and we ended up buying Clover Technologies for $5 million. And that immediately took us from a $20 million company to a company that was doing about $120 million operating all over the world. We had seven offices. We were doing work for the federal government. We were working in automotive plants around the world, and it was kind of an overnight kind of deal.
Story_ID: 633957
Speaker 1: So this is in 2001, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Clover [Clover Technologies, Inc., Wixom, Michigan], you know we had done other turnaround type of deals before, buying companies that were troubled, finding a way to enhance the operations, enhance the performance. So we immediately went to work. I mean this company needed a lot of surgery. It had been underperforming for years, had been losing money for years but had a talented workforce. And we thought that you know if we did some downsizing you know and really focused on fewer areas, we could turn it around, but it was just too big. It was too big and we couldn't turn it around fast enough and we actually ended up going through bankruptcy with that company.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 2003, it was liquidated, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what did you learn from that experience?
Speaker 2: Well I always tell people that that was the start of my business career. Going through bankruptcy with $100 million company is very sobering, you know. And I learned the hard way that it's not how much revenue you're generating you know, it's how much profit you're making. You know before that incident, and I wasn't very good at reading financial statements. I wasn't very good at the fiscal discipline that you need as a CEO. I wasn't very good at identifying the type of talent that you need to run a company of that magnitude and just going through that entire exercise was an amazing ride. It really was the best education that you can have as an entrepreneur. It's painful going through a bankruptcy and seeing your name in the paper and having people say not too kind things about you, but you know it's not too many times--and not too many times when you're afforded the opportunity to go from--I started that company with maybe $750. And to go to from $750 to having revenues of almost 120 million is a heck of a learning experience. And quite frankly, I wouldn't change that for nothing in the world, nothing because you--there are just so many lessons learned you know in the course of building a company like that and I, and I'm reminded of them every day. Luckily, we had started a company, another company called Genesis Energy Solutions [Genesis Energy Solutions LLC, Detroit, Michigan], during this process as well. And Genesis was a utility contractor doing underground construction. Company was headquartered in Atlanta [Georgia] and we would work with utility companies in building out underground infrastructure for new housing developments and new construction projects. So I was able to fall back on Genesis, we built that into about a $5 million company and we actually ended up selling Genesis to a partner that we had that owned 40 percent of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--Genesis was launched in 2004? Or '5 [2005] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand three [2003], 2004, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 633958
Speaker 1: But another thing you got involved in was the purchase of the Chronicle. I don't know, now were you a part of Real Times Media [Real Times Media LLC] when you purchased the Chronicle or the group, you know Real Time purchases the Chronicle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened was first of all Real Times is a group of investors. These were African American businesspeople who were really interested in making sure that these iconic newspapers had a future. These are all the former John Sengstacke [John H. Sengstacke] papers, the papers that Mr. Sengstacke owned, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Chicago Defender, the Tri-State Defender in Memphis [Tennessee] and the Michigan Chronicle in Detroit [Michigan] of course. And it's an interesting story. You know Bill Pickard [William F. Pickard] tried to buy the Michigan Chronicle some time ago in the late '90s [1990s] and just really couldn't get Mr. Sengstacke to even consider selling. Mr. Sengstacke died in 1997, and so Dr. Pickard and the former publisher here, Sam Logan, tried to put together a group to go and buy the Michigan Chronicle from the trustee. Mr. Sengstacke left the papers in the hands of his grandkids. There was no luck there but in 2000, Sam Logan the former publisher here decided that he would leave the Michigan Chronicle and start his own newspaper called the Michigan Front Page. So Sam came to Bill Pickard and myself and we started helping him raise the money to build this competitor to the Michigan Chronicle, and Sam launched it.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So in--so I'll just say, Sam Logan actually left the Michigan Chronicle in 2000--
Speaker 1: He was frustrated with the current, the management at the time when he left I guess, is that it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's when he went to form his own?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've talked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear), go ahead.
Speaker 2: We've talked about Don Barden [Don H. Barden] a couple of times. Don Barden actually made a bid to buy the Michigan Chronicle and you know, I don't know if the story is accurate or not but apparently Don's--came over and told Sam, "Hey look, I'm your new boss," and Sam said, "No, I want to go start my own paper." So Sam left, along with Karen Love here, his longtime co-worker and they started the Michigan Front Page. We got behind the Front Page, we raised some money for it and we were off and running. And the Michigan Chronicle continued. In 2002, there was a group of African American investors in Chicago [Illinois] and the name of their company was Real Times, Inc. And they came to Detroit [Michigan] and asked us if we'd be willing to invest in their company to purchase the Sengstacke properties. We as a group raised some capital and we became partners with this group out of Chicago and at that point I was just a small shareholder, I was not active in the company at all. I was running my company. But in 2004, this group in Chicago came back to us and said, "Well, you know we need to raise some additional capital." And our group said, "Well, you know we'll give you the additional capital but if we do this, we want to take control of the company." So I would say around 2004, the Detroit investment group took control of Real Times, and we started managing the company.
Story_ID: 633959
Speaker 1: In 2005, 2005, you know I was getting more involved with Real Times [Real Times Media LLC]. I would sit in on the board meetings. Many of the Detroit [Michigan] investors were kind of--I was very close to, they were kind of big brothers to me. And so they would ask me my opinion about the Internet, about special events and just to try to get a younger perspective on maybe how to run this newspaper company. Print was beginning to take a turn in terms of its significance, the Internet was building its significance and so I started getting more involved. I found it an intriguing business but we weren't making money, in fact we were losing quite a bit of money. But in 2005, I got diagnosed with kidney cancer and I--you know it was a big deal for me obviously. I was able to obviously beat it, had surgery, had a kidney removed. And during that process I really you know just took a second look at what I was doing. I had gone through a bankruptcy [of GlobalView Technologies LLC, Detroit, Michigan], I had built two companies that were successful and I just felt like I wanted to take a break. And after I got out of the hospital and after I figured out I wasn't going to die, I was going to make it, the Detroit investment group asked me to help them find a CEO for the company and to help them develop a strategy on where Real Time should go next. And so I started doing that. I took the CEO title on an interim basis and I started liking it. I mean I started really saying and appreciating the history of these newspapers. I always had a place in my heart for the Michigan Chronicle, would do everything I could to get Sam Logan to put me in the paper. I never really had a full appreciation for the black press. And so when I took over as CEO and I started reading about the Chicago Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and you know Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and The Philadelphia Tribune and the Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers], I mean, it was very clear to me that our story but for these newspapers would never be fully told. And so I just started immersing myself in it and I concluded that in order for these newspapers to have a future, we were going to immediately have to develop a strategy to go forward.
Story_ID: 633960
Speaker 1: So what was your plan? What was your plan?
Speaker 2: Well I, the--one of the first things I recognized was that these brands were iconic and they were universally known and respected. And I forget which year we did a survey just to see--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What was your plan?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We--two thousand- so I would say formally I started the role in January of 2006. Company [Real Times Media LLC] was losing a lot of money, readership was going down, didn't have a lot of technology in the process, and I would say 95 percent of the revenue that the company generated was through what we call ROP, run of press, just regular quarter page, half page ads. And because of what's happening on the web, that revenue stream was diminishing every day. So I felt like we didn't have a crisis in recognition. I mean these are iconic brands, people loved these newspapers, they loved the content and it was a niche. It was--you know these papers were providing news and information that you just couldn't get anywhere else. And that's what you look for in a business. You look for a niche. You look for an angle that your competitions, your competition can't meet. So I forget which year we did a survey and the survey came back that the Chicago Defender and Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] had brand recognition, upwards of 96, 97 percent and that, to me that's like Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] or McDonald [McDonald's Corporation] type of name recognition. So we developed a strategy, we said we have to diversify our revenue streams because just focusing on print is not going to provide us with a healthy future. So we immediately started this--doing special events. We immediately started looking at commercializing our archives. We have an enormous library. I mean if it happened from 1900 to today, we probably got some images that, that captured it.
Story_ID: 633961
Speaker 1: Now this is a treasure. We were talk- talking about this off camera.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: All the photos of great photographers that worked for the Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, yeah.  So well, you know talk about some of the photos, the kind of photos that are around?
Speaker 2: Sure. Well we [Real Times Media LLC], you know when we started this process, we--I'd walk into the office and there'd be photos on the floor. Just, you know not even in a file cabinet, just on the floor. You might see a photo of Fidel Castro and Muhammad Ali just, on the floor. Or Sammy Davis, Jr. and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] with their kids on the floor. And so you know we had to immediately just figure out what we had and just real- on a basic sense, just start filing them away. But these are photog- these are photos that are one of a kind photos. I mean you know the Emmett Till funeral, open casket funeral, open casket photo. We have photos that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's one that rocked the world. I mean every other person in that generation we talk to or everyone in that generation that saw it in the Jet in '55 [1955] were rocked by it.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. And Jet [sic. Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] is the only other company that has that photo other than the Chicago Defender. And we don't just have a photo, one photo or two photos in these collections, we have a file of the Emmett Till case, we have a file of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he lived in Chicago [Illinois] for a short- point in his life when he was exposing poverty and some of the conditions of the Chicago housing department [Chicago Housing Authority] where African Americans were living. We have photos that talk about the Double V campaign.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: You know success at war, success at home, eliminating racism. So these photos are one of a kind and they are shocking in their uniqueness and so I just really felt like you know this could be a part of our future, finding a digital platform that these photos can ride on to make them universally available to anyone who wanted to see them, you know. So that became very much a part of our diversification strategy, take these photos off the floor and out of file cabinets and digitize them and make them universally available around the world and so we've been working on that part of it. We have about ten thousand photographs that have been digitized and we're going to be launching our website later in the year with some very unique photography. And ultimately what I'd like to do is build the infrastructure so that all of the papers in the black press can put their images on our infrastructure and make them universally around the world.
Speaker 1: So would they be available for a fee or would they--?
Speaker 2: They would be available for a fee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have a unique service today where we've already digitized our newspapers from 1905 to 1976, all of those have been digitized in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and, so all of our papers are online. So if you're a college student in Amsterdam or a college student in Chicago, you can go online and if your university or college has signed up to our program, you know you can have access to these images now. And so we've been able to monetize the digital newspapers and now we're trying to digitize the photography. So that was part of our diversification strategy. We started doing events. We created some pretty interesting events. One of our signature events is called Pancakes and Politics. We started that event in Troy--in Detroit and it's really a town hall meeting of the movers and shakers. We use our brand to highlight issues that are impacting southeastern Michigan and it's a television show and we partner with, we have print partners and television partners and that's been a huge success for us. We do, today we do over fifty events around the country with our various properties and so with the special events, the digital strategy, we do a number of community outreach programs and we started a marketing services division to help companies better understand the African American consumer. So we're not only a newspaper company anymore. That was a bitter pill for some of our folks to swallow because you know they believed in the newspaper business and wanted to stay very much in the newspaper business. But given the trends and what's happening in the digital world, you know we're not giving up on our print products and we're not giving up on our newspaper division; they do quite well now. But we really felt it necessary to expand into some of these other areas to diversify our platform and take advantage of the relationship that our brands have with this, with this growing African American community.
Story_ID: 633962
Speaker 1: It's becoming less important, I mean the acquisition of news is becoming less important in terms of new news that, I mean getting the scoop on something--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --than it was before. Can you explain that for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean you know thank god we're not in the breaking news business. I mean you know our job [at Real Times Media LLC] if we're doing it correctly is that we want to tell you, we want to give you our spin on the story. We want to interpret the story from our perspective. If there was a story that comes out in the Chicago Sun-Times or the Detroit Free Press, you know we may address that story. So it's not a situation where we're breaking news, but we want to give you the story from the African American perspective and we want to highlight some aspects of that story that you may not have considered before. So yeah, the, with the advent of twenty-four hour cable, with websites, with social media, it's very difficult to break news in print today, but it's still a great opportunity for us to give you our angle on it. You know journalism in my opinion has changed greatly, obviously. We live in a world of sound bites and quick hits today, you know. The Internet seems to be about how many hits can you get, how many visitors can you get, how much shock value can you create, as opposed to how much depth does your story have, how accurate is your story, how meaningful? You know how will it impact people, how will it inspire communities? You know we want to, we--we're still very much committed to that, telling stories from a unique perspective, stories that are powerfully connected to the African American community that have substance and meaning and not just about you know getting people on the website and developing clicks like that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now the way you--on that, well on that note say a case like the Trayvon Martin situation, I heard whites in the media say that, well if a white man or a white like man hadn't shot him, it wouldn't be an issue and black people don't demonstrate when black kids kill each other. And I was thinking when I heard that, I said well they don't know anything about the black community 'cause this happens all the time. There are prayer vigils on these corners.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they're--you know it happens in Dayton [Ohio], it happens in Detroit [Michigan], every city I'm in.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean just take today you know in two of the cities where we have newspapers, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], we had a, you know Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] had an issue where they--black on black crime was reaching an all-time high. The Pittsburgh Courier started counting the murders that were, that reflected black on black murders. We put it in the paper and we said we're going to keep counting them until you know somebody stands up and as a community we take you know accountability for this. That was a black on black situation and you're right, I mean we--in Chicago [Illinois] there were five hundred murders last year. We reported in the paper we don't care, who, what color the person is that's committing the crime, we just want the murders to stop. I've heard that as well and I don't buy that, you know. You know murder is murder and especially when it's a child involved. So you're right, I mean you know especially those of us who live in black communities where there is high crime, we're very active, we're very involved and you know we are, we do ask for justice respect- irrespective of what color the murderers are.
Story_ID: 633963
Speaker 1: Now have you had to, I mean so when you look for personnel in these papers, I mean do you--has--I mean or say over the last twenty years, has the numbers--have the numbers, I imagine it had gone down or maybe they shifted over into different occupations that weren't you know priority back in you know twenty years ago in terms of running the paper (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In terms of revenue?
Speaker 1: No, no running the paper, who--what kind of personnel actually is needed to--
Speaker 2: Oh, right.
Speaker 1: --because, yeah because of the different platforms and stuff like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah. You know it's a different day obviously. You know maybe ten years ago when you had a normal newsroom you had a managing editor, an executive editor. You know you had writers on staff, circulation and distribution staff, and accounting staff. You know today you need a very flexible staff. You need someone who can, you know post stories on the Internet every day. You need someone, the stories are not as lengthy, whereas you might go 1,200, 1,500 words, you know in the print you may need a story that's four hundred words and on digital. You, you need folks who can write a story and maybe go take a photog- go do some photography as well. So you need a very flexible staff and the things that are, that were important ten years ago in terms of investigative news, you just don't see a lot of investigative news today. Yeah, so you're right, the staffs are much, much different, much leaner, much younger and you know 'cause you're dealing with multiple platforms. And the digital platform you know it seems to be kind of a game that the younger audience is really, really leaning towards, so you got to play in it.
Story_ID: 633964
Speaker 1: Now in order to raise, I mean to keep the paper [Michigan Chronicle] afloat, I was surprised to read--well I know it's, I know it's--I'm not that surprised, but you still have to convince major advertisers that the black community is a, that they should target the black community with a, with specific kinds of ads that speak to the black community, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And you know what we've tried to do is we've tried to create a platform of products. Companies are less willing just to buy print because there are multiple ways to reach this aud- this, you know the African American community. And so what we've tried to do is bundle these services together: digital, engagement marketing and the newspapers. And we've been very successful at it. I, you know our tagline here is that you know we want to revolutionize the black press and for us to have a future we have to continue to demonstrate that we can influence public opinion, that we can influence our readers and you know, and consumers. And the way we do that is you know, because the demand for the content is through the roof. The demand for the actual content is still very much--very strong. What is not in demand is you know giving, forcing print down folks' throat. They want to be able to you know consume the content in multiple ways, whether it be through mobile devices, desktops, laptops, smart phones and so you know we have to adapt to that. We have to adapt to that. We haven't stopped creating great content. I think most of us in the black press you know have been a little slow at developing the technology needed to get this content to these readers. But I think you're starting to see now many small, black community newspapers understand the importance of being on a digital platform.
Speaker 1: Okay. Some of your major advertisers that advertise with Real Times [Real Times Media LLC] include DTE Energy [Detroit Edison Company; DTE Electric Company, Detroit, Michigan], PNC Bank [PNC Bank National Association], Blue Cross Blue Shield Michigan, of Michigan [Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan], Fifth Third Bank, Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and Macy's [Macy's, Inc.]. Are these pretty much, except for the Michigan specific ones, are these companies pretty much across the board and all over the country supporting the Real Time newspapers?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, we still enjoy a lot of support from the corporate community. You know we work hard at it. We, you know our job is to stay relevant and produce relevant content and you know these companies that are out there who are looking to get their message to the African American community, it's important to them to partner with you know stable, credible firms and we work very hard to make sure that our organization is still, still has a very strong voice you know in these communities where we operate. So we still enjoy the support of major corporations, nonprofit organizations and, and we've shown a willingness to be progressive. You know we're very, we--not--you know, we've had a lot of success with digital. Again we produce some of the most meaningful special events in these communities. So once you put those packages together, companies still understand that, you know that we have a good footprint in these communities, and they want to be a part of it.
Story_ID: 633965
Speaker 1: In 2007, times are sort of difficult from what I understand and Real Times' board approached Detroit's pension board for loans totaling 15.5 million [dollars]. And, well tell us that story.
Speaker 2: Well you know, the company needed to recapitalize. You know as I mentioned to you, when I took over Real Times [Real Times Media LLC] as the CEO, company was losing quite a bit of money every year. It had been mismanaged for several years. The losses were huge. And so we were aggressively in the capital markets looking for someone to provide us with the needed capital, not only to grow but just to stay in business. So I started again in 2006 and I immediately started looking for a bank, a banking relationship or a venture capital relationship to capitalize the company. We were successful at borrowing fifteen and a half million dollars from the General Retirement System [General Retirement System City of Detroit], the pension board, and so we took that money and we did some what I think incredible things with. Number one, we consolidated about thirty years of debt from about seventy companies. Number two, we made an acquisition of the Who's Who Publishing Company, which is operating in over twenty cities and number three, we were able to kick start some of the major initiatives that we still have today. We created a special marketing company, special events. We were able to spend some money on our digitization with our archives and so it was much needed capital at the time. But 2008 hit, and 2008 and 2009 and 2010 were really horrific years in general, you know worst economic times probably since the Great Depression. A lot of our customers were in bad shape. You know had the bankruptcy of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC]. Many of the healthcare institutions were in bad shape. Many of our top advertisers were in deep financial crisis and we lost about 30 to 40 percent of our top line revenue so we were struggling. We were really struggling and the funds that we had secured to in fact help us grow, we were actually using those funds to keep us alive. And we came out of it around 2011. We stayed you know really focused with our plan and really bounced back in 2012. Two thousand twelve [2012] was a very profitable year for us and we've continued our relationship with the pension board. They're a, they're a significant shareholder in our company, and, and, and you know now we're just preparing for growth in some of these other areas.
Story_ID: 633966
Speaker 1: Now in 2009, Real Times [Real Times Media LLC] acquired Who's Who [Who's Who Publishing Company]?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Now this is the--these are the Who's Who books, 'Who's Who in Black America,' 'Who's Who in--' various (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, the company was started in Atlanta [Georgia] about twenty-five years ago by a gentleman named Sunny Martin [C. Sunny Martin]. He was an entrepreneur and he had a concept of documenting the African American experience. Our tagline with that company is that you know we celebrate African American achievement. So in these various communities around the country we go into their city and we highlight African American achievement for an entire year and then we publish a really upscale coffee tabletop book that highlights the African American experience in that city. And you know that company allowed us to have a national footprint and you know we're still growing that company today. We're actually focused on building out the digital platform for that company and we tell some incredible stories and we highlight some incredible people who are doing some amazing things around this country. We go into these cities and we research, we really research who's doing what and we're able to publish some amazing stories about the African American experience in this country.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] uses Who's Who to find out who's who (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. We do 'Who's Who in Black Chicago,' 'Who's Who in Black Detroit' and you know there are some very interesting stories that would never be teld--told, you know but for those books.
Story_ID: 633967
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in 2011, as General Motors [General Motors Company] is making a rebound, you receive the GMAAN award [General Motors African Ancestry Network] for a project called DRIVEN [DRIVEN in Living Color: Celebrating Multicultural Achievement in the Automotive Industry], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, tell us about that, about DRIVEN.
Speaker 2: Well, we have a custom publishing division in our Who's Who Publishing Company and DRIVEN is a project we created to highlight African American achievement in the automobile industry. Now here's a hinder- here's an industry that's over a hundred years old who was built on the backs of African Americans. You know the automotive industry was--you know created the black middle class and there was never a forum where we could celebrate you know our input into that particular industry. And so we thought it would be interesting to highlight the impact that black people have had in one of the biggest industries in the history of you know capitalism. And so that's what DRIVEN was. We, we're in our fifth year now and the book has evolved to become a multicultural project. But we've produced a short video, a book and then we launched it at the largest auto show in the world, the North American Auto Show [North American International Auto Show] here in Detroit [Michigan]. And it went over really well. Went over really well and was--had many wonderful stories about legends who, you know living legends in the industry and emerging leaders in the industry and the many minority suppliers that are doing really well in that industry.
Speaker 1: Can you give us maybe a couple of examples of the people that are highlighted in DRIVEN?
Speaker 2: Sure. You take a guy like Dave Bing who had an incredible, All-American career at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], went on to play for the Detroit Pistons, all pro, top fifty basketball player of all time. Left the NBA [National Basketball Association] and became a steel mogul, providing steel to the Big Three. And he wasn't done with that. He left and became mayor of Detroit. That's one of our stories. Mr. Bing was a living legend in our book. Or you take a gentleman like Leon Richardson who worked for a pharmaceutical--a, I'm sorry, a chemical company who--he was a sales person with a company called Product Sol [Product Sol, Inc., Birmingham, Michigan]. Quit his job, went on to start his own company called Chemico Systems [Chemico Systems, Inc., Southfield, Michigan]. He's been the GM supplier of the year for the last five years. He was Black Enterprise company of the year this year. He's doing well over $100 million a year now. He started his company selling one barrel of chemicals to General Motors [General Motors Corporation] in 1989, you know, folks like that who are entrepreneurs, who are creators. And you know but for a project like this you would never hear of some of these people.
Story_ID: 633968
Speaker 1: Now you were named the publisher of the Chronicle [Michigan Chronicle] in 2011, so you didn't start off as the publisher. But it was the death of the longtime pub- publisher that, I mean--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --editor that precipitated that.  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did you envision yourself--I mean is it difficult to run both?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I--you know losing Sam Logan was a real hard punch in the gut. He was an icon in this community and he was an icon in the black press. He was the publisher and I never thought that you know I would become the publisher. You know Sam and I were a pretty good tag team. He focused on running the paper, my focus was running the entire company [Real Times Media LLC]. When he died, I took over the publishing role because you know it's very difficult to find someone who is uniquely qualified to run a black newspaper. You're a counselor, you're a community leader, you're a journalist, you're a cheerleader for your city, you're a networker, and you know they don't grow Sam Logans anymore. They just don't make them like that anymore. But because I knew that we were going to have to take a different direction as a company and start to go digital at special events, I took the impetus to kind of step in that seat so that we could begin to grow in these various areas.
Story_ID: 633969
Speaker 1: All right, so we were just talking about the death of Sam Logan and you know new duties as publisher of the Chronicle. Do you think being a publisher of the Chronicle in addition to being the head of Real Time [Real Times Media LLC], the CEO of Real Time put you in a better position to really kind of feel what the rest of the papers are doing in a sense?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--one of the reasons I did not appoint a new publisher is because I wanted to figure it out myself.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right, okay. I was asking you about the experience (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah. I, you know it's very challenging times for print in general, very challenging times for newspapers and very difficult to know exactly what the future looks like for all of us. I felt like I needed to become the publisher of the Michigan Chronicle to help drive the future, to determine what he future looks like. And I honestly feel like I'm not just doing this for Real Times, but you know I want to be in the driver seat for all of the black press. I mean you know we're all in this together and it's important that we figure it out and figure it out very quickly. If you look at for example Jet magazine just recently stopped publishing and they're going to go all digital. You know I see some of that happening with black newspapers in the near future. So it was real important for me to kind of live this publisher life every day, get to the meat and potatoes of what makes it work and how we're going to evolve as a company because it's still very unclear. I do like what we've been able to develop. I think that we've been able to do some unique things that have not been duplicated by other companies. We're still continuing to build our brand. We still have a great revenue base with some great customers and partners in the community and I feel like as long as we're producing great content and we're staying relevant with a big voice, that we'll figure out how to monetize that as we go. But it was real important for me to get on the ground so to speak and help try to figure this thing out because I do think that we're in fragile times.
Story_ID: 633970
Speaker 1: Tell us something about the staff of the Chronicle. You--well the Chronicle is positioned in Detroit [Michigan] from what I understand, you've got like one--how many rival black papers are there in Detroit? I mean that--
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that the Michigan Chronicle is obviously the best (laughter). You know, we're the oldest. We're the largest in the State of Michigan. There is another paper in town that caters to the African American community, but you know we've worked very hard to position ourselves as a market leader and so I would say that we really don't have any competition. The Michigan Chronicle in Detroit has a very unique voice, has a very relevant voice and we've worked hard. We do probably fifteen community events here in town. We've developed some very signature projects like Pancakes and Politics, like Men of Excellence, Pastor Salute [Pastor's Salute], Women of Excellence. Our--we have a senior editor that's an award winning senior editor that stays engaged in hot political issues and topics and we run this--
Speaker 1: Is that Mr. Thompson?
Speaker 2: Yes, Bankole Thompson. The day to day is being run right now by Cathy Nedd. She's our chief operating officer. For ten years she ran the largest PR [public relations] communications firm in the City of Detroit. The staff is different. You know our staff is capable of doing video production, great photography, digital projects, marketing services, special events and we have a small staff. Now one of the things that we've been able to do lately is we've gone to a, what we call a centralization process where you know we have five offices around the country and we've centralized certain functions, accounting, production. So the product--we produce the paper for Atlanta [Atlanta Daily World] or Chicago [Chicago Defender] right here in Detroit. The content is gathered locally, but the layout and design is done here in Detroit. So to get better efficiencies, we've kind of consolidated a lot of the functions that used to be done out in the field.
Story_ID: 633971
Speaker 1: Real Times [Real Times Media LLC] has inked a deal to jointly develop and share a central--share content nationally with Radio One [Lanham, Maryland], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So is that going on now (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yep, we're real excited about that. Radio One has a digital only subsidiary, it's called Interactive One [Interactive One LLC; iOne Digital]. It's one of the largest digital only media companies in the country. We partnered with them last year. We utilize their technology as our back office for our websites and we share content. They distribute our content nationally and we distribute their content locally. And we're really looking forward to growing that relationship. They get about 15 million unique viewers a month across the country and around the world and we're just below a million unique visitors. We're growing very quickly and you know we're preparing ourselves for the future and Interactive One has been a great partner and we're looking forward to really building out our other digital platforms with them as well. We're going to start to launch some digital only sites ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now there is a planned move to--is there--is it still on, a planned move to Paradise Valley?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know we--Paradise Valley in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] was a part of Detroit [Michigan] where African American businesses thrived, barbershops, jazz clubs, pharmacies, you know clothing stores, dentists, lawyers. It was a thriving African American community and it went away primarily because of urban renewal. You know new freeways, new thruways that were put in by the state really wiped out these thriving African American economic centers. We bought a building in a downtown neighborhood that has since been renamed Paradise Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay, because the old one is gone and it's never, I mean it's never going to come back--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where it was.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They got Ford Field [Detroit, Michigan] sitting on it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: And we're--this--there's a community that was formerly named Harmonie Park [Detroit, Michigan] that was, that overlapped with Paradise Valley. And the Michigan Chronicle was started in Paradise Valley and it's just fortuitous that we bought a building that's in the new Paradise Valley and you know we're going to be moving in hopefully before the end of the year. It's a three story building. On the first floor we're going to have retail and hopefully a coffee and--coffee house and a wireless community. The community and the public can come in and enjoy a cup of coffee or a light snack and watch our award winning editors interview people. The Michigan Chronicle will be on the second floor and Real Times will be housed on the third floor and we hopefully will be building out an Internet studio on the third floor to do original programming for the web.
Speaker 1: Okay, so interviews and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And reports I guess on there?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's something.
Story_ID: 633972
Speaker 1: Now you also, in twenty- 2013, you were elected to the board of directors of the National Newspaper Publishers Association.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The NNPA.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's--do you--well tell us about NNPA and then tell us about if you have any connection to NABJ or not?
Speaker 2: Well the--NNPA, next year will be our seventy-fifth anniversary. It was started by a group of publishers you know seventy-four years ago who felt like black newspapers should come together and have a collective voice. So we started the National--actually there was a former name [National Negro Publishers Association] but the--it was the National Newspaper Publishers Association. And it's the top two hundred black newspapers in the industry and we meet four times a year to talk about how can we continue to grow, how can we continue to transition our businesses, how to manage our businesses in a digital world, all the things that impact small community black newspapers. In fact, I'm going to Portland [Oregon] tomorrow for a board meeting. I was elected last summer, and I chair the technology committee and the marketing committee for the board of directors.  And no, we don't have an association with National Association of Black Journalists. We have a working relationship but there's no formal relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is it hard to keep, in that regard, I know the National Association of Black Journalists are journalists you know working in what they call mainstream media or--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) white owned media basically.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Is it hard to keep good writers and people because of the competition trying to pull them into the major mainstream media?
Speaker 2: Well everybody, even the mainstream papers are struggling for good talent today because most print companies are downsizing. So you know what I'm seeing is that there's a lot of talent that have been let go by the big boys. In fact, when you have an African American writer, nine times out of ten when they're released from these large papers, they're--they come knock on our door looking for a job. But I think that's a challenge that we're all having is--and then the other thing Larry [Larry Crowe] that I would say is that it's--you know we're looking for a different kind, a different type of writer today. You know we're looking for somebody who can write and post stories every day, shorter versions of stories, different types of stories that have what we call Internet or web value. So there are a lot of writers out there that--who are very experienced and very talented, but haven't really adapted themselves to this whole digital world.  Yeah, so that's, that's a big challenge I think.
Story_ID: 633973
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, when you look back on everything you've done 'til this point--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Wow, that I would do differently? I don't have any regrets but that doesn't mean that I wouldn't do something differently. I think that when I went through my bankruptcy, I wish that I had acted on the issue sooner when I saw that the company [GlobalView Technologies LLC, Detroit, Michigan] was not going in the right direction. But at that time I didn't have the tools that I have now. I didn't have the tools. So would I have done something differently? Probably not. Just didn't know. Just, you know if I--with that old phrase, if you knew better you would do better. But you know, I think that I've had a great life and a great career, and I'm not sure what I would do differently.
Story_ID: 633974
Speaker 1: In the same vein, when you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today do you think is your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: You know I've always been proud of the work I've done in the community. You hear that all the time from business executives and corporate leaders about working in the community. You know it's really a part of my business DNA to be connected with the community. You know I've been very active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I've been on the Detroit Branch board [Detroit Branch NAACP, Detroit, Michigan] since I was twenty-three years old. I've chaired this dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner] three times. I was the youngest in the history of the dinner to chair the largest sit down dinner in the world. I'm on the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of Southeastern Michigan] board of directors. I felt it was absolutely mandatory that I get involved with that organization because of the significance it played in my life, got me out of the streets, you know two of the male figures that helped me broaden my world were out of the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of Highland Park; Fauver-Martin Club, Highland Park, Michigan]. So I felt that it was really important to give back to it. And where I am now as publisher of the Michigan Chronicle, is you know in large part, a community service seat. You know we're very much a business and we very much try to make profits but at the end of the day, if this organization is not helping people or highlighting people or you know talking about issues of social justice and the like, then we're not doing our job. So I'm very proud of the work that I've done in the community. I think that people know me as an individual that is willing to get involved in causes that help people. In terms of my business career, I'm a risk taker. I've hit some homeruns and I've had some strikeouts and I'm not afraid to swing the bat. So I'm self taught. My dad [Hiram Jackson] was a janitor, so everything that I know as a businessperson I've taught myself. And I've created some great companies and I've done some very interesting things. So I'm excited about the process that I've gone through and the maturity that I now have as a businessperson. So you know there are some individual accomplishments that I'm proud of, but for the most part, I'm really excited that I've been able to develop a process that has gotten me sitting here talking to HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].
Story_ID: 633975
Speaker 1: Well you've come a long way fast, and, but what's next? Do you have a next big plan that you'd like to see reach fruition?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I feel like I'm just getting started in business. I feel like I've been in training you know for twenty-five years and I really feel that the network that I've developed over the last twenty-five years, elected officials, community leaders, CEOs that I've met all around the world over the last twenty-five years have really prepared me for the next twenty-five years. I see Real Times [Real Times Media LLC] as a great platform to build a worldwide you know, black media company, I really do. And I think it can have major impact on public policy and really drive what the future should look like for print media because no one's figured that out. I think we can figure it out and develop a worldwide platform, a news platform that's providing incredible news and information to black people and everybody, not just black people, all over the world. So I see us diversifying into entertainment, marketing and you know there are some other things I'd like to do as well, outside of Real Times Media.
Story_ID: 633976
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I, you know I'm really concerned about the--our ability to work, I mean to be a part of the American capitalist system. You know there are two areas where I think we're really suffering. One is economic development. You know how do we get our young kids to understand that they need to properly prepare themselves to get a good job, to create a business? How do we begin the process very early in their lives to get them to understand you know what preparation they need to have to, you know to become an engineer or to become a university professor, or to become an entrepreneur? You know I travel quite frequently and I speak to kids quite frequently and the one thing that I try to focus on is you know, preparing yourself for the real world and making sure that you have an opportunity to generate income for your family and being a part of this capitalistic world and not just taking from the system but being able to contribute to the system. You know I'm concerned about you know African American health issues as well. You know in this job you get to see the best and the worst of our community and I think right now one of the things that we're really struggling with as a people is just our health, you know with the advent of you know diabetes, high blood pressure and all of these systemic illnesses. You know I see that as a major challenge for our community to really get a better grip on you know our bodies and our health and our mental health and, you know so that we can all live healthier, healthier lives.
Story_ID: 633977
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit about your family. You've got a--at least a son and a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: Sure, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a--you know I'm, I'm married. My wife's name is Kimberly Jackson [Kimberly Blue Jackson]. She was born in East St. Louis [Illinois], went to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] got a degree in finance. And I met her, she was in the--she was living in Virginia actually. We just celebrated our sixteenth--our seventeenth anniversary. Yeah, we just celebrated our seventeenth anniversary and I have two beautiful kids; Hiram Eric Jackson III [Hiram Jackson III], he's sixteen, just turned sixteen this year and Grace, Grace Jackson who is twelve, will be thirteen in September. Some--they're a blessing. And you know when you asked me about what would I have done differently, you know I thought about them, you know because I'm on the road and for all of their lives I've been you know working hard. But I have no regrets for them because you know I, I've--I'm always there, and I make time for them, and, and they keep me sane (laughter). They keep me sane.
Story_ID: 633978
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't touched upon we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Wow, you, you, you've gone all over the place. I mean I think that, I think you hit it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll probably think of something (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: But the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow. I think I want to be remembered as a guy who was not afraid to try new things. Not afraid to try new things, you know not afraid to take risks. I'd like to be remembered as a creator, someone who was innovative and who was able to connect people and to solve difficult problems. I'd like to be remembered as someone who as I mentioned very early in our interview, who was very much willing to help people when they needed help the most and put others' needs in front of my own. I want to be remembered as a great father and a great family man and someone who never quits. I think that people will remember me as a businessperson and a community activist. And hopefully they'll remember me as someone who did whatever he could to make a difference in peoples' lives and organizations that I've worked with and the companies that I've run. I want people to look at me and say, "I never knew that was possible until he did it." And I think that for the most part people will remember me as a fighter and I didn't always do what was popular, but I tried to do what I thought was the right thing and when there was a path that I needed to take, I didn't always take the easy path. I did whatever it took to get where I was trying to go. So--
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Sure. Thank you.
