Story_ID: 20899
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers archives.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Erich Jarvis.  E-R-I-C-H, J-A-R-V-I-S.  And actually, I'll even say, to paraphrase, Erich D. Jarvis.  The 'D' stands for David, D-A-V-I-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born May 6, 1965 in New York Hospital in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a scientist, broadly speaking.  And I'm a neurobiologist, specifically.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is, what is it?  February 20, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are sitting at the Brian Research Building in Duke University in Durham, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 20900
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have some favorite--do I have a favorite food?  Actually I like collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: And a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would say--what's my favorite vacation destination?  I've been all over the world.  The place that I liked the most was Brazil.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, my favorite saying is, "It doesn't matter what you do in life so much as long as you do it well."
Story_ID: 20901
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Valeria Sasha Monk.  That's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's V-A-L-E-R-I-A, Sasha, that's S-A-S-H-A, and then Monk, M-O-N-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now is there a story behind the name Monk, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, Monk, basically, that's my mother's line and they were originally from North Carolina where I reside now, and descended from peoples who were both slaves and not slaves on the Monk plantation in Newton Grove, North Carolina.  And Archibald Monk was the plantation owner.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We were actually related to Thelonious Monk through that line.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a football player named Art Monk.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So Art Monk is also in this family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So is Thelonious Monk like a relative that you all would have known, coming up?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--so my grandfather and Thelonious Monk were contemporaries.  My grandfather was Cole(unclear) Monk, you know, Valeria Monk's father.  And they were already distant relatives by that time.  I did the genealogy, and so they're about fourth cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So did they know each other, you think?
Speaker 2: They knew of each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There are other relatives that are closer, more closely related to Thelonious Monk, who I knew.  I knew them because well, Thelonious is older than me.  He died when I was young.  But, you know, I met his sister, his kids, you know, his half-siblings and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What I call half cousins--because his line comes from a particular Cole and Monk marriage which is different from my grandfather's line, which is another Cole and Monk marriage, back in the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Archibald Monk plantation was in--
Speaker 2: That was in Newton Grove.
Speaker 1: Newton Grove?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the plantation house still sits there.  It was moved.
Speaker 1: This is North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Here in North Carolina, what's called Nouse Cross Roads.  And he was from, well his family was from the Isle of the Skye, Scotland.  They came through Moore County, North Carolina, bought some slaves and set up a plantation.  And he was considered the nicer slave owner, plantation owner, if you want to call it that.  He didn't hit his slaves, so to speak.  Not that slavery could be nice, and he, what he did that was different from the other plantation owners is that he fostered education of the slaves.  So, even after slavery was over he set up a Catholic school.  He was the first person in North Carolina to set up a Catholic school, but he set up a Catholic school where colored people could go to.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, that could be dangerous, advocating slave education.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that--so they, so a lot of the folks there in North Carolina, when I say there, in Newton Grove, he was also part of the legislation of North Carolina, and they didn't actually like what he was doing.
Speaker 1: So he set up a Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yep, he set up a Catholic school and he had part of the Catholic church and school, in which part of it was to educate the Negroes, as they say back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So then some of my relatives--there are pictures back in the 1800's where they're actually on the church wall.
Story_ID: 20902
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's quite a story.  So, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: So my mother was born in New York City.  And that was August 3, 1949.  Is that right, 1949?  Yeah.  I'm going to be embarrassed, I'm forgetting her birthday.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: About how old was she when you were born?
Speaker 2: She was about eighteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: seventeen, eighteen.
Speaker 1: It's probably '47' [1947] or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I'm born in '49' [1949].  I'm thinking I was fifteen when you were born.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So, yeah, so a few years earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Maybe '46' [1946]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know why '49' [1949] is sticking in my head.  No, it can't be '49' [1949].  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll put them both down.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  But you say she was born in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there a story in the family about how the Monks made the move from North Carolina to New York, or was there a movement in middle?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, actually on my mother's side and my father's side--in both cases--his name was James Jarvis, both sets of families, that is their parents and grandparents, or great-grandparents, moved from the south to New York City during the Depression years [The Great Depression], in the 1930s.  So, much like we're having a big problem with the economy now, at that time the Great Depression particularly affected the south quite a bit, and people just left homes and abandoned their homes and came on up to New York and settled mostly in Harlem [New York] and some in Brooklyn [New York].  And so my mother belonged to the cohort, or let's say her mother, Easter Monk, belonged to the cohort of people that settled in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any--well, go ahead, what were you going to say?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would say what happened at that time was kind of what happens with immigrants coming into the United States.  So my grandmother, as I said, her name was Easter Monk.  Her maiden name was Easter Sanders.  She was originally from Selma and Smithville, North Carolina.  And what happened is her older sister went up to New York City, got a job, started making some money.  Then she sent enough money back to get her, some of her younger sisters, who then came up, and they got more jobs and made some more money for them to bring up the rest of the family.  And this is what a lot of immigrants tend to do, you know, whether they be from a U.S. territory like Puerto Rico or from Russia or elsewhere.   And so this is sort of part of that mass migration from the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your grandmother do for a living?
Speaker 2: So my grandmother, she, that's my mother's mother, she actually didn't--well, she worked in a--I forget what kind of business it was.  But she--my goodness--I did all the family genealogy and I haven't thought about--I can see why this is hard.  I haven't thought about this in years.  Ah, I forget who she was working for.  I think it was an advertising company, a black-owned advertising company in New York.  And then she quit that job after she had children, and so she stayed at home raising seven daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what did she do for the ad agency?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: She was a secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, actually I didn't know they had--there was such an agency back in those days.  That's interesting.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather, her husband, he was a bus driver for the transportation authority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he--so I'm telling you from a perspective of a person of a colored family, as I say, colored.  But we're all mixed up with African, Native American and European.  And so my grandmother was dark, darker than I am, and you know, for all intents and purposes might be--you know, someone would look at her and say African-American, but mixed, you could tell she had Indian in her as well.  And my grandfather was light-skinned, lighter than me.  And so, he actually identified himself more as Native American than anything else, Tuscarawas, from North Carolina.  He was mixed with all three races as well.  And so at the bus company, sometimes he would call himself Negro, and they would--but they couldn't see that he was--and so they would actually treat him differently than some of the other employees because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the New York Transit Authority.
Story_ID: 20903
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that are passed down about what New York was like in those days for black people in Harlem, or anything that they, that happened that they talked about?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, one of my aunts, she did work at the Cotton Club.  And that is one of my, one of my mother's sisters who just since passed.  She was part of a dance group.  And my grandmother also danced in different places. And they said Harlem at that time was a fun place to live.  They were swinging a lot in terms of, you know, the swing dance and competitions.  Maybe that's where I got my dance training background from, I don't know.  But what I do remember is they said how hard of a struggle it was to grow up in Harlem and make ends meet, even after coming up from the south.  And I also remember them saying about how, being persons of mixed background, for some of them--some family members are much lighter-skinned than the others.  There was a lot of racial prejudice coming from both sides.  And I also recall when I guess there was a period right before the '60's [1960s] I believe, where drugs hit the scene pretty hard, and I heard that a lot of people were affected in Harlem.  And those are the stories that I remember most, in terms of the tough times.
Speaker 1: Now did your aunt talk about her color being a factor in being a dancer at the Cotton Club, because I've heard that they only chose--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So they only had black people there as performers and white people as the observers.  Yes.  That, you know, what I was told was if you could make money, that was more important than anything else at that time.  Of course, not, you know- (unclear)
Speaker 1: I was asking about the color factor, too, because I've heard that they would hire like light-skinned women to dance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's right, that's right.  Yeah.  So, you know they did have grades of color categories in terms of what you could do, of what you were assigned to do.  And I've heard about those stories as well.  So, it's these kinds of things that I grew up with, that, you know, when I tell my own kids, or the students that I have now, it's hard for them to imagine that I heard about these experiences from my own relatives as I was growing up.
Story_ID: 20904
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother say about growing up, specifically?  I mean, did she have any specific stories about herself and what she aspired to do and what she, you know, the kind of things that happened to her?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So my mother she grew up in the time, particularly the 1960s, where you know, I would say there was a cultural revolution.  And so she grew up fighting for things like world peace and protesting, trying to get the government to change policies about education and the war in Vietnam, for everybody, not just for people of color.  And she sort of passed on that kind of thinking to me, that is, you have to do something in this life that's going to have a positive impact on society.  And so she was part of that whole movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she mention any organizations she was a part of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, her and my father, they did become parts of organizations that had different means of doing things.  So, I'd say I'd consider my mother and her family as sort of the Martin Luther King followers.  And my father's, not his family, but he himself, sort of become more of the Malcolm X, you know, type of more aggressive way of doing things follower.  So my mother became part of a Soka Gakkai [Soka Gakkai International] organization, which is basically a Buddhist organization.  I don't know if you've heard of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's a temple right near the HistoryMakers office.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  Okay.  Yes.  Right, so, it's a Buddhist organization that comes out of Japan but originally, you know, Buddhism began in India.  But nevertheless it's a Japanese influenced version of Buddhism, and I grew up practicing that.  They really pushed this thing of world peace, trying to change the world and no more war and so forth.  My father, in contrast, he joined the Black Panthers in the 1960s and they were more of, as people called them, militant.  I wouldn't call them exactly militant, but they certainly were the type that, you say if people attacked you, you should attack back. I don't, you know, I don't remember my father being militant in that sense.  But I do remember him having meetings in the apartment we lived in, in the Bronx [New York] with Black Panther, you know, members.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I know you--your mother and father got married when she was I guess on the verge of graduating from high school?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah, so they, yeah, so they got married young, just as she was graduating, and had four kids.  I am the oldest.
Speaker 1: I don't want to race through it too fast, but--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: So what high school did she go to?
Speaker 2: She went to the high school for performing arts [High School of Performing Arts, New York, New York] which is where she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even though--she is about a few years younger than he was.  He was born in 1945.  So, my mother is 1947, yes.  Okay, there we go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright.  So, yeah, he was a senior and she was a junior and they met there and then eventually got married.  Although he was already two grades ahead of himself--he had been skipped two grades.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, but, he graduates at fifteen?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 20905
Speaker 1: So, let's go to him right now, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, now give me your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Alright.  So his, my father's name is James Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No middle name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  James Reginald Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born May 28, 1945, also in New York City.
Speaker 1: Now, was he born in Harlem?
Speaker 2: He was born in--no, they didn't live in Harlem [New York] at the time.  They lived in the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was in the Bronx, too?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was in, my mother was born in Harlem.  My father was born in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've traced my father's side back to the early 1800s.  And I guess even some--well, even some parts of that family to the late 1700s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well give us the story.  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: So the Jarvis's, they, it's, they sort of grew up as middle class African-Americans.  And I think it has something to do with them having been the Jarvis part of that lineage, being freed from slavery before slavery was over.  And we haven't found out the reason why.  But--
Speaker 1: Were they slaves in the south, or--
Speaker 2: They were slaves in the south, in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So there's the Norfolk area of Virginia at the coastline there.  There's some, once again, Scot Irish families who had slaves who had the last name Jarvis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the story is similar there in terms of mixtures:  Native American, African-American, European mixtures.  And actually, I think that story is quite common  in the U.S. in general.  So, actually, I mean we can talk about that later, but I've done some work on this genetically.  But, basically, as far back as I can go, let's see, my father--I'll just name off the names.  James Reginald Jarvis, his father is James Hargett Jarvis.  His father was David Jarvis--I mean, sorry, his father was John Henry Jarvis.  Then David Jarvis, then John Henry, Sr., Jarvis.  Okay, so we're four great-grandfathers back from me, alright.  And he was born in Norfolk, Virginia.  He married a woman who was part black, part Cree Indian.  And before Lincoln freed the slaves he moved to Washington, D.C.  And I know, we know he set up some of these Free--there was a bank for African Americans after slavery was over that they could--
Speaker 1: Freedman's Bank.
Speaker 2: Freedman's, that's right, yes.  And I have pictures of him by the way, as well.  And so--
Speaker 1: So did he work for Freedman's Bank, or did he--
Speaker 2: No, he had an account there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was one of the first people to set up an account.  And he then became a Bishop for, oh, I'm not sure if they called it a bishop. What did they call this?  A deacon, sorry.  He became a deacon for a black church in D.C. And--
Speaker 1: So this is a Baptist church, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yeah.  And also he worked in a catering business.  And eventually his sons then set up their own catering business, and partnered with some other people in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 20906
Speaker 1: And just to explain, that's sort of one part of my father's lineage.  And that was on all sides of my family, but that particular lineage was always pushing education a lot.  They felt that education was your way out of the cycle of poverty, or let's say, being disadvantaged.  And then the other side of my father, you know, that is his grandmother.  They also come from North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: What are their names, I mean what was her name?
Speaker 1: So, Martha Greene.
Speaker 2: Is that with a--
Speaker 1: With an 'e' at the end.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So they come out of North Carolina and Virginia, actually.  And there's an interesting story there.  So, Martha Greene's mother, her name was Mary Johnson.  That was her maiden name, at least.  And she, I took care of her when I was a graduate school student in school.  So she lived to be 96 years old, and she had an aunt who also at that time was living, and she was about 106 years old before she died.  And her aunt's mother lived to be 101 years old.  So, there's a long lineage of that part of the family having people who lived into quite, you know, old age.  And I was able to capture a lot of family history from them before any of them died.  And one of the stories that I'm told is Mary Johnson's--let's see--Mary Johnson's great-grandmother, who was caught as a slave in West Africa and brought to Virginia and sold in the slave market along the James River, I think James River in Virginia, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it was by dark-skinned Dutch, sort of mixed dark-skinned Dutch slave owners, who were called the Clufs.  And the Clufs were slave owners even though they weren't white or full-blooded white, because they, their family had fought for George Washington during the Revolutionary War.  And George Washington had made a promise to some slaves that if they were to fight in the war, they would be, the new government would issue their freedom.  They became free and then set up their own slave plantation.  I'm like thinking, can you believe that?  Alright?
Speaker 2: Now, what were these people called?
Speaker 1: Clufs, C-L-U-F-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, I have not verified this story with documents.  This is the oral history that's come down.  I mean I've verified some documents, I've found names and so forth, but to find out they were dark-skinned Dutch, well, meaning that they were black and Dutch, mixed, that were free during the Revolutionary War and became slave owners themselves.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, you know.  I was thinking maybe the--they may not be Dutch in the sense that we think of Dutch now, but they might have been German, as the Germans like to call themselves Dutch (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  That's true.  Yeah, that could be--right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, only the English call them Germans and, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it could be--that might be the--because the Hessian soldiers, you know, were German mercenaries and fought on behalf of, I mean fought for the Revolutionary cause under--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well they fought with the British, though.  That's right.  They fought with the British, so, I don't know.  It's just, it's intriguing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is intriguing.  Yeah, yeah.  I don't know if Cluf is a Dutch name or anything, but it certainly is not an African name, not that I know of.  Uh, so, anyway, the Clufs, they had bought Easter Victoria.  That was her name.  I don't know what her African name was.  And she came over with her mother on a slave ship and was separated eventually from her mother because, I forget, she had gotten married to somebody else on another plantation in Goochland County, Virginia on the Lacey plantation.  Now all of this is coming back to me.  But the sad and the interesting part of the story there is that eventually, you know, they had children and she--and her mother had children with somebody else who was--let me backtrack.  Easter Victoria was eventually separated from her mother.  And her mother gave her a pillow of a type of embroidery or style that they make in the country of Africa where they came from, and just told her to keep this, this is from your homeland, your home territory, and to keep it with you at all times.  And she passed that pillow down onto her son, who was the grandfather of my great-grandmother, okay.  And that son, eventually he was separated from his mother, who was Easter Victoria.  And after the Civil War, she came looking for her son, because she was sold to an owner in New Orleans by the Clufs.  And she came walking all the way up from New Orleans to Goochland County, Virginia by horse buggy or, you know, hitching rides wherever she could hitch a ride on a horse and buddy, and by foot, looking for her son.  She's an old lady now, after the Civil War is over.  They couldn't find him there.  They said he moved up to Fairfax, Virginia after the war was over, and was living there.  She eventually found him, and he could hardly remember her except for the pillow he had.  And that's like one of these touching stories in the family, that after so many years of being separated, he finally meets this adult woman that gave him this pillow from his home country after being separated for many years, and now he's an adult man.  So, I've been looking for that pillow.  Nobody knows what happened to it in the family, but it had been around at least until the early 1900s.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We're going to pause here for a second.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 20907
Speaker 1: If you don't mind, I can tell you, like in probably less than five or ten minutes, four quick stories about all of this.   And then I've got all my, this whole family genealogy set up, or things that I think have affected me in my generation in my family, in some of the stories that have come down.  And one of them is here in North Carolina on my mother's side.   So, my grandmother Easter, her mother and father's line--we were told that her grandfather--his name was Boyett Lee in Newton Grove, North Carolina.  And Boyett Lee's parents were Igbo from West Africa.  We think they were Igbo because we were told they were very tall African people and they came from Nigeria, and they were brought on a slave ship here to North Carolina, first through the Caribbean and then up to North Carolina.  And I forget exactly where, but somewhere near Fayetteville, they were brought off the ship and they heard about what was happening over here.  And when they saw what was happening about a third of the people got, you know, got up and walked away from the beach, back into the water and drowned themselves, rather than be enslaved here.
Speaker 2: Now that--
Speaker 1: Now I've heard this story, I've heard this story several times.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the story of--there's a place called Igbo Landing near--it's near Jekyll Island, Georgia.  It's near St. Simons, and there's a place they call Igbo Landing where they tell a similar, a very similar story.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: A story just like that where they walked into the water.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting.  I wonder if this is multiple stories or one story being told through, you know, through some of the descendents of that time--they're actually telling it in different ways because, you know, with oral history, some things get mixed up.  A guy named Johnny Bryant told me this, who was 82 years old about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: Right.  But yeah, this place is called Igbo's Landing.  It's either on St. Simon's or Sea Island near Jekyll Island.  And I was at Jekyll Island when I found out about it.  I went over to St. Simon's at the Sea Island and they said Igbos landed around here and they, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So if you look it up, you may find exactly--it might not be the very same story, but it's something that may have happened more than once.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So it's these kind of stories that get passed on that make me realize, you know, once you dig you can find some things.  I mean, people are passing now, so I don't know how much more the generation--my kids or my grandkids, would be able to find things out if they didn't ask these questions of the elders.
Speaker 2: And there's a couple of children's books with that theme, with that story of the people walking back to Africa.  I mean walking into the ocean to get back.
Speaker 1: I'm curious if this is something that happened multiple times, or--I got to look this up.  Now the Clufs are in this (laughter).   Another story that brought me back to some, you know, some African roots, was my grandfather James Jarvis.  His sister who just died a few months ago, the last one of the family, Irene Jarvis, she told me that when she was living with her mother in Brooklyn--I mean in the Bronx, sorry-that her mother woke her up in the middle of the night one time.  This was when she was about maybe seven to ten years or so.  She's the youngest of those 14 children, actually.  And so she would, her mother woke her up in the middle of the night one day and telling her she has to tell her something about what her father told her and his mother told him to never forget.  And that is Yoruba, that something about your peoples is Yoruba.  And the way she pronounced it, it wasn't quite like I'm saying now.  And my aunt did not know what that meant, nor did her mother know what that meant.  Back in the 1920s to '30s [1930s], whenever, I forget, this happened.  It had to be the 1930s.  She died at 84 years old.  Okay, I can't remember any exact dates.  Until in the 1960s, late 1960s, a cultural revolution was occurring and a lot of people were going back to Africa to try to find their roots.  And my aunt discovers Yoruba is actually a group of peoples in Africa.  And it seemed that this one word had been passed on down, but in a different pronunciation, for four generations, from the 1800s on to, you know, her telling me this story.  You know, I thought that was pretty fascinating.  Now, one day I'll have to do some genetics and see how true that holds up for that line in the family.
Speaker 2: Right.  The Yoruba civilization was big...
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: ... in the 19th Century, with cities of 200,000 people, and, you know...
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: ...going--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean it's a lot to, you know--a lot of history there.
Story_ID: 20908
Speaker 1: And so there's one more story that sort of affects, you know, why did I get involved in all of this, the family genealogy and how it affects what I do today in my everyday life.  It's that, so I grew up in a family that--like I said earlier, there's a mixture of different ethnic groups and races, and I think that's the case for many people.  But there's a lot of discrepancy.  There's a lot of debates about somebody trying to pass for one thing but not being proud of some other part of their ancestry, not being proud of their blackness or their African or Native, or whatever.  And part of that story, part of what happened, and I think it's happening even today in society, is built in the following story.  Back in the early part of this, the last century, 1900s, one of my grandmother's aunts, Easter Monk's aunts, her name was Della Blackman--  she was mixed with Tuscarawas Indian and African, and part white, like the rest of us, but she had more of the stronger Indian ancestry.  And she was married to a white guy.  But she was light enough to pass.  But her sister, darker than me, wasn't.  And this is what happens when you get genetics mixed up like that.  And so, she was invited to go to a picnic with her family.  And they, and what I mean they, not so much the family, but the friends of the white husband, said "If you go, right, you're being supportive of that type, that side of your family.  You should disown them.  And if you do go, some trouble's going to happen."  And she did, and on the way there, at least this is the story that I'm told, that it's on the way there, the Ku Klux Klan members, as I understand it, kidnapped her, raped her and killed her, as an example of what happens when you disobey them.  Now, I don't know if that's the exact version of the way this story has happened, but it's certainly the version that got passed on down.  Another part of that family story is that my aunt Pauline told me--so this is my grandmother Easter's sister.  She told me that her grandmother, that is the sister of the one that got killed by the Ku Klux Klan, was told that when the census takers come around and asking, you know, for your names--back then they would knock door to door and take census records.  And they would ask for your name, who lives with you, and so forth.  For those who are native, don't say you're Indian, because you'll be killed, alright.  All Indians were supposed to be removed from North Carolina and brought over to Arizona on the Trail of Tears.  And so she--her mother was an Indian woman who married my grandmother's grandfather--would be Igbo, okay.  So that's the Indian and African mix there.  And she was, "Don't say you're Indian, say you're a person of color, or Negro." Because according to Andrew Jackson's law, starting from the Trail of Tears all the way back to the 1800s, if you're Indian and on land living in North Carolina, you can be shot and killed.  And these kinds of discrepancies lead to what I consider sort of identity mix-up in today's peoples and people of color.  That is, you're either white or black, alright.  There's nothing in between.  You can't belong to both, you can't actually accept all of who you are, you have to accept this or that.  And if you do something else, it's non-existent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, I think that's what we can get out of all of that, really.  And that's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To be an expert on it is to--I mean, I don't what you have to do (laughter).  But, that's what-
Story_ID: 20909
Speaker 1: So I'm going to jump full steam ahead just to say that the resolution to this is that people are people, and you know color evolved mainly for either protection from the sun, or Vitamin D degeneration, from UV light.  It had nothing to do with, very little to do with preferences and you know, superiority and inferiority and so forth.  And what we'll find in our genomes when we sequence them, is that we'll have segments of parts of us that come from African ancestry, from European or from Asian or from Native that goes way back that we don't--there's been more mixtures going on for many generations, even within Africa.  There are many peoples who are more divergent from each other than different, let's say than Indian, but what I mean by Indian, in India and European populations are.  That is, the ethnic difference is bigger for some people in Africa.  And so, what all this has taught me in terms of thinking about diversity and race and so forth, is that we're not going to get rid of this, what I call society's disease, until we understand the real biology behind what makes up ethnicity and what makes up our genomes to determine the different ethnic groups that we are.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I know you weren't asking all that, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that does--I mean that's an answer from a scientist who's investigated it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 20910
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but that's good.  So now I want to say, I'm trying to catch up with your father.  Okay, with your father's specific story, then, you know, he's born and raised in the Bronx, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And now he has a very interesting story that resounds throughout your story.  I mean, you kept, it keeps coming back.  So tell us about what--now how did your father grow up, and what did he want to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my father grew up mostly in the Bronx.  So it was a small nuclear family--him, his parents and his sister.  My father was the oldest.  And his father was kind of like the patriarch of the family who was going to, you know, who was basically trying to lead the family into you know, a more prosperous future for them where they came from.  And my father was sort of supposed to be the emulation of that emancipation, and that's how his father treated him.  And so my father had a lot of pressure to not only be good in whatever he does and so forth, but be the best.  And I think that pressure was good and was bad as well.  So, and I have to say, though, my father had his own motivations as well.  So he did well in school.  My grandmother really, not only helped him out in school, but she home tutored him as well as having, you know, the school system tutor him.  And he became interested in science.  And at a young age, I forget the exact age, he did say something like ten or twelve, he tried to re-derive Einstein's theory of relativity.  So, he was getting heavily into physics and math at that time.  And then he went to high school and graduated from the High School of Performing Arts.  So he also had an artistic side to him.  He was a singer and a piano player.  But during that path from elementary school to high school, he skipped grades twice, once in elementary school and the second time in junior high school.  And in doing so, I think the second skip in junior high school, they transferred him.  They didn't keep him in the same school, they transferred him from a mostly black, or minority school, in New York City to a mostly white public school.  Both were public schools.  And this was an experiment to try to de-segregate the schools in New York City, even though officially they're not segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he was at the High School of Performing Arts [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: He was at the High School of Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: Is that where he was transferred from, to the other school?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So, in junior high school is when he was transferred from one school to another.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So, before he got to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: So this happens at a time where I mentioned he was skipped twice, once in elementary and once in junior high, and then he went to high school after that.
Speaker 1: So he was like physically less mature than the other students?
Speaker 2: He was definitely less mature.  He felt that after he was put into the other public school with mostly white students, that he was treated less than.  Before, he was treated a lot more than.  He felt the teachers were being harder on him and grading his exams harder because of discrimination, just pure--someone felt like he shouldn't be there.  And I'm hearing all of this from him and from the family and so forth, and thinking, this is New York City back in the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s].  But I guess, I mean, you know, racism was everywhere.  But you just hear it's not as prevalent up in the north, and here I'm being told these stories.  So, I know that had a big effect on him.  And at the same time, because he had skipped two grades, the family sort of put him up on a pedestal.  You know, they called him Butch, that was his nickname.  And, you know, "Butch is the genius in the family, and he's going to, you know, be somebody we can talk about and be proud about and so forth."  But after he graduated high school, a lot of things started going down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what high school did he go to?
Speaker 2: He went to the High School of Music and Art [Harlem, New York].  And so he was a music major there as well as, you know, did a lot of science classes.
Speaker 1: This isn't the same one that you attended?
Speaker 2: So I attended the High School of Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: Right, that's the one on St. Nicholas?
Speaker 2: Now it's on St. Nicholas.  Before it was on 46th Street, between Broadway and Avenue of Americas.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So they had two high schools.  Music and Art up in Harlem and the one downtown near Broadway, the High School of Performing Arts, started by LaGuardia when he was mayor of New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright.  So--go ahead.
Speaker 1: So, he was at the one that was down in the Theatre District?
Speaker 2: He was up at the one in Harlem.
Speaker 1: He was in Harlem, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's where he went to school at?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the difference with Performing Arts is that--well, Music and Arts was all music and regular academics.  Performing Arts was music, dance and acting, plus academics as well.  But I don't think the academics was as robust as it was at Music and Art.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Music and Art is right next to the City College of New York, up on the hill?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, yes.  So, you know the city area well, yes.  So, exactly.  So it's next to City College.  It was a whole educational experience in that neighborhood.  It's not too far away from Columbia, although there is some distance there.
Speaker 1: It's not too far from Schaumburg Center.
Speaker 2: That's right, Schaumburg, that's right.
Speaker 1: Two blocks away, I think?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yep, yep.  So, I actually auditioned for both.  I got into Music and Art and in the Performing Arts.  But at the time I got into Music and Art, some of the teachers, who are still there--these were my mother's teachers and my father's teachers at Music and Art--when I auditioned they were still there.  And some of them suggested I go to Performing Arts because they felt, and I'll say this on tape because it happened, that the quality of the education was decreasing there.  And the school later closed down, but they merged the two together.  But the quality of education was decreasing there, and that I should go to Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, back to your father.  Your father goes, he goes to the one in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he goes to Music and Art in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He sings and plays the piano, too?
Speaker 2: That's right.  He sings and plays the piano, and he also played the saxophone.  So he was multi-talented in that degree.  I would say probably his best forte was singing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is--let's go back to him being skipped like that.  I mean, was he a very, was he a large person?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't too tall.  He was on the hefty side.  I'm on the thin side.  So we're about the same height now.  I know you can't see my height, but I'm 5'11, I think, not 10 to 11.  So, he was about that height.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, like two years makes a lot of difference with kids in terms of their sizes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he's, he may be the smartest person, but he's with people a lot bigger.
Speaker 2: So, he's definitely shorter than his classmates, who were two years older, yeah.  And I really do think that had an effect on him.  I think he even expressed sometimes that he wondered if it was a good thing he had skipped two grades.  So, but after high school, he did decently well in high school, got into city college and went there as a chemistry major and learned to become a chemist.  And this was during the mid-1960s, from like '65' [1965], '67' [1967].  And in '68' [1968], he dropped out.  And for those who know about history, they know '68' [1968] was sort of an anti-establishment year.  There were lots of universities where the students were protesting and so forth.  And so he followed this crowd "Turn out, drop out."  I forget the exact saying that he told me, but it was a popular saying back then.  And he got involved in drugs, you know, more involved with the Black Panthers as well, and actually was then synthesizing drugs himself.  He had--because he was training to become a chemist.  So he knew how to synthesize drugs, and he wasn't so much into selling them or trying to make money or anything like that.   What he was doing was, he felt that with the drugs, he could take his mind and transplant it to another time and dimension.  He was a physics major as well--and to open his mind up to other realities.  So now by this time I was born, right.  I'm anywhere from three to six years old, but I can remember some of these details.
Story_ID: 20911
Speaker 1: Now let's go back again to, is there a story about how your parents met?  Or how they noticed each other and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Wow, I don't know exactly how they met.  They met at High School of Music and Art.  They were both there.  But in terms of what brought them together, I don't remember.  I think it was one of his best friends, who is a friend of my mother. But it was clear to me that they liked each other enough.  They wanted to get married and so forth.  It wasn't a relationship that I think had a lot of turmoil in the beginning, although I think it later did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Obviously.  They separated.
Speaker 1: Did her parents approve of him and vice-versa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the parents of each of the families were quite supportive.  They did like each other.  So, later on it became--most of the families, both sides of the families were against my father, because they felt that he just failed.  But up until that time, he was seen as some protege, you know, that they were happy for my mother to meet him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, now, but okay, when you consider their dispositions, their personalities, their talents and looks, even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question.  I'm going to cheat and almost say it's 50-50 (laughter).  Ah, but I would say if I had to break it down in specific areas, I take after, let's say the positive things that they had, I take after them in different ways.  So I think I look more like my mother.  And I think probably many guys do, you know.  But I can see, looking at a picture of my father yesterday, I can see a lot of features at his age that I'm now, and I'm in my forties, that oh, wow, there's something familiar there in terms of looks.  But mostly I think I look like my mother.  And in terms of my curiosity about the world and science, and sometimes leading my science on the edge, that is definitely like my father.  So, but I know that I don't have his temper.  He had a temper, which was a bad thing for him.  So, and you know what, I don't, I actually did not get that from either of them.  I got that--my grandfathers were the calmer ones.
Story_ID: 20912
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now so your father, now he's from what I understand, he had like a drug-induced schizophrenia?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, he had to struggle with that most of his life, then?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So during that time during the '60's [1960s] where he was experimenting with himself with different drugs, I was told later on by a psychologist that he used to--see, after, you know, this is way into the future--that they felt he had drug-induced schizophrenia because he would hear voices, he would have the paranoid type of schizophrenia.  But I don't understand how they diagnosed these symptoms.  They say it was drug-induced as opposed to something genetic, or some other kind of developmental thing.  And one of the reasons why is that they also felt that it happened at a time he was heavily using drugs, and before that, he didn't have these symptoms.
Speaker 1: When I read it, I wondered too, because I know that the schizophrenics that I know, the people that--children that are schizophrenic, it manifests itself in their late teens or early adulthood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is the time that he--
Speaker 2: Well, this would be, let's see, this would be around six or something, so he had to be in his mid-20s when this happened.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: That's as far as I know.
Speaker 1: I think you wonder how they know--
Speaker 2: I did wonder, and being a scientist I like to know what the evidence is.   And I remember asking the psychiatrist about this, that, you know, who do you use to see--and what was the evidence for it?   And some of the things I was told is that the records are private.  I was asking this person after my father had died.  And the other thing was that, you know, it was just the timing and the particular types of symptoms that he had.
Speaker 1: That's not much of an answer.
Speaker 2: Right, no, no.
Speaker 1: But, okay--
Speaker 2: I can see, you know, maybe some things happening.  I mean, what I was about to say, when I was a child and he started getting into the drug scene, well at that time they had these what they call reel to reel tapes.  And so, you know, he would sit me on the floor and, you know, cross-legged style, and he would sit on the other side of this reel to reel tape with a microphone.  I would have to hold the microphone and he would take drugs.  Cocaine or whatever, LSD, and something that he synthesized himself, and I was to observe him and be his observer to find out if what he says, does something happen to his body differently before and after, and he would put it on tape.  So basically he's experimenting with himself and I'm there being the observant scientist so to speak.  It's kind of ironic and humorous in a way, and also it's kind of, you know, tragic that someone's doing that to themselves.  As a child I didn't think that, you know.  And it was also dangerous having that around the house, because I remember as a child one day I went through his pants and took out whatever was in a plastic bag, white powder, and started eating it.  I don't know what it was, but certainly after that, I started having what I now realize to be hallucinations.  And so I remember seeing an egg come out of the wall and then get bigger and bigger and pop open and then say "Hi, I'm Big Bird."  And I screamed, yelling for my parents and then they found out that I had eaten these drugs, and then you know, he hits me actually as a result.  Then my mother gets upset because you know, why should you hit your child.  You shouldn't have left these drugs around for him to get to.  And so, I know whatever they were, whatever it was that he was taking, it was potent enough to make you hallucinate.
Story_ID: 20913
Speaker 1: Okay. So now, do you have, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were mentioning that before.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what's the order?
Speaker 2: So I have four full brothers and sisters and one half.  And the four are from my father who I was just talking about, and my mother.  So, I'm the oldest.  My next brother, Marcus Jarvis is the second oldest, born a year after me.  And then the next two are twins, Victor Jarvis and Monique Jarvis, born two years after us, which was 1968.  So my mother and father basically had four children in pretty rapid succession when they were in their early twenties.  And then my mother later re-married a number of years later--and her husband Gerald McCall--and they're still together now.  And I think they married around about the time I was 18 or so, and they had a child.  That's my youngest brother, Gerald McCall.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  We're going to pause here again for a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 20914
Speaker 1: Alright, so you've named your brothers and sisters.  And so, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My earliest childhood memory is being in a bassinet at 1816 Andrews Avenue in the Bronx, the house that my grandfather on my father's side had, by the front door.  I don't know why, but you know, it's very rarely--I've looked this up a few years ago--that it is possible to have an infant child memory.  And I remember some family relatives--I can remember my grandmother and mother standing over me, and that is about all I can remember at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, where did you all live, where were you, where was the family living when you were born?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my mother and father were living with my, his parents in the Bronx, okay, in the house in the Bronx that they bought during the early 1960s.  Yeah, exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Was that like a New York brownstone type building?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's what they call a townhouse.  It has an upper floor and a bottom floor.  And I guess when you ask me these questions I realize I have so much history that I can talk about, because I've digged it all up.  And I don't remember all the details of everything, but all of them have some strange stories or, you know, crazy stories.  Like, that house that they bought, my grandfather was the first African-American to buy a house in this community in the Bronx back in the early '60s [1960s].  This was on Andrews Avenue near Tremont and Burnside.
Speaker 1: Now, he worked for the post office?
Speaker 2: He worked for the post office, that's right.  So after he got discharged from the war in the Navy, in World War II, he went to work for the post office.  He used the GI Bill to get an associate's degree, alright.  Not many people did that back then.  And then he got a position at the post office.  And so he bought this house, where eventually I was born into.  And I was told--so most of the community at that time was, all the community at that time was white, mostly Jewish.  And they did not want a black man buying a house.  And so he was moving from some other part of the Bronx on Third Avenue, mostly a black neighborhood, to this white neighborhood after getting a good job at the post office.  And so he was ready to pay the owner the top price.   And after the other people in the block got word that he was buying the house, that a black man was buying the house, they tried to prevent him from buying it.  And how they tried to prevent him from buying it is that they all were trying to get together to buy the house themselves, alright.  But they didn't want to give the owner the price that my grandfather was going to give them.  And the owner...  Well he had to sell, and money is money.  He sold it to my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after that I was told then what happened was white flight.  At least that's the term that's told me, told to me.  And so a lot of people started moving out.  And that made--the whole neighborhood in the Bronx, by the time I became a child running around the street playing there, it was mostly Dominican or Puerto Ricans and African-American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With a few trailing white Jewish families that stayed behind, who were very engaged in the community.  So it's not like they were afraid of everybody--and very good friends with my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So the question was--that's where I lived.  That's where I was born into.
Speaker 1: Well, describe your neighborhood.  And what were some of the sights and smells and sounds of growing up?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, well my parents were quite mobile, so it's hard to give you one specific location.  I could--there are three locations I grew up in.  I have to put it that way.  One is in the Bronx that I just described, alright.  And the other is in Harlem where they moved to for a few years up until I was six years old.  So that was right after the Bronx.  And the other--and then they got divorced.  And after that time, after six years old, most of my time was spent in Queens with my mother's parents.  And then as a teenager when I went to high school, I came back to the Bronx house.  And then--so what were the sights and smells?  Those three communities were all different from each other.  The Bronx community was sort of semi-residential.  So this was one block in the Bronx where there were actually houses, not whole buildings.  And it became quite dangerous because this was during the '70s [1970s] when the South Bronx was on its downfall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember--
Speaker 2: Lots of burned out buildings all around us.  Gunshots.  But good food, you know, in the local bodegas, and good memories.  I mean, going to my grandfather's house in the Bronx to me was like going to heaven, because of the way he treated us.  He scolded us, he pampered us, he pushed us hard to do well.  But, you know, it was--so even though all these negative things were going on around us, it was quite a positive atmosphere community there.  Alright, and the house--so you're talking--we had furniture in the house all the way from the 1800s that my great-grandmother got.  She inherited it from slave times from her ancestors, and things that she got from some rich folks that she worked for.  So this is 1920s furniture.  She worked for the Roosevelts for a few years before they became president, as a maid.  And then she worked for a family called the Goodstats, who were into making boats.  So, and then my grandfather had his own 1950s, and then eventually 1960s, and then '70s [1970s] furniture.  So that's kind of what I grew up in.  In Harlem, I was there for only a brief period of time, a few years.  And that was a building, a high rise, filled with many, many people--playgrounds in the middle of the building on each floor.  It was sort of an experimental community for people of, you know, minorities or whatever they were called back then.  So, and that's on 135th, 145th, somewhere between those two streets.  There was a playground, you had to watch out for taxis in the street.  And then in Queens where I spent most of my time--this was in Corona, Queens--  it was more rural, a big backyard, lots of grass, more trees, and which later then became mostly a Dominican, Italian and African-American neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what were some of the sights and sounds of those places?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds--
Speaker 1: And smells--and smells.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I would say my memory of the Bronx is more of an industrial type of smell.  Lots of cars, kids playing in the street.  That's, you know, in Harlem it's similar, but in Queens the sights were more, we felt like we were more like in the country area at that time than we were in the major city in terms of sights.  And in terms of smells, everything I remember about Queens is my grandmother's good Southern cooking, you know.  I mean, that's the best smell I can remember--the collard greens, the sweet potato pie, potato salad and you know, you name it.
Story_ID: 20915
Speaker 1: Now, your parents split up when you were like six years old?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: 1971, '72' [1972], yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have much memory of what happened?  Or what do you remember about it?
Speaker 2: My father started becoming abusive to us and to my mother.  And, you know, and I don't mind talking about this because I think people really need to know about, you know, these kinds of things that happen in people's lives.   And they can have a negative effect or you can try to turn it around to something positive.  But, so, my father was working, I think, two jobs and trying to go to school at City College with four kids.  You know, as soon as the twins are born in 1968, he drops out.  He's struggling with drugs, and I'm not giving him any excuses, but he just, I can tell, he was getting abusive, when one time for instance they were having a meeting, that is, the Black Panthers and my father were having a meeting.  And it was getting late and my mother put us to bed.  And so we had a three bedroom apartment in Harlem.  And so I remember they were making a lot of noise and laughing, and my mother asked them to calm down and be quiet.  And they're drinking and getting drunk--who knows--taking drugs too, maybe.  So, my father gets upset at my mother for complaining about them making too much noise, and then takes a stick and hits her.  And she starts to cry.  And I heard her crying, and I go out and run out and tell him to stop it, stop hitting her, you know, and so forth.  And she tells me to go back in my room, not to see this.  I mean, eventually she got them out of there.  But the fact that he was projecting this kind of dominant male--I'm the male of the family and you're embarrassing me in front of all these guys here who are, you know, who are the wave of the future for the Black Panther movement and our freedom in this country and so forth, and you're messing it up.  You know, that kind of thing.  So that--one time he hit me so hard after I think I had been through some of his drugs--oh, I know what I did.  I threw out clothes out of the window, you know from the 17th floor or whatever.  And me and my brother were just throwing them out of the window because we wanted to see how long it'll take to drop down to the bottom of the ground.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were measuring your--
Speaker 2: Right.  To me it was another experiment (laughter).  And so I guess one of the security guards found the clothes and saw us throwing it out the window and tracked down the building number.  And my brother and I were alone.  We probably shouldn't have been left alone as kids at that young age.  And my father comes back and, you know, "I heard about it."  And then he hits us.  And he hit me so hard one time that my mother had to take me to the hospital.  And they said that they think my spinal cord had slightly moved, and for whatever reason--this is a story that she's later telling me when I'm a teenager at a Buddhist meeting--she's saying for whatever reason, they said I was going to be retarded, or mentally retarded as a result.  So, you know, fortunately I wasn't, or at least I hope I didn't become--you know, maybe I'm some other reality (laughter).
Speaker 1: We won't tell Duke.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yes (laughter). So, these kinds of things just kept pushing him further and further.  And so then one day--my mother explained the story later--but I remember it, I just didn't know all the details.  My father had gotten my mother involved into Buddhism, into Soka Gakkai Buddhism.  And--but he eventually didn't like it.  But she actually took hold of that and it became part of her, and she still practices it to this day.  At that time he told her he, you know, wasn't happy with what's going on, that they're taking up all of her time and so forth.  It's either them or him.  And with everything else going on, she made the decision, it's them.  And so I remember she called up his mother and said she wants to leave.  They came and they picked us up, this is in the Harlem apartment.  And I can see my mother and my grandmother crying about this.  And that is my father's mother.   So, she came to pick us up, the kids, to stay with them for a few days while my mother gets herself settled into some other place.  And why I remember this day so distinctly is that my brother Mark, who is very hyper-active, as we were all leaving the apartment, his finger gets stuck in the door and gets slightly crushed, you know, at the edge of the door and the door frame.  And he had to go to the hospital.  And then the rest of us went with my grandmother to stay with her.  And from that time on is the memory I have of the separation.
Story_ID: 20916
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what happened--well maybe we'll just--we'll pick up your father's story later.  Because he, at this point he just kind of--does he drop off the scene or is he still involved?
Speaker 2: Yes, so that separation really affected him a lot.  From there on he, you know, they went to court.  I have the court records.  I've read them, and so forth, and he was being kind of belligerent in court.  And it's as if, you know--I kind of talked to him about it later when I saw him many years later--that he felt he was losing control of everything.  He was losing control of his education, of his life, of school, and I mean of job and his family.  And he basically was pulling at straws, even in violent ways sometimes, you know, by hitting us.  Just pulling at straws, of always to try to keep things together in a nice way--and a mean way.  And it just wasn't happening.  And he felt that part of it is his fault and part of it is part of the society he lives in.  That's my whole summary of his whole interpretation of what was going on at that time.
Speaker 1: So he was perplexed in some ways?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was perplexed.  And he did feel, whether it was true or not, I mean, he did feel that part of it had to do with him being a person of color, of just not being able to get--if he does bad, it's because he has disadvantages.  If he does well, then uh, you know he feels--like those who don't want to see him go far, like the teachers who were trying to be hard on him in school, to grade his exams harder than others--that he can't have it, one way or the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At least that was his perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you all didn't see him for awhile?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So after that, my grandfather kind of disowned him.  And he lived with my grandfather for awhile, but he just tuned in and out.  He couldn't keep a stable job--and this is also the social worker thinking that he might have also had a drug-induced schizophrenia by this time.  And eventually he became homeless.  And all in that time I would see him maybe about once or anywhere from one to three times per year, from the ages of six up until, six until nine.   Because when I was nine years old, we lived with my father, I mean my grandfather, in the Bronx for one year because my mother just couldn't handle us economically.  So, she sent us to our grandparents.  My father was living in the basement at that time.  And his temper got the better of him, and one day--there are four generations here.  My brother Mark, who like I said, is hyper-active, got my great-grandmother upset.  My father yelled at my great-grandmother, who's--I'm sorry I'm telling you this story.  I don't know if you're--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, go ahead.
Speaker 2: My father yelled at my great-grandmother.  She got upset at him, and my father--then my--his father got upset, and they had a physical fight, basically.  And I think at that time, actually having a physical fight with him, he just gave up.  He just felt my son is not the child that I wanted him to be, and basically asked him to leave.  And from that time on, he just went around to different places and eventually became homeless.  And so by the time, from the age of nine years old until I was fourteen in high school, I only saw him intermittently, one to three times per year.  And then I sought him out.  I can't figure out how I found him.  When I was in high school he was homeless.  But he met me, and we chatted sometimes, and that's when I began to really find out more about it him.
Story_ID: 20917
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Alright, so, but basically then it's just you and your mother and your siblings together, your four brothers and sisters together living at your grandfather's house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, grandfather's, that's right.  And then with the other grandparents in Queens, sometimes on our own.  We lived in many places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I heard that early on in life you wanted to be a magician.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So when did this start?  Did this start before school or after school?
Speaker 2: This started when, oh, I can't remember when.  I was quite young. Sometime probably after seven years old or something like that.
Speaker 1: Well, let me start with school first then.  What's the first school that you went to?
Speaker 2: The first school I can remember going to was in the Bronx, not because I lived in that grandparent's house in the Bronx, but because my mother lived in the Bronx for about a year.  And so I have the address at home.  I can't remember it, but it was an elementary school, of course.
Speaker 1: Did it have a number, like a school with a number, like they have in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes, they do.  It was PS something, public school, something.  I know I went to Public School 143 after that.  This one I can't remember.  The numbers 143 and 42 stick out in my head, uh--
Speaker 1: Okay, well don't agonize over that.  I just wanted to--you know-people name the school.  Okay, so, now had you received any schooling at home prior to going to--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you go to kindergarten or just start first grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember--boy I really can't remember why--there was something that was troubling when I went there.  So I remember them telling me that I wasn't advanced enough, that I had some problems, and that they would have--they were considering keeping me back a grade, alright.  And that was shocking to my mother, and she was trying to help me read and so forth.  And I don't remember having problems except maybe it's possible that I might have been more of a quiet, withdrawing kid because you know, a lot of things were happening, and I remember that being quite a difficult time.  But I wasn't left back.  But I just remember the teacher saying that I had some disabilities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's kind of--I'd like to go to see those teachers now and ask them what do they really think now, being a professor at Duke.  (laughter).  But that's my first memory of elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--
Speaker 2: But I think it was, they wanted me to go into kindergarten instead of first grade.  I think that's what it was.  But my mother insisted they keep me in the first grade.
Speaker 1: So did you like school?
Speaker 2: In general, I would say yes.  There were some challenges later on. But I actually liked reading, I liked learning.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The challenges I had later on was going into public schools in Queens--we were getting older.  I have no idea why and I still can't figure out why to this day, but my brothers and sisters and I, we would get picked on a lot.  And I think maybe we were the more passive types or--I have no idea why.  But the bullies found a bully, a bullier.  So I remember one time, you know, a whole group of kids on the bus had, you know, basically were just beating me up one time.  And as a result, we end up having to take the--the school was paying for us to take public transportation to the school to avoid that from happening again on the bus, until the following year.  And I think some of it has to do with, we were brought up to--I don't know--not to chastise people, not to put people down, to speak properly, if you want to, so to speak.   And so the type of vocabulary that I was using wasn't the type of vocabulary that my classmates were using.  And I think they just, to me they were just seeing this as a difference that they didn't like.  And then the teachers would say, you know, good things about me in the class, which I don't think they liked either.
Speaker 1: So you were getting decent grades in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at some point I started getting decent grades, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Alright, so, now you said you got interested in magic around age seven.  Now what prompted the magic interest?
Speaker 2: I guess one of my mother's, one of my aunt's husband--so one of my uncles, Bruce Cristburg (sp).  He was basically into magic, and so he got me and one of my cousins, Sean, his name is Sean Robin, interested in doing this.  And so uh, for me I just became fascinated with two things.  Tricking people into thinking something is happening that's not.   Alright, and the other is figuring how things work.  So I would say magic was actually sort of my first step into becoming a scientist.  Because in order to figure out how to create an illusion, or how to pick a lock, I had to take it apart.  And so my cousin Sean and I, we would spend hours and hours in the basement inventing new magic tricks, picking apart locks and rigging things.  And then we combined that with--particularly my mother's family, but part of my father's family--but in my mother's family the ambitions that were bestowed upon us was to be famous performing artists, to make it big, so to speak, as a musician or some other type of performing artists.  So what do we do?  Well, we start putting on magic shows for the neighborhood and charging 25 cents, you know, for the kids.  And we did have a showing of kids in the block, you know, once every four or five months or so, putting on these magic shows.
Speaker 1: Well what was your signature trick?
Speaker 2: My signature trick actually was escaping from ropes--getting tied up, and escaping very quickly right in front of their eyes.  And it was hard for people to figure out how we were doing that.  And then others were making things disappear behind my hands.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had some performances--did you perform for the family and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So every Christmas the family would get together, you know, as many families do.  But we would put on these family shows.  So all my cousins--there are 12 of us at that time, would do a talent show.  And we'd invite all the family and put up the chairs and so forth.  And one of my cousins would sing, another would dance, and my cousin and I, Sean, would do our magic performance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you still follow magicians now?
Speaker 2: I actually don't.  No, I haven't done so since high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: Houdini was my favorite.  He died before I was born, so we were going to be the next Houdinis.  That was our goal.
Story_ID: 20918
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now at some point you get--I don't want to go too fast, but at that some point you get interested in dance.  Now how did this happen?  Now this is in grade school, right?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I moved to Hartford, Connecticut.  My mother left New York City.
Speaker 1: How old are you at this point?
Speaker 2: So I'm doing magic performances and so forth from the ages of around seven years old until, actually until sixteen years old.   But there's a period of time there where right at the end of junior high school--so I had to be like, twelve, thirteen years old--my mother moved to Hartford, Connecticut, and I moved thereafter with her.   And she gets a job at American Airlines, uh, you know, booking tickets, receiving phone calls, you know, customer service.  And so she re-marries there.  And so I'm no longer with my cousins, and my cousin Sean, he had left the home in Queens as well, and moved in with his father in Pittsburgh.  So we're not working together anymore as magicians.  Or at least  not physically together.  So, I needed some other performing arts outlet and I--what happened around that time, Saturday Night Fever came onto the scene, a movie with John Travolta being the star figure.
Speaker 1: So how old are you at this point?
Speaker 2: How old am I?
Speaker 1: Yeah, how old were you, what was your age?
Speaker 2: Yes, thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen or fourteen?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  so you've been involved in magic up until this time?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, let me backtrack a little bit--
Speaker 2: But I continued as well--when I went into dance, I continued doing magic at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have any, in the grade school part of your life, did you have any heroes or mentors in school, or in the popular culture?
Speaker 2: I would say during my grade school years, even afterwards, I didn't really have any heroes outside of my family.  My grandfather was my hero, basically, my father's father.  He was the one I looked up to throughout my entire upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Speaker 2: So that means we've done one hour already?
Speaker 1: An hour and a half.
Story_ID: 20919
Speaker 1: So, my grandfather really has been my role model in the sense that, you know, he's the guy who, you know, was successful in what he did.  He became the Director of Customer Service, the highest black person in the post office at that time.  He kept the family together, you know, he had high visions and high horizons of what a person should do with their life, and remained calm in the face of adversity.  And so I really looked up to him for all those reasons.  So, this is James Jarvis, on my father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In terms of having teachers and others as role models, I mean, there are a lot of people I emulated, but I didn't quite feel that I had a lot of role models.  And one thing that made me realize how I should handle my vision of a role model--it's not that they didn't exist--there was a professor who later told me when I was in school, he said that--his name was Jim Townsell--he was one of my mentors--and he says, the best role model you can have for yourself is yourself, where you set a bar for where you want to be.  And you should raise that bar higher than what other people expect of you, and then try to achieve that.  And that's what I've been doing.
Story_ID: 20920
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So in--let's see, we've got you in--oh, I was asking you about dance.  So when did you get interested in dancing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, that transition going to dance was not a focused decision.  It was more by happenstance, in that at this time--I forget the exact year, but it must have been 1977 or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1977, around that time.  There was this movie called 'Saturday Night Fever' that came out.  Let me put it within the timeframe, '76' [1976] or '78' [1978], somewhere around there.  And John Travolta was the main character in 'Saturday Night Fever,' and I started, as a teenager I started practicing and copying his dance style and went to discos and started entering dance competitions and started winning the competitions. This was in Hartford, Connecticut.  And then that sort of made me realize, oh, I have this talent that I can move and so forth and felt, okay, let me foster this further.  And I auditioned for a, what they call the Hartford--I forget--the Hartford Drama Company, or whatever, for kids.  And I got into there and got a part in a play called 'Two Gentlemen of Verona,' at least the modern version of the Shakespeare play.  And from there it just kept going and going.  And I decided, you know what, I think I would like to become a dancer.
Speaker 1: So you had grown from being kind of introverted and being picked on, to go on out to do Saturday Night Fever.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, this is a transition.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a transition.  It was.  And I have to blame--I mean I can blame that on myself, but I have to blame a lot of it on my mother as well, who really instilled in us a sense of drive to go for our dreams, do what we need to do, don't be afraid, and in the face of any adversity to dream the impossible dream.  And this is the approach I took--and also being part of the Soka Gakkai organization, which I was heavily involved with as a young kid, as a teenager.  I was with what they call the youth division of that organization.  And every weekend we'd get together and as a kid, from like ten to eleven or twelve years old, I would jog with them for five miles, play the drums, marching bands, bringing the Soka Gakkai mission to other places, and even my mother trying to raise money to fly me to places with them.  And so this was also helping bring me out from the shell.
Story_ID: 20921
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now were you--so now, Soka Gakkai--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: That's where--now this is my primitive understanding of it.  You're chanting, and you concentrate on things that you want to happen?  Is that--
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah, so Soka Gakkai has two parts to it in terms of an organization.  One is the very religious spiritual part, and they chant "Nam-Myoho-Renge-Kyo" which is supposed to be a type of phrase, saying, that has a connection with the greater universe and towards enlightenment in terms of the Buddhist sense.  And it has the other part, which is more of the secular, which is the part that not only chants and reads these ancient sutras about how to live life, but also goes out there and practices, and tries to bring peace to places where there's conflicts, tries to bring people together to work for the common good.  And so these two parts of Soka Gakkai together--I didn't realize they were like two separate sects.  There's a pre-sect and a secular sect of it.  It's what I grew up with.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, had you--you saw Saturday Night Fever, so I assume you were a movie-goer.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a--actually my mother was a movie-goer, and she would just take me.  But I think we did probably want to go see Saturday Night Fever.  It was one of those big movies at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right.  I remember Siskel and Ebert raved about.  I think one of them bought the jacket for a big sum of money afterwards.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, did you, you and your mother--did your mother take you all to the museums and to the shows in New York, any of the Broadway shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So my mother, she didn't take us much to the shows in New York, and probably she would have, except she didn't have the money to.  But definitely she took us to the museums.  I went to the Museum of Natural History a lot, and that sort of also--I guess it was grooming me more to become a scientist, and I didn't even know it at that time, but I could tell my mother respected that.  I think that's one of the reasons why she liked my father.  And I remember--when you say museum, certain stories pop into my head.  One story is, I'm sitting in a cab with my mother and one of her older sisters.  And her older sister, Paula, is into you know, astro-physics.  Well, let's just say astrology, alright.  And so she's one day telling me, you know, there is real evidence about how astrology works, you know, whether reading the stars or looking at something about your hands, symbols and the stars and so forth.  And my mother says to me--now, this stuck with me.  After--even with my aunt in the car, but even more aggressively when my aunt left, after the taxi ride, is--that is not real science.  She says, "If you want to go into science, right, you go to college and you get an education and you become a physicist or a biologist, and you really learn about how things work.  And that's a really noble cause to do in life, is to become a scientist."  And I must have been, I don't know, nine, ten years old or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is remarkable to me in a sense that having grown up in that era--I'm about your mother's age--there was so much, you know, talk--I mean, when you'd meet somebody--what's your sign, all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know very few people, you know, questioned that at all.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: It was just part of the social fabric of that era.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Age of Aquarius, all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Very few people questioned it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. So you mother was different in that-
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so I do have to blame a lot on my mother.  For whatever reason, that's the way she came out, and she made that influence upon me.
Speaker 2: Did she give you any ideas of why she could see past that?
Speaker 1: No I think there's--why my mother could see past some of this--I think it has something to do with just their upbringing to be strongly opinionated about something.
Speaker 2: That was your--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, yeah, I don't know why her opinion became that, except the only thing I can think about is her own father, Ceppel Monk, was heavily into education.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now was her father in the church, your grandfather, in the church?
Speaker 1: He didn't really belong to any particular church, no.  So, he wasn't religious in that sense.  He would consider himself spiritualist.  He believed in other things than what we can see, and in a spiritual sense.  But what people were learning through education is what he believed most, even though he himself never made it past high school.  He did read a lot.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So they had sort of an unusual background I guess in the black community.  Their perspective would be a little different.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I was told by other family members, more extended family members, that this was unusual.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I actually--I blame it all the way going back to something about during those plantation years, a Monk, you know, Archibald Monk, getting complaints that, you know, he's trying to educate his slaves.
Story_ID: 20922
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, so now, so 'Saturday Night Fever'--you're dancing, and then you get involved in Children's Theater.  Ah, this would be a youth theater, I guess?
Speaker 2: A youth theater, that's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And you do 'Two Gentlemen of Verona.'  That's the musical version?
Speaker 2: That's the musical version, that's right.
Speaker 1: It had been on Broadway?
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: So this gets you into dance class?
Speaker 2: I think- the name Clay Stevens comes up to me.  I guess he was a producer at that time.  I have to look up the name, but they got a popular, a famous producer to produce it for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this leads to, does this lead to the scholarship with Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And Joffrey Ballet?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So you get scholarships to these two prestigious dance companies to take classes?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yeah.  But I didn't think I couldn't get the scholarships (laughter).  But now when I look back on it I realize it's not such a simple matter.  And I wasn't, I started training in dance--well, with Saturday Night Fever, right.  It was at the age of thirteen or so, and then I'm in a performance by fourteen, and then in High School of Performing Arts at the end of fourteen years old, or whatever.  So, I was at the beginner stage still, and they weren't sure if they should take me.  But they said, okay, you have a lot of potential.  And I think also it's harder to get guys.   Although they have plenty--they still have hundreds of people auditioning, and they can't take those hundreds.  I don't know how many, but it's definitely hundreds, if not a thousand or so.  So, but I think what happened--well I know what happened now.  After being drilled in my head by my mother about, you know, "No matter what you do, just do it to the best of your ability.  Practice, practice, practice over and over again.  Make it perfect, work hard.  You can do anything you want to do as long as you put your mind to it."  Those kinds of statements then helped me become better at being a dancer relatively quickly, to get on scholarship, first at Joffrey and then Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories from those days about the dancers or the schools or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember--so, the year that I got in was the year the movie 'Fame' came out.  And so it was filmed the summer before I arrived.  So, I wasn't part of it, but I knew some of the stars who were in the movie, or the characters from the--I don't know what we called them at that time but, some of them were classmates, because they were an older year.  And I remember that following October--Halloween--you know, this was a big splash hit movie--we started--the school wasn't quite like the movie, and we started emulating what they were doing in the movie even though the students didn't do that, like dancing in the middle of the street on top of the cars, right?  And so, we did that. (laughter).  And you know, just going around the Broadway area and--you know we all felt that we were stars of this movie, even though all the new kids weren't, (laughter) and many of them weren't because some of the kids they had in the movie actually weren't from the original high school.  So, that's one thing.  The other thing I remember is being a dancer, particularly I went into ballet.  And I decided to go into ballet because I felt if I could be technically trained to do ballet dance, I can do any other thing.  At least that's what I was told.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they tell--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, okay, I want to be able to be good at everything, so I'll be a ballet dancer.  And in doing so, the kids in my neighborhood in the Bronx thought oh, he's gay, or something like that.  And, you know, ballet didn't make you gay.  So I wasn't, you know, that wasn't my preference in life, but I had to deal with this stigma that some had.  Okay, here's this sissy guy going to school.  And it was the guys who did that in the neighborhood.  The girls, you know, they were sort of like, "Oh, this guy the dancer is going to the famous High School of Performing Arts, I like him."  So I think the guys had more of a reason to call me a sissy, you know, because of the girls.  And the other was--I guess that high school was an awakening for me in a sense that it even brought me more out of my shell.  So I started grooming myself more, and I--you know, I think I looked pretty decent at that time.  And so that's when I started, like all teenagers and so forth, getting involved with--okay, what are the girls like, what are relationships like?   And I found, I discovered that I was a good kid.  I wasn't one of the bad guys.  And I guess my parents and everybody in my family tells me that.  So I found out that although I was able to attract girls quickly at that time, I didn't have the brawn, the testosterone type of behavior that some of these other guys had.  And so they were attracting the girls later.  And so I had to wait until my brains really caught up with science and so forth, and, you know, intelligence being attractive, rather than some kind of bad boy type of thing.  And so that's something else I remember about that time.
Story_ID: 20923
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So your social life--you had a social life, an active social life in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I had an active social life, but more along the lines of being a good kid.  So I was the guy who--my parents and grandparents let me have a decent amount of freedom, which was good, which meant that I would go out to parties with my classmates.  And a lot of them would be smoking pot or taking drugs and drinking and so forth.  And I was the one who had to observe them, like I was observing my father, right.  I had to observe them and make sure that they were doing okay, because I wasn't the guy who took any drugs--never smoked, never drank--I never drank a glass of alcohol until I was 40 years old, you know.  So that was my social type of experience, being the good guy amongst all the, you know, teenagers who were exploring the crazy things in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lets--ah, your early years are different from a lot of scientists, though, in terms of, you know, that at least you had a social life (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yes.   I wasn't the geek in that sense or the nerd--
Speaker 1: Or when they say scientists, they're supposed to be like--I don't think they're all like that.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you broke the stereotypical mold?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 20924
Speaker 1: In terms of science, were you keenly interested in science in high school?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was science was where I really--I mean, it was high school that I really decided I wanted to be a scientist.  It was sort of at the end of high school.  But the science classes I had in Performing Arts, even though it wasn't an academic school geared towards academia, that is, I really liked them.  And then also, you know, knowing my father was interested in science although he never really became a scientist, that sort of piqued my interest as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you take like a college prep course?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I had biology, chemistry, algebra, geometry.  Those were my favorite classes.  So, basically kind of--it sort of was a semi-gradual transition.  So there was a period of time where I was trying to decide-- okay, am I going to go for this career in dance--which I thought, it's hard, but I was moving on up.  And I had gotten into what they call the Westchester Ballet Company, and was dancing with them for some money.  It wasn't a lot of money.  So at the end of my senior year my Performing Arts dance concert, it went well.  They even did a write-up in the New York Times about it, and I was mentioned in a few places here and there.  And so I was trying to decide, what do I want to do for the rest of my life?  And my mother's sayings rang the bell in my ear and my head, and said to do something that has a positive impact on society, that changes the world for the good.  And I looked at all the things that I liked to do, and I said I felt I could do that best as a scientist than I can do as a dancer or a magician or something else.  And so it was at my senior dance concert, at the end of that, I decided I'm going to be a scientist.
Speaker 1: Now did something happen that rewarded you for being a scientist on some level?  Did you win anything, or were you, did they take notice of you in any way as a science prospect?
Speaker 2: My biology teacher, you know, he liked the questions that I asked and everything like that.  But I would say my only reward was the satisfaction of, you know, liking it, and also I just think support from my family.  And it wasn't like I wasn't rewarded in other ways or getting asked to do other things.  So when I was making that decision they asked--some of the teachers from Alvin Ailey asked me to audition for the junior company.  And so I'm trying to decide here.  Am I going to audition for the Alvin Ailey company, junior company--I'm not saying the main company, I wasn't that good yet--or go to Hunter College, which I had just got accepted into for a scientist.  And I just felt you know, this feels like my calling, because I felt for some reason science felt more real to me.  It felt that something tangible can come out of that, making a discovery about how things work on this planet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a good answer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you continue to do any dancing while you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I, so while I was--so I went to Hunter College and I continued on doing some ballet after that, but went to take classes at Alvin Ailey for a year and then eventually got into African dance.  I met my wife at that time.  She was Puerto Rican and into Puerto Rican dance, but also was doing African dances also and was into science.  So I met her in the lab.
Speaker 1: Now was this a specific African dance group?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, yeah Djinoba Lufflet (sp) is his name.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-J-I-N-O-B-A, I think, and L-U-F-F-L-E-T (sp).  That's a French name.  He's from Trinidad, and I can't spell that, but I know it has two 'f's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I would have guessed he was from Senegal or something, but he's from Trinidad.
Speaker 2: But he does, he dances like they dance in Senegal.  So, he opened up a school at a place--well, he's teaching dance classes at a place called Lesley Dance Studio in New York City.  And so Miriam, who was my girlfriend at the time brought me down there and I took a few African dance classes with her, and I said I'm never going back to ballet, this is what I really like to do (laughter).  Because the rhythm, the energy, the drums, the music, everything just like sunk in me.  And so from that time on--let's see, I got into college when I was about eighteen, nineteen.  I started doing African dance when I was about nineteen years old.  From the age of nineteen until three years ago, I was doing African dance two to three times a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got into an African dance company, a small company, in New York City.  And I was performing all the way up into graduate school.  And I felt, and I even tell the students now--it's just that you have to do something else in your life besides science, because science is a tough career.  You have to work hard, there's a lot of failure before you get success.  You need some other outlet.  And to have some other outlet is also helpful for your life.  And so mine is dance.
Story_ID: 20925
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in terms of science, I read that when you started you had to kind of, you know, go back and re-visit some of your coursework to try to get up to speed with math and--
Speaker 2: That's right.  So when I applied to college, um, I can't remember when I--I applied and I remember one of my counselors at high school saying to me, you know--I did--I don't remember how I did--what my grades were like in high school, I can't.  But I just remember the counselor saying "not good enough" for the colleges that I wanted to apply to, even City College, or Hunter College.  But I got in, and I think because I did well on the SAT exams they called--yes, that's right.  So there were some grades I didn't so well in in high school but I really, really studied hard for those SAT's.  And I did well and got into Hunter College, but they said because of my grades I had to take a remedial class.  So I took remedial summer classes in Hunter College and did well, you know.  And from there on I remember applying to take three or four science classes all in the first year.  Now, I see students do this.  They overload themselves, and I even give them advice not to do this.  But I did it.  And my counselor at the time was trying to force me not to take science--too many science classes--they only wanted me to take one science class in my first year.  And I said, "No, this is what I want to do.  I want--please, please."  So he said, "Okay I'll sign it and allow you to do this for the first semester, but if you don't do well, I can't do it for the next semester."  And I got 'A's in all the classes, and from there on I just kept going.
Speaker 1: You know, I had in the notes here that they would have to get you to leave the laboratory because you would fall asleep in the laboratory.
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.  So, so basically what happened, I ended up taking on science as a passion like I did for dance: the same attitude, different walk of life.  And so I got into one of these affirmative action programs as we called them at the time, that basically help you get scientific experience in the laboratory doing research and would support--you know, so you don't have to get another job doing something.  So I got a small stipend to do research in the lab, and I just fell in love with the art of discovery to the point of where I actually was working more in the lab than many other people, and yeah, and spending the night making sure the experiments worked.  And just hammering away.
Speaker 1: Okay, now at Hunter College was there any particular professor or mentor there that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Rivka Rudner (sp) was my science mom, as she says.  So she's a professor at--she still is a professor at Hunter College in the biology department--a Jewish woman, so she considers herself my Jewish science mom.  And she was really special in a way that she--it didn't matter what background you came from, what age you were, how good or bad you were--if you have the motivation to be in the lab to do science, she was going to work alongside with you.  And so she kind of really held my hand along the way and eventually...  You know, there was a special bench in the, laboratory bench in the lab.  And that bench was the bench next to hers.  And eventually I became the person sitting at that special bench because I did the most work and was really pushing hard and so forth.  So I--she's now, still my science mom and still my mentor until this day.  I just spoke to her two days ago.  And has really helped me all along the way in terms of my career in science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was she basically a biology instructor?
Speaker 2: That's right.  She has her own laboratory, you know, with her own graduate students.  She's now retired from doing research in the lab, but--I mean, from teaching, but she still does research in the lab.  But, yeah, she was a molecular biology instructor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you learn about molecular biology that you felt was exciting?
Speaker 2: So, at that time which was, what are we talking, 19--
Speaker 1: This is '83'[1983], '84' [1984].
Speaker 2: '83' [1983], that's right, '84' [1984], that's right, yes.  Molecular biology was a, you know, it was an advancing field, and I remember some people saying molecular biology is at it's peak and it's going to die, and that didn't happen.  But you know it was the, the aura of the idea was genes.  You can explain a lot of things about how biology works, how life works.  And so I was fascinated with that idea and I decided, yeah, I want to become a molecular biologist to understand how organisms communicate with each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're just going to pause here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 20926
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, during this period of time, you kind of connect back up with your father, too.  Your father's--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So, yeah, college years to me was basically some more of my transformative years in the sense of, you know, what led to what I do now.  And that included meeting back up with my father.  What happened was towards the end of my first year in college--I believe it was the end of my first year to second year-- my father was still homeless.  I would hear whispers in the family every once in a while that, oh, they saw my father in Central Park somewhere and he looked really bad. That you know, someone's got to help him out or do something, or don't tell the kids, you know--they're going to be upset and so on.  And so, so one time, and I got--now I'm re-telling the story from my father's perspective.  My father decided, that--this was between my high school and college years--that he was not going to be homeless anymore.  He wasn't going to waste his life like this.  And instead, what he was going to do is to take advantage of his situation and be a caveman, to try to understand how primitive human beings thought and invented civilization and religion and science, alright.   That was his goal.  And so one day he just packed up his things, you know, his bags that he had with him, living in Central Park, and just started walking up Manhattan, past the cloisters, going all the way upstate, walking for two weeks.  And the way he would feed himself, he was in the Boy Scouts and he was taught how to pick certain plants, cook them, trap certain animals, eat squirrel, and so forth.  That's how he survived.  And found some caves up in upstate New York where he lived for about six years.  Well, between there--he came back once and went back up.  And you know there are so many stories of what happened in that six year period that he's told me.  But the essence was, he felt--and I asked him one day what was he trying to do later on when he was back in the house.  And I'll tell you how he got back there in a minute.  But what he was trying to do, he pulls out this 'Scientific American' article he had on him, with a cartoon--I forgot who drew this cartoon--of a caveman sitting on a rock and a round rock rolling from a mountain onto this guy's head and hitting his head and bouncing off his head, to say, "Okay, dummy, here, think about the wheel, what the wheel could do for you, this round rock, you know, which is in the shape of a wheel."  So my father was thinking, how did human beings come to invent things like the wheel, or understand the constellations and the stars.  And he felt the only way he could really understand how that was done is to experience it himself.  But he went too far.  So after so many years in upstate New York, he came back to the city, because he felt like he needed to be around people.  But he wasn't really wasn't ready to re-join society, so he lived in caves in Inwood Hill Park in upper Manhattan for about a year.  And on one winter morning he decided to really experience what it was like to live like primitive men.  He had to walk through the snow barefoot, you know, naked basically and which he did, and got frostbite.  So I guess that's not what primitive man was doing, but I don't know, or at least they thought not to do that. And as a result of that, he checked himself into the hospital at Columbia where they had to cut off the front of his toes.  And they called up my grandfather and said, you know, "We have your son in the hospital.  He's got frostbite; he's safe," and so forth.  And my grandfather, after that my grandfather said I got to take him in.  And I was living with my grandfather and going to college at that time in the Bronx.  And so they, he brought my grandfather into the--my father, his son--back into the house, and the three of us lived together for about a year and a half.  And my grandfather uses as an excuse--you know, he wasn't proud of his son, but he couldn't let him do that to himself out there in the wild, so to speak.  And so he felt since I just started college, that my father who was interested in science would be able to help me with algebra and physics because that was his specialty in college.
Speaker 1: Was he able to help?
Speaker 2: He was, yeah.  So I, you know, would sit down at night and, you know, would have my father help me out with, you know, understanding differential equations and linear algebra and the forces that we are taught about in physics.  So, he remembered a lot of that.  And he was really happy to help me out with it.  And so our tutoring sessions, if you want to call them that, would start out like that, but by the end of the night they would get into, "What were you doing out there?"  Why were you doing this?  What happened at this point in your life?  So they became a lot more philosophical, which I learned a lot as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this like filled a need for want to know what happened, what he was doing?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes, yes.  So yeah, it sort of answered a lot of questions for me of not understanding why he did things, who was he.  You know, why on the one hand there seems to be this, you know, pretty intelligent guy who other people thought were intelligent, skipped several grades, can help me with my physics and remembers these things from many years ago, to this, on this other hand, the guy who you know was abusive to his wife and kids, my mother, and he was homeless for a number of years and so forth.  Why the dichotomy?  What was going on there?  I can't say that I figured it out, but I just soaked it all up and tried to understand.
Story_ID: 20927
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well--okay, now, okay.  Okay, now in '86' [1986] you win first place award for excellence in biomedical research from the National Institute of Health?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is a competition you entered?
Speaker 2: It's a competition, that's right.  I see you guys did your homework here.  (laughter).  Very good.  Yeah, so at that time--I forget if he was there or not.  But so, so this was the time that I was spending a lot of effort and time in the lab, and I had entered this minority research program.  And yeah, I really worked at my science with a passion, and presented my research at a conference where they bring all these students and faculty together from all the schools all over the country.  And they had a competition, you know, undergraduate and masters, at the Ph.D. level competition.  And I presented what I had, and I guess they liked it and they gave me the first place.  And it was certainly a good ego boost.  It made me feel that, okay, yeah--I didn't think I was going to win it.  I thought my goodness, that was a bad presentation.  That's what I was thinking.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your presentation about?
Speaker 2: So, this was back at Rivka Rudner's laboratory.  And what--I was talking about the discovery of some new genes that we've identified that are involved in synthesizing proteins inside the cell.  So, you know, little bodies made up of proteins and then gene codes for those proteins.  And people had a hard trying to identify them, and the genome of these bacteria.  It's called Bacillus subtilis.  You can find it in apples, for instance.  And so I wouldn't say it was a discovery that changed the world, but it was a discovery that certainly--later on now I realize did have an impact in that area of science, in understanding protein synthesis and bacteria.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is that, is there a way to explain it to a layman or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, what we found was--well, there were two things.  One was that in a person's genome, or even in the genome of the bacteria,  let's say you have multiple different versions of the copy of a gene--gene version A, version B, version C, D, E, all the way up to J, alright.  We did name J after Jarvis, by the way.  So you have different copies and different versions of these genes in the genome.  And what--the work I did in Rivka's lab, we discovered at the time, is that all those copies of the genome, all those different versions of the gene, are not scattered randomly around this circular genome.  They're all bunched up in one location, mostly one location.  And we discovered where they were bunched up at.  And when we started coming up with the hypothesis, what we think is happening is that these are genes involved in protein synthesis, and we thought that there's something about them, that from this location in the genome you start to make a copy of the entire chromosome, like in a circle, around like here.  And there's some reason you need to have these genes at the beginning of this replication process in order for the cell to make proteins quickly in the new daughter cell, alright, to be at the beginning of that replication.  That's what that, one of those discoveries was.  And the other discovery was, is that since these genes are similar copies of each other, they recognize and re-combine, just like in humans.  We get mutations by what we call homologous re-combinations, genes that are similar to each other, mixed with each other.  And what I discovered is that there were some bacteria that had mutated to a different form and we knew there were mutations, and we kind of knew the location of where the mutation was located, but we didn't know exactly.  And what I discovered is that some of these mutations were in these genes.  They interacted with each other and flipped a chromosome around based upon their similar sequences.  I don't know if that's a layman's example.
Speaker 1: Well that's an explanation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 20928
Speaker 1: So, I can follow some of it.  But, ah, so, ah, now you graduated from Hunter in '88' [1988]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now is there a significant event before we graduate you and get you moving on to--
Speaker 2: I guess I met my wife at that time, who was a scientist.
Speaker 1: Was she in science, too?
Speaker 2: She was in science as well, yes.
Speaker 1: As well as in African dance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was into African dance, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, that's a--
Speaker 2: She already had a relationship before me, but that didn't go so well.   And she had a son before me.  And, you know, she was older than I was, as well.  So, she was a Ph.D. student and I was an undergraduate student.  So she was working towards getting her Ph.D.  And I actually helped her out with one of her experiments, and so then, you know, we had a lab love affair and then, you know, got married eventually, and you know, had two kids.
Story_ID: 20929
Speaker 1: Well we mentioned off-camera, too, that you took some classes from John Henrik Clark in the Africana Studies Department.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Was that a big feature of Hunter College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So that's why I would say looking back, those were some transformative years in college.  I took advantage of all the classes I could take without, you know, collapsing.  And so I had the biology classes--so I was a biology major.  I was a math major, too.  So I double majored and I took a lot of history.  If I wasn't a scientist, I was going to be a historian.  Ah, so, so I took John Henrik Clark's class.  For those who don't know John Henrik Clark, go back in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], and maybe even earlier, and he was heavily active in, you know, getting history correct for African Americans and political movements to a certain degree.  My grandfather knew more about him than I did.  And I would say he was--I learned from my grandfather later when I told him that I was taking a class with John Henrik Clark.  He actually didn't think that was such a good thing.  And I was trying to figure out why, right?  And then I understood that John Henrik Clark was considered more of the radical African American.  At least that's what I was told, you know.  And I thought this guy was great, you know, even though he graded pretty hard, actually (laughter).  So, so with John Henrik Clark, I basically--you know, from him I learned a lot about the false things that were taught historically about African Americans, and even science in terms of where the origins of different scientific discoveries came from, particularly places in Egypt and the Sudan and some places further in Africa.  So, I really loved his class.  And after that I read books and books upon, you know the, let's say the remaking of history and what John Henrik Clark might call the true history of Africans.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright--anything else at Hunter?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would say that the Hunter College to me was the place where the faculty, not just Rivka Rudner (sp), but others, like Shirley Raps--who I'm thinking of was--Jim Wash who was there, an African American professor--you know, these folks they really had an interest in us becoming successful scientists.  So in that sense--I'm not really sure if it's really occurring that way now--but I don't think we, you know--the students that they brought into their labs had talent, but I don't think we could have succeeded without that help from these professors, who really mattered.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did the faculty take a special interest in African American students, you think, in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  So they, so Hunter College was one of the poster child cases for the National Institute of Health, for the program that started in the '70s [1970s].  So there are a few white and African American, Native as well as Hispanic scientists who were trained back in the '60's [1960s], late '50's [1950s], early '60s [1960s] to become scientists at some of the prestigious schools like Harvard and others, and felt that they needed to do something to really make an impact on the ethnic makeup and diversity of science in the country.  And they convinced NIH to give them money to start some of these programs called Minority Access to Biomedical Research, MBRS.  MARC is another--oh, MARC--I mean, Minority Access to Biomedical Research--I forget what MBR stands for.  It's now called, they go by a different name--I can't remember the name now.  And so, so they started these programs, and what they would do is, you know, interview us.  We had to apply--they would give us $3,000 a semester, which was a lot of money back then to do research in the laboratory, and then every year go to a conference and present that work, and also to give us some money if we wanted to go to some other conference as well throughout the year.  So I really felt that's when I started becoming a scientist.
Story_ID: 20930
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there any, were you involved in or did you know about the, or keenly aware of the research regarding sickle cell anemia?  You know, that was a big topic in the news--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and this disease that is mostly black, you know, affects black people, and some southern Mediterranean--
Speaker 2: Yes, I--so that was already probably even entering the textbooks by the time I was in school, in college.  And I do remember it being surrounded by--that people of different ethnic backgrounds can be more susceptible to certain degrees than others.  You know, there's this balance between we're all created equal and we're all the same, to there are differences between people, you know, not only in skin color.  And then some people want to push that to intelligence.  I've never seen evidence for that, but certainly things like sickle cell anemia--I mean, I'm not sure, you know, in terms of your question--
Speaker 1: I wanted to know if there was a major thrust around there to do some research on sickle cell because it was such a--it was hot in the news and people were talking about it and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Before, I guess '73' [1973] or '74' [1974], nobody ever discussed it.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, yeah.  I would say my science upbringing--yeah, it had two parts.   One was to be a scientist and study everything all other scientists study regardless of the population or the ethnicity or what you're worried about.  And then there are some scientists, and I've ended up being one of those, who really felt there are disparities--health disparities, in our country and around the world, and nobody was addressing them until people of color came along and started doing that.  Likewise for men and women.   A lot of experimental analysis in testing the efficacy of different drugs and so forth was done on white males, and then years later you find these drugs that work good on men were ineffective on women.  But they didn't think about doing that, you know, because of their gender and racial biases.
Story_ID: 20931
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, okay, so in '88' [1988] you entered a Ph.D. program?  Ah, now what happened between--wait a minute, let's see.  You graduated in '88' [1988], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I stayed at Hunter College [New York, New York] for five years to do a double major and then I actually had enough to practically get a Ph.D. for my undergraduate work.  So I published--altogether after I graduated, I finished publishing more, six papers, as an undergraduate student.  I think three of them I was first author.  So I talked to Rivka Rudner and a few other faculty members about the possibility of getting my Ph.D., staying another two years and getting my Ph.D. early.  And a lot of them, some of them liked that idea, but a number of them encouraged me to go elsewhere, to do something that I really want to do beyond studying bacteria.  So, I listened to that advice, and what was my passion?  My passion was understanding how the brain works, was one of them.  And the other possibility was understanding the origin of the universe.  It seemed two different things, but I wanted to take on something big--and so, one of those two.  So, I started applying to graduate school programs to do one of those two, to have the opportunity to do either or.  And that was in what, '87' [1987], '88' [1988]?
Speaker 1: '88' [1988].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so I applied to all the top schools like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge Massachusetts], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massaachusets], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]and Johns Hopkins [John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] and so on, and actually got into all of them, except for Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].  I think they're the only ones who didn't take me.  And that was quite exciting back then because I realize now--I didn't realize before, but they, a lot of people didn't expect that to happen, because Hunter College wasn't considered an Ivy League school.  So, you usually go from MIT to Harvard, or from Harvard to Stanford, you know.  But to me, you know, I didn't know that.  And it didn't matter to me either.  And so by the fact that I had these publications as an undergraduate student--I had more publications than people coming from Harvard, MIT or Stanford.  And what I learned later on, by the fact that I was a person of color who did this, it really surprised people a lot.  And I think, I know, actually, the combination of my scientific success as an undergraduate student and my color actually even made me more competitive to get into these programs.  And I realized that even later on when I was--for my faculty position, something similar happened, and it started to hit me that the color of my skin actually was a big disadvantage for many years.  And suddenly, for a moment of time, it became an advantage, because they want this colored person who's good at what they do, and we need him, because it's going to look good for us.  And actually it was a sad reality for me.  I realized it's going to be a disadvantage, and in some rare cases an advantage, but rarely neutral.  And it made me realize also, after all those years of other people--years of other people, that who was the advantage for?  You know, what's been happening?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now how did you decide on Rockefeller University?
Speaker 2: So, yes.  Rockefeller [Rockefeller University, New York, New York], I, what was different about them compared to the four schools that I was really down to--it was between Rockefeller, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And I chose Rockefeller because their approach was to let you have freedom to do what you want to do in the lab, and let you explore more.  And they had some buzz words in there, that we are looking to generate the leaders of science, not just the regular ordinary scientists.
Story_ID: 20932
Speaker 1: Now the area you chose to focus on, was this an unusual combination, molecular neurobiology and animal behavior?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, yeah.  So, when I got to Rockefeller, yes, I wanted to see how the brain works, and I had my previous training in molecular biology and I wanted to combine those two.  What does the brain do that fascinates people the most?  It produces behavior.  So I combined those two, and decided to study songbirds, of all things, because they had a fascinating behavior which is the ability to imitate vocalizations like we do for speech.  And I discovered that, yeah, well, I didn't discover it, but we all knew that primates couldn't do this, and it was assumed that mice couldn't do it as well.  And those were the common mammalian animal models.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  Ah, now what birds did you actually study?
Speaker 2: So, I basically studied the birds of the lab that I entered--or my Ph.D. advisor, Finetta Nattabaum.  So these were Zebra Finches and canaries.  And the reason why Zebra Finches is that they produce, they learn and produce a highly stereotyped song that they can't really change throughout the rest of their life after their critical periods.
Speaker 1: So if you hear the call of a Zebra Finch, you can identify, or naturally know that it's a Zebra Finch?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, yes.  Well, most species actually have some typical genetic component to even their learned vocalizations.  You can tell it's that species.  But the specific notes that they learn, you know, that's what varies.  But even for a Zebra Finch, so since it's--to paraphrase your question, it's not that I can recognize that it's a Zebra Finch as opposed to some other species--I can recognize that's, you know, Joe over there and Sally over there and Jim there, okay.  Actually, I say Joe, Jim and, you know, Sam, because the female birds don't learn in this particular species.  So, I can tell who's singing based upon their particular song, as opposed to a canary.  A canary, they, like humans continue to learn new songs later in life, new vocalizations, not as good as they could when they were younger, just like humans, but still continue to add to their repertoire.  And because it is, it's hard to tell one animal from the next, who's who, because they're continuously learning new things.  And that's those two different species that were brought to the laboratory--
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: --to try to figure out the difference.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, what were your findings?
Speaker 2: So, I found that, when birds are learning how to imitate--or let's say from auditory memories of the sounds they hear, there are certain genes that become activated in the brain as a result of forming those memories.  And, we found that how they express the pattern of--when I say express, what I mean is the DNA gets converted into a protein product that then functions inside the brain.  Okay, and that protein product, in this particular case, regulates other genes to come on, alright, and turn into protein products.  And so, and then eventually we think that changes the connections of the cells in the brain to hold onto new memories that the animal is perceiving.  Just like I'm hearing you now, so I'm going to remember your voice later on.  I'm going to remember what you said.  So I think that's what these genes are doing.  And we discovered how those genes are regulated in the brain, in response to hearing sounds.  And, we also--later I discovered they're also regulated in the brain areas when the animals produce the learned vocalizations.  And, so these are what we call song nuclei, the singing song circuit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In getting back to the difference in canaries and Zebra Finches--the ones that are very stereotyped, the ones that are more variable in their songs--later on we discovered that certain genes that are responsible for turning on what I call the activity dependent genes, those ones are different in the species that are singing more stereotyped and variable songs.  We don't find a difference in the overall brain circuit.  We find a difference in how the genes are regulated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know you're getting into the science here.  I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: That's good, that's good though.  That's what we're supposed to be getting into.  I'm going to pause here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 20933
Speaker 1: These two species of birds, the ones that--well, there's a certain part, the anterior part of the brain, that is responsible for the trait of the imitative part.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  So, basically what this brain circuit is organized like, is that there are two sub-pathways, I like to call them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's one more anterior in the brain--so, closer to the front, and the other, more posterior.  What the interior, what I call the pre-motor circuit, or the vocal learning circuit, those brain regions are necessary to imitate the motor movements basically that control the muscles of the vocal organ.  They're necessary to form the motor memory of the sounds that are going to be produced--not the auditory, not the hearing, but the motor.  And they send signals to the posterior part, which is the primary motor cortex, about right here in humans, a similar location in birds.  That pathway is responsible for producing the actual vocalizations, the learned vocalizations, and they control the muscles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, if I damaged the posterior part of the brain, I wouldn't be able to make any sound.  Is that what--?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  So, if you damage that motor cortex area, you can't speak at all, or the birds can't sing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They can produce innate sounds, ah, like an alarm call or they can go awwwwww, like this, or cry and scream, but they can't produce the learned speech.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, um, so if the anterior portion is damaged, then the creative aspect of it is gone?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: No matter what kind of voice you had?  If you're Whitney Houston, you wouldn't be able to sing, because you wouldn't have--
Speaker 2: Right.  You wouldn't be able to learn how to sing something new.  You'd still be able to get out already learned words, very rudimentary sentences, like awwww dawww, awwww, bawww--this is what these effected people speak like.  Ah, and the birds, they--it's interesting--they'll still be able to sing part of a learned song they already had in the past, but they can't learn anything new, so they're stuck.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We call it aphasia for humans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, slow me down if I'm going too fast.
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Story_ID: 20934
Speaker 1: But what I'm--ah, one of the things that fascinated me about, reading about you, is that you and other scientists, as a result of these kind of studies, decided to re-map the brain.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To terminology that describes the different parts of the brain.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the terminology that describes the brain, that's right.
Speaker 1: I think the brain at one time was--correct me if I'm wrong, was--well, you tell us.  How was it first mapped?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, back in the late 1800s, soon after Darwin came up with his view of evolution, a guy named Ulrich Ettinger in Europe developed a history of all things, and he was also sort of contemporary with Einstein,  like Einstein was developing the theory of all things in physics.  Ulrich Ettinger was trying to develop a theory of all things in neurobiology of the brain.  And microscopes were coming on line at the time, and new ways of dissecting and looking at tissues.  And what Ettinger did was combined Darwin's view of evolution, Aristotle's view of scala naturae, and you know, modern science at that time, to come up with a new theory of brain evolution.  And he also combined--what's the one I'm thinking about--ethnicity into it as well, and human and religion, okay.  So he didn't view evolution the same as Darwin did.  He viewed evolution as going from more primitive forms that's still living today to more advanced forms.  And humans are most advanced, and among humans, Europeans are the most advanced.  And of most Europeans, men are the most advanced, okay.  And with this view of all these people together, he came with a new theory, alright.  He didn't call it a theory.  He just said this is the way it is, alright, in his papers back then.  And what he argued is that the human brain evolved from lower to higher stages, lower to higher physically, the ventral part to the dorsal part of the brain, alright.   And at the base of the human brain was these paleo--meaning old, striatum--sort of an area of the brain that's not layered, it's called striatum, that they evolved that from fish.  Fish gave rise to a new thing in amphibians.  Amphibians gave rise--we call that architriatum.  Then amphibians gave rise to a new structure in reptiles, called the neostriatum, meaning new.  And reptiles passed that on to birds and then eventually also to mammals.  And so they had these--also reptiles had something called cortex, very primitive cortex, called an archecortex.   And birds had a paleocortex, right.  And mammals had this latest and greatest advancement, the neocortex and exalted it to on high, alright.  And humans had this giant neocortex all folded up and so forth.  And so, and evolution had a purpose, and the purpose was to generate men, right.  And so this is where all that terminology came from.  And they tried to fit the science to this view rather than try to fit the science to a view that actually explains the science.
Speaker 1: Now, did your research contradict that terminology, or was it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my research and a whole bunch of other people's research before my time, so, one or two generations of scientists before me.  Harry Corton, I would say, is the founder of this modern view.  Well, let's say the person who found more evidence to say that there's something wrong with this view, alright.  And then he was working with birds.  He was an M.D., but he was fascinated with birds.  And so he--at that time back in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], they were coming out with molecular markers for different vein areas.  And he started looking at these molecular markers in pigeons and the human brain.  And he started to say, something doesn't match up here.  This area, they call the entire bird brain mostly striatum, which is primitive like structure.   And they felt why is--we know now that it's not primitive, but that's what they thought.  They find only a little part of the bird brain matches that striatum structure in humans.  The rest doesn't.  And they come up with a new theory that says that the base of the human brain and the base of the bird brain are pretty much similar, alright.  And second, they're not involved in simple behaviors, and our work supports that, alright.  And whereas these other--there's upper parts of the brain, cortex.  Birds also have a cortex, except in us it's layered of cells.  And with birds, it's big giant conglomerates of cells in different locations.  So he argued that birds actually do really have a cortex, but just organized differently, and these guys missed it before.  And our work had supported that argument, with genes that are regulated in those brain areas and also work of my colleagues--and you know, these areas are controlling cognitive complex behaviors in birds.  Plus they can imitate human speech, you know.  What do you think is going on?
Speaker 1: Well, people would say before that they don't know what they're talking about.  So, it's just simple--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that kind of argument, where, you know, where you say an animal does something, then somebody else says, "but this", alright.  There are two things about that.  It's a moving target.  What is--you know, there are people out there who say, you know, the closer you get to some animal behavior, like in humans, then they keep changing what a human does that's different from an animal.
Speaker 1: They move the goal line (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, the goal is just to make humans different, right.  That's the main goal.  And even scientists do this, you know.  I think it just has something to do with their own self-aggrandizing ego, alright.  The other is that some of the assumptions of what we have is wrong.  So, a lot of the times we humans, even human scientists--the default is the negative result.  So, yeah, parrots can imitate human speech, but they don't know what they're talking about.  Well, how do those scientists know the parrots don't know what they're talking about?  Did they do the experiment to prove that they don't know what they're talking about?  No, they didn't.  Then you have someone like Irene Pepperberg who comes along, you know, a colleague of mine, who trains parrots to imitate human speech, and actually proved that they can actually understand the meaning of the words that they imitate.
Speaker 1: Now this is, you're taking us--this is a regular cartoon now.  Birds actually know what they're talking about?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Civilization, isn't it going to crash down around our feet? (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I don't think civilization is going to crash.  But it does demonstrate that we humans, even though we've done a lot of advanced work on this planet, we shouldn't take for granted that things, that we know everything, and that other animals don't have high levels of intelligence.  And it's been humbling to me, because I study these animals and I listen to their songs or watch their behavior and I think, what in the world are they saying?  What in the world does this mean?  Why are they acting this way?  And I just think, oh, these are stupid animals.  I think that sometimes.  And then I--you know, discover, you know like in the training paradigm that I'm doing, that an animal has figured out how to escape a particular task that I'm doing in a way that I never thought about.  And I go, that's really smart, I never would have thought about that.  And what it really means--what I've learned to have is an appreciation of animals in a way that I would have never had if I wasn't a scientist--that they're not dumb creatures.  They may not build the Empire State Building, but they'll build some things we can't build.  And not only that, just because they can't build the Empire State Building does not mean that, you know, that they're dumb or imitating things without meaning.
Speaker 1: And it may not mean the Empire State Building is smart either.
Speaker 2: That's a good one, yes. (laughter).  That's right.
Speaker 1: So this is, so this is, so did you ever meet Alex the parrot?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  Unfortunately, I didn't.  I almost had the opportunity, because someone wanted to do a documentary with myself and Irene Pepperberg at the same time, and to go up and visit her, and then he died.
Speaker 1: That was a tragic story.  They broadcasted it on NPR and on--
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: How the Bird died, and his last words...
Speaker 2: That's right, "I love you", that's right, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: It shows he may be capable of a lot more.
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely, yeah, that's right.  Yeah, I think I'm going to call it a hypothesis, because it's not proven enough, but I think Alex and some other animals, they demonstrate for me that many animals have the ability to have cognitive understanding and communication with humans and other animals, not to the human level, but they have some.  And that they can't express this through the voice, because they can't imitate and they can't communicate with other animals for that reason through imitation.  But, because we can--we have this enhanced ability to understand what other people are thinking.  And so animals, some other animals, non-human primates, do a lot of gesturing.  I think they can understand what that other animal is thinking.  You know, if an animal raises his hand like this, alright--I know you probably can't see this on the screen, but raises the hand like this--a monkey does that--the other monkey knows he's probably going to get hit.  And so, you know, get away from that food source.  So, but if a primate could talk, that animal might say, "Go away" or "Out of my way," or something like that.  And I think that Alex, Irene Pepperberg's parrot Alex, demonstrates that capability in animals.
Story_ID: 20935
Speaker 1: Yeah, now there was, there's been, there is research--I mean I saw on Nova, about dogs being able to read human body--faces and body language.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And they studied, looked at humans in a way that other animals don't.  They anticipate what we want.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  And I have a hypothesis for this as well.  I think there are some animals that can communicate with us more so than others, and particularly those that we domesticated.  And I, we have a publication under review now, showing that there are some genes in humans and in domesticated species, particularly dogs, that have mutations that you can't find in other species.  That as we share more genetic similarity with these genes--and some are better evolved in facial structure in dogs than we do with other species.  And so I actually think we are evolving dogs and ourselves together to be able to communicate with each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's certainly a relationship that's a lot different from--I think they were demonstrating on this program that a wolf doesn't--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: That he doesn't see the same thing a dog sees.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And like pointing, right?  So you can point here--
Speaker 1: You can point here, and a wolf--
Speaker 2: That's right.  You can point like that and look there, and what a dog will do, like human children is, look where you're pointing.
Speaker 1: Wag his tail and--
Speaker 2: Right, but a wolf won't do that.   A wolf will look at your finger and stare at it, and wonder what is going on.  (laughter). Right, eat the finger off.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So there's more nuance and intelligence than we were heretofore--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't think it's that the wolf doesn't have as much intelligence as the dog.  I think it's just that the dog intelligence and the human intelligence way of thinking is more similar for some things, because they have evolved together for thousands of years.
Story_ID: 20936
Speaker 1: And there's another aspect of this, too, that I've read about, that speech makes you more able to--being able to speak makes you more intelligent than if you do not speak.
Speaker 2: Yes.  This is, this--that idea I haven't been completely sold on yet because it's one of those things where the evidence really hasn't been sought after, but it's kind of, you know, sort of assumed.  But so far some of the, some things suggest that might be the case.  Why is that?  If you look at all the species that scientists say do something incredible with their behavior, they turn out to be those that are vocal learners.  And if you look at those species that have the largest brain size to body size ratio within their body size cohort--you know, it has to be a certain size, they tend to be the vocal learners.   Who's that?  Humans, of course.  Parrots, crows and ravens, whales and dolphins and elephants.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Dogs turned out to be vocal learners as well, but nobody's talked about incredible behavior in them.  So I don't know if it will be everybody, but those--and these are the species that humans tend to have the most empathy for, you know, killing dolphins or elephants, or you know, parrots, you know.  So who eats parrots for dinner?
Story_ID: 20937
Speaker 1: What about the hummingbird?
Speaker 2: The hummingbird is a--
Speaker 1: There's some significant research around hummingbirds.
Speaker 2: Right.  So hummingbirds is some of the fastest flying species, some of the most aggressive--are able to escape predators pretty well.  So, they interestingly have a very similar circuit as what we find in the parrots and the songbirds--the brain circuit, that is.
Speaker 1: So, what did you find when you--?
Speaker 2: So what did I find?  Yes, that's, that was an interesting discovery, with the hummingbirds.  So when I, when I entered this field, all they knew about was brain pathways in songbirds and a few brain structures in parrots.  Und I used a tool that I and my colleagues developed called behavior molecular mapping, to identify the song learning areas.  When you think about song learning, you mean hummingbirds.  And this tool, as I explained it a little bit earlier, it's like going in an MRI machine and you, if you were to hear sounds or speak, you see certain areas light up in the MRI signal.  Well, this is the tool that when the birds sing, the gene product comes on in those brain areas where the gene product is made, the protein product is made.  That means that those brain areas were active in the act of the animals producing these learned vocalizations.  And what we found in hummingbirds as well as in the songbirds and the parrots, is that each of those three different bird groups have exactly seven brain structures involved in the production of these learned vocalizations.  It's not five in one, not three or two in the other.  And why is that surprising?  Well, these species aren't supposed to be closely related, alright.  So, it's like finding in humans and dolphins speech brain areas that you don't find in a chimpanzee or other species that are more closely related to humans.  And so you have these seven brain areas showing up apparently three times independently in evolution.  And so we ask, well, how did that happen?  Well, some people are now saying maybe parrots are more closely related to songbirds than they once thought, but there are still other species that are clearly closely related to songbirds, like chimps are to humans, that don't have these brain pathways.  So we really did think there had to be some type of independent paths.  So, for a long time I didn't have an answer, but I have three alternative possibilities.  Either one: the phylogeny of-- the family tree of birds are completely wrong, and these species are closely related--so it's like saying humans and dolphins are closely related--and they have a common ancestor that they don't share with the rat, for instance, alright.  So that one is kind of off the table for now, alright.  Or, there's some type of constraint that says Mother Nature says if you're going to evolve a complex behavior that can give you the ability to imitate even human speech sounds, this is the way you're going to do it, not some other way.  It's going to be seven brain areas distributed between an anterior and a posterior brain pathway, one for imitation and the other for producing the imitated vocalizations.  Or the third alternative is, everybody has it to various degrees, but we just haven't detected it, it's just amplified in these vocal learning species and in humans, because we argue that humans have similar brain structures.  There is a fourth alternative.  When I published this paper, a number of religious groups said this helps prove the existence of God, okay.  Because how could something like this happen by chance multiple times?  It has to be a Creator.  So the figures from that paper have actually entered into some religious textbooks for this reason.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I don't want--without evidence I don't like to deny anything, but at the same time I just, I don't like, when all else fails, you know, to say something is "supernatural," I don't like that either.  So, I didn't really have an answer to any of those until about three years ago where we found that these seven brain areas in all three of those vocal learning bird groups, are embedded within a motor pathway that controls things like walking, hopping, flying, and you know, basically motor movements.  And I argue also--perhaps motor learning, learning how to walk, learning how to play the piano for a human brain pathway--and that all species we've looked at have this motor pathway.  What happened in the vocal learning species is that they have an additional pathway built inside of this motor pathway which controls the vocal organs.  And so, what I think happened, is that during development in some species, there is some mutations that took this motor learning pathway to control the arms and legs and other parts of the body, mutate some genes, and duplicate that pathway again.  And those cells proliferate and now connect this old ancient pathway to the muscles for vocalizations and use the same mechanisms of learning how to gesture, learning how to play the piano, to learning how to vocalize.  And that's my hypothesis as a result of the hummingbird study.
Story_ID: 20938
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, is that, what are you working on now?
Speaker 2: So, I call that my motor theory of vocal learning origin hypothesis.  That's, what I find fascinating is that's where hummingbirds brought me until today, because we argue the same thing for the human brain, which means we find speech areas that are now adjacent to areas involved in gesturing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the human vocalization has the same primitive--same as the--?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So, it's hard to study human brains in the way we can study animal brains, because it took--you know, we don't do invasive experiments on humans.  But a lot of the literature is now revealing some of the things we discovered in the songbirds and the parrots are similar in humans.  So, I think, and some of the theories that people are coming up with are similar.  Like they call it the gestural origin of language, where if you notice, I'm speaking now, I'm using my hands.  When we speak, we gesture, and we have learned gestures for different sounds.  You know, what I'm doing now, okay, is learned, alright.  They're not innate.  Guess what?  Non-human primates gesture even though they can't speak, alright.  And they  have learned gestures and they can even learn how to do sign language.  And so what I think is happening is that those brain pathways that are being used for gesturing, learned communications with the hands in the primate, is the duplicated pathway that led rise to the learned communication with the muscles of the throat as opposed to the muscles of the hands.
Speaker 1: Now, in the case of a chimp, this was explained in something I was reading, that a chimp can't, can learn sign language of course, but a chimp, they don't have the physical capacity to form the words.  Their palate or something else is off, where they can't really--they can go awwwwww, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's a theory that's been out there for awhile now.  That--actually the evidence for it now is pretty weak.   Colin Munch, Crimson Fitch and others have shown that chimps actually have the physical capacity to produce maybe about half of the different sounds, the phonetics, like aaw, baw, daw, caw, whatever, that humans can produce.  And it's because their throat is not up as high as once thought, and they can actually lift up their mouths, their chin, and their larynx will descend further.  And with that descent, they can actually theoretically produce many different sounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they're actually lacking that other center in the ring, the imitative--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's where all the evidence is leading towards.  It's a difference in the absence of a particular forebrain network that controls those neurons down here that eventually control the muscles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright, so they have all the circuits in the brain stems controlling their vocalizations, but they don't have the fore brain control.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's why we just hear the aawww, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, yes, yeah.  Good imitation.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.  (laughter).  My own evolution is not that hard to do (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you asked me what I'm doing now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My, so my dream project that we're working on now is to prove this hypothesis that, or disprove it, that the brain pathways for vocal imitation evolved by duplication of an ancient motor pathway.  And how we're doing that, or how we're going to go about it--I think, well, now I have evidence that there is a difference in this new pathway in the vocal learning species.  It does have some connections from the forebrain down to the motor neurons that control the voice.  Some of those connections are different than other pathways.  The genes haven't mutated in those pathways.  And we've discovered some of them.  And, so what I like to try to do is create a transgenic animal that has the songbird of the human version of the gene to see if I can induce that novel connection.  Or induce this duplication of this brain pathway in the species that doesn't have it, and actually induce vocal imitation ability in the non-vocal learning species.
Speaker 1: So if you're successful, maybe one day we'll see a chimp sit down and play Jeopardy or something.
Speaker 2: I'm not going to be un-modest, but, well I don't know about Jeopardy, but at least to the level of Alex the Parrot (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I can get to that level I can then do something else in my life.
Story_ID: 20939
Speaker 1: Now, do you know of other parrots that actually do--I know some can do, some of what Alex can do, but are there any that are good as Alex?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Alex is an African gray parrot from Africa, and there are some Amazon Brazilian parrots that are pretty good imitators and there's also the cockatiel.  Cockatiels are actually parrots.  There's a famous cockatiel now called Snowball.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're gonna get to that, okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Explain who he is.
Speaker 2: Well, Snowball--so parrots, there are several groups of parrots.  One they call the true parrots, like the African grays and the cockatiels and the macaws, alright.  And Snowball is a cockatiel, and he was raised by humans, by two teenage boys who liked to play the Backstreet Boys, you know, the Backstreet Boys, when growing up, and they danced to the Backstreet Boys.  And what Snowball did is, not only did he learn to actually imitate some of their speech, alright, but he actually saw how they were dancing.  And they danced like this, you know, some good old Midwest boys, and he would then move his legs like they would move their arms, and move his head up and down and dance to the beat of the music.  And so he became a famous dancing parrot.
Speaker 1: And he could be seen on YouTube and on some television shows.  I've seen him on television dancing, Snowball.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I did a, I was asked to participate in a world science festival event with Snowball, and I was told that that event, a particular dancing scene of that event, went viral on YouTube at some point with one million hits, so obviously it's catching a lot of people's attention.
Speaker 1: Right.  So did--
Speaker 2: Well, I brought him up because about the imitation.  So, when we were backstage before the World Science Fair event talking about bird brains and bird intelligence--we were backstage with Snowball and his new owner at that time, and talking amongst each other, okay.  We were talking about Snowball was walking around his cage and so forth and staring at everybody, and eventually he started saying "Not fair, not fair, not fair," right, (laughter), because everybody was talking to each other and not talking to him.  Then everybody started saying "What's wrong Snowball, what's happening?"  And he calmed down and started brushing his head up against the cage, and people were petting him and so forth, and then he stopped, you know.  In other words, he wanted attention.  And that's how he communicated.  So you know, so other parrots can do this, like Alex.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  We're going to pause again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 20940
Speaker 1: Yeah, so to say one more thing about Snowball before  moving on, is that you had earlier asked is there anything different about species that can imitate like us humans in terms of our intelligent ability or something different, that other animals who can't imitate, have.  And there was a study published on Snowball and a few others to show that only vocal learners can dance to a rhythm, okay, can move their bodies synchronized to a beat.  So, Snowball, you know, when you put on music he's pretty good at keeping in rhythm, and if you look at this YouTube video, you'll see that he's actually even better than in some of the scientists on stage with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, scientists aren't the--
Speaker 1: Right, they're not always the best dancers.
Speaker 2: You're the one exception--
Speaker 1: There are others out there, but yeah, it's true, it's not, they don't always go hand in hand.  So, I think of what they show--an elephant and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, elephants dance in a circus.
Speaker 1: That's right, yes.
Speaker 2: And you have dolphins that do that little thing in the water, where they dance together.  They can actually do aquatic ballet sequences, and what do they call it?
Speaker 1: To music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Water performance, I forget what they call it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's in sequence.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: They shadow each other and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Yes, so this was work by Ani Patel, a colleague of mine, and Irene Pepperberg as well, and Mark Hauser.  And so the governing theory there is that once an animal, a species like us, evolves vocal learning, that new circuit then somehow influences the old motor circuits to be more in tune with auditory information that we hear, so that in our brains, maybe our brain circuits for hearing sound and moving our body are more connected, not just for our voice, but for other body parts, than it is in a non-vocal learning species.
Story_ID: 20941
Speaker 1: Now, here you hit on something that, this is a famous African American--it's not a famous theory but it's a theory that several African-American musicians have put forth, most notably Oscar Brown, Jr., that "It don't mean a thing if it ain't got that swing."
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: And he says, what is swing?  It's the oscillating rhythm of the--you know, he talks about this biography of him that's done by Donnie Betts.  He does this, it's a film biography of Oscar Brown, Jr. where he actually, you know, he talks about himself, you know, a year before he passes away.  He talks about rhythm and its relationship to learning and, you know, from the position of a musician, you know.  Phil Cohran of Chicago [Illinois], a musician who used to be with Sun Ra [born Herman Poole Blount, famous jazz composer], you know, claims that black children learn best when they're doing something in rhythm, and when you sing--you've done some research, too, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --that seems to indicate that singing reinforces learning, or--
Speaker 2: Well, you have to practice to sing, but some others have shown that gesturing, ah, reinforces the ability to learn how to speak.  And children actually gesture before they actually learn how to speak.  And the other is that singing ah, yes, does enhance the ability to learn.  And so somehow that might be, you know, those two things or those three things--the gesturing, the singing, the hearing, may be linked up together, but we don't know if that's the case or not, but that's one idea.
Speaker 1: Well, I know the story, the example of a child that can rap, and can remember rap lyrics no matter how intricate or how long--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, but yet can't do their homework.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know it's like, it's an old, you know--that everybody has heard this now.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yes.   Yeah, I don't, to me I think that has more to do with motivation and to consider what's important to, you know, that person or that family or that community than it has to do with how smart or not smart somebody is.  You know, so yeah, this gets back to ethnicity in the sense that a lot of peoples all around the world, you know, particularly during the time of colonization of the different countries, you know, thought Africans are less intelligent.  And the guys who developed this theory about brain evolution said, you know, that Africans have a smaller brain than, you know, whose names we changed about the brain terminology.  So Africans have smaller brains than Europeans.  So a guy who's rapping, small black kids rapping, can produce a whole long series of raps and memorize a whole, you know, like a whole poem, basically, long poem of things to say.  Well, that shows a high level of intelligence.  Why isn't that person doing good in English or something else?  And that's because of cultural differences in what's considered important in your own culture more than something about lack of intelligence. One thing, though, I have seriously considered might be different, between peoples of different ethnic backgrounds, going back to the rhythm, is the case that some of the most famous dancers to rhythmic dances, are African--people from African descent-so, music from Africa.  And so, I get people asking me, does this mean--like Snowball, you know--Africans have more higher connectivity between speech areas and brain areas involved in body movement than other people?  And I don't know the answer to that, but I do think there's probably going to be small differences between different ethnic groups depending on the environment they grew up in, either through development-- because you're influenced by that culture--so if you are hearing a lot of rhythmic music at 2, 3, 5 years old, alright, that is imprinting upon your brain during a critical period, that is hard to change later in life.  The same thing for two different languages.  If you're learning two different languages at an early childhood stage, you can speak those two languages much easier than learning another language later in life, yet in the public schools they try to make us learn languages later in life.  It's counter-intuitive.  So, some of that's going to be cultural, some might be genetic.  I mean, we just have to find out in the future.  So I don't know--you were about to talk about somebody else though.
Story_ID: 20942
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, right.  I was going to ask you about Thomas Bethune and other so-called idiot savants, who were able to master huge amounts of information it seems, on one hand, and then not be able to figure out, you know, how to tie their shoe on the other hand.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yes.  So I'm fascinated by these things.  And I'm beginning more and more to think that these are genetic differences that somebody like an idiot savant or a person--that's kinesthesia.  This is where they see something that they--they see things, but they actually hear it instead of--it's been shown that their auditory cortex is processing the visual signals, and that's how come they see something that they hear.
Speaker 1: Right.  I've heard that--I think they did something like that--oh, I read about where a person can see colors when they hear sounds.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So, what I think is happening here is that there are differences in some connectivity of some brain pathways that have become enhanced for, you know, some visual processing, auditory processing, or just even processing in general that then leads to a decrement in some other brain pathway.  And from my scientific perspective, at least, all species are forever changing themselves in the next generation to constantly adapt to new environments, to do something better than what the prior generation done before in terms of the genome.  And what I think happens in savants-- and is just basic evolution--but not all things that change have all good sides to them, they have bad sides to them.  And this is the same thing for genes and behavior.
Speaker 1: And it's for those who, I guess--Thomas Bethune, known as Blind Tom could play concertos and so forth, just after having just listened on a piano, just like he heard them.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Yeah, I've heard about that.  That's amazing.
Speaker 1: There's a fellow now that can look at the horizon of a cityscape and then go on and draw, and draw every building--
Speaker 2: It's like photographic memory, yeah.  I used to not believe that such people exist, but after reading about them more and more, I believe it does exist, which tells us also that our brains have a greater capacity than the average person has now.
Speaker 1: I have to ask you about that old saying that we only use one seventh of our brain.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, that's right, ten percent of our brain, that's right.
Speaker 1: People always say that.  Is there any truth to that?
Speaker 2: That's not true in the, let's say, in the more global sense.  We use a lot of our brain from moment to moment to moment.  I forget who presented this.  Someone presented it--talked the other day where they were recording a thousand neurons from the brain with some type of neuro-activity markers.   And based upon that, they did see that somewhere roughly ten percent of the neurons were active at any one particular second in time, okay.  So, from one second in time, you know, one; ten percent, another second; another ten percent, another second; and another ten percent.  So, but no one knows, no scientist that I know of knows where that old saying comes from, that you only use ten percent of--it's one of these mythical things.
Speaker 1: You hear it in the barbershop.
Speaker 2: that's right, yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 20943
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, once again, what you're doing now, you're trying to actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, we are, we have like several sets of projects.  One is on continuing to understand how the vocal learning system works in birds who are cloning the genes out of that circuit, understanding how those genes form new connections to help form new memories of the songs heard.  And the other project is to test this hypothesis that I have, which is how did these brain pathways evolve, how did they form?  And so we are taking genes that we've identified that are different in humans and parrots and songbirds and trying to manipulate them in a chicken or mice, to see if we can influence those brain pathways to become more human like, and get these animals to produce more advanced type of vocalizations.
Speaker 1: Like, imagine a chicken saying, "unfair, unfair."
Speaker 2: Right, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: They have a lot to scream about.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah.  Don't chop my head off or something like that.  I don't want to be food.  Who knows, yeah.  Once animals talk, people have a lot more empathy for them.  So that--who knows, they might start becoming more vegetarians if we did this.  So, but, I--you know I realize that this is pie-in-the-sky talk and what we call hand waving science.  And, you know, I've been cautious about trying to say what we really think could be done in my lifetime.  And I've really been timid sometimes, thinking if I can only even get halfway there, or even a third, to this goal, I'd be happy.  At the same time, what I've seen over the last 20 years since I've decided to start my career in science as a student, I found that a lot of things have changed.  Science sometimes has these rapid bursts in the area of genome biology, sequencing the human genome.  I'm getting my genome sequenced now.  It has advanced so fast in the last ten years that there are things that we can do now that we couldn't think of easily before, manipulating genes in animals and so forth.  So I'm going to keep hope alive on the horizon, that maybe we'll be able to accomplish this project in my lifetime.  And if not, at least then I'll set down a foundation for those after me to come and continue.
Story_ID: 20944
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were, when you were working on your Ph.D., your father was killed?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so actually when I was working on--yes, that's right-my first year in graduate school, it was my Ph.D.  My grandfather had died a few months earlier of a heart attack.  Then my father was killed soon after that.  And the story as we interpret it now from the police report and so forth, is that at that time he had re-joined society to a certain degree.  He was living in a, what's called a homeless shelter, but it wasn't a typical shelter with guys living in cots in a big giant army infirmary or something like that.  This was a new model that people from Columbia University [New York, New York] had started at the time, to get money from the city.  Instead of spending money for one of these shelters, spend money to renovate a broken down building to house people who have once been homeless.  And my father was in this housing complex and re-joining people and so forth, meeting other people who were once homeless.  He played the piano for them and, you know, on holidays and so forth.  But even though he was no longer homeless, he liked to go back out to the caves.  So he went to High Bridge Park in upper Manhattan [New York] and would sit outside the caves.  And these were old Indian caves that he used to visit, and he would sit there and spend the afternoon, just contemplating, you know, whatever he liked to contemplate about the world.  But he, even though he was living in a homeless shelter, he liked his raggedy clothes that he had. And so he looked kind of like a caveman.  And he looked kind of homeless though, to a certain degree.  He took a shower, but he just liked his hair to grow.  And so we were told that there was a gang of teenagers who were doing an initiation rite, and they had to kill somebody to be initiated into the gang.  And they thought that--there were guns being shot up--and they heard that this was happening, and they couldn't find these guys, but they basically said that he was shot point blank in the head, and was killed instantly.  But before the police figured out that's probably what happened, because it wasn't solved, they assumed that he committed suicide, alright, because of being homeless and his father having had died several months earlier.   But the coroner's report claimed that the evidence is not there, he did not have any gun powder on hands.  They assumed he committed suicide and maybe the teenagers came along and picked up his gun.  But there was no evidence that he had got a gun anywhere--had gun powder on his hand--and he had money and keys in his hand that looked like he was trying to give to somebody, but they left without the money.  So that's why they think it was an initiation rite.
Story_ID: 20945
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, David Satcher, a few years when he was the Health Secretary, discussed how black people deal with mental illness, and we need only to, you know, kind of face up to it, because we kind of hide people away and that sort of thing and we don't really deal with it.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And those who are ill need to get help, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any reflections on--
Speaker 2: Yes.  In looking back on, not only my father, just my family in general and now being a neuro-scientist, let's say brain scientist, and understanding mental illness, mental health, I have a different appreciation of it than my family did back then.  So, mental illness, certain kinds of mental illnesses are clear diseases that are affected by--it could be drug induced, or genetic, or some type of chemical environmental, or whatever, occurs.  And my father, obviously, now when I look back on it, had mental health problems, whether it be drug-induced schizophrenia or something else.  But the family just treated it as something that is, you know, this is his fault, this is something that he's in control of, and he's just not making the effort to change it, he just doesn't have the willpower, and he's a failure.  You know, so here's this once brilliant guy who's now down and I'm ashamed.   And that's how I felt my grandfather treated it.  And then I've seen other people in my family who have had some psychological problems, and now I believe that for some reason they didn't see it as the way I see it now as a scientist.  And I think that has more to do with just being educated in what it is--rather than considering it, you know, something that's just tough love and you have to deal with it and get over with.  And I think the tough love part of it comes from just our past of, you know, we have the short stick in society and, you know, what we're taught is, you know, you're at a disadvantage, but in order to succeed in this life you have to be as good as--not just as good as, but better than your white colleagues or your classmates, otherwise you're not going to succeed.  And if you fail, that's your own fault, and you just get back on your feet and move on.  And that works in some instances, but not every time.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the kind of work that you--your studies are going to help, I guess, with the understanding of how the brain functions in the future where they'll even be able to, I guess, inform the mental health,
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Some of my research is funded by the Mental Health Institute, MIH, and the National Institute for Deafness and Communication Disorders, mainly because these animal models, they're--you know, you don't have species that imitate what humans do that are closely related to humans.  So, where could they inform them?  I personally am interested in really how the brain works, but there are some diseases that influence your understanding of how the brain works.  So I've studied Parkinson's-like diseases of the brain, autism-like symptoms.  Autism is a disease that affects speech.  And I think that these effects on these communication abilities for humans--you can't study in a non-human animal that doesn't imitate sounds.  You need to study in one that does.  And so, where I think our future work will really help, this hypothesis that I want to test, of inducing new brain circuits--is that if I can figure out to form these new connections in the brain for vocal imitation behavior, then that also would be a similar way of how to repair them when they get damaged through the stroke or some other trauma or some type of disease, you know, genetic disease or otherwise.
Story_ID: 20946
Speaker 1: Now, just kind of briefly summarize your career here at Duke, because we have a lot of paper about different milestones, but just kind of summarize this for us.
Speaker 2: So, yes, my career at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina],
Speaker 1: And why you came to Duke in the first place.
Speaker 2: Yes, I came to Duke for two reasons.  One was because--well, there are three.  One is the--well, before I even applied, the former chairman of our department, Dale Pervs, was trying to enhance the diversity of their department.  And they were contacting all universities all around the country, "Do you have any up and coming bright people who are, you know, from diverse backgrounds that would be interested in applying?"  And they, somebody, one of my mentors, also an African-American, sent his, that announcement to me and said I should go talk to them.  I came here, I was a graduate student, and Dale Pervs said, "No, you're not ready yet, plus we already have two songbird laboratories here.  We don't need another one."  Okay, and so I said, okay, and I went back to New York to Rockefeller and kept on with my post-doctoral work and then published more papers and I was doing well.  Got--Hunter's College, they offered me a new position there, and then I went to UNC and got an offer from there, the University of North Carolina.  And then I called Duke back up, and I says "I'm ready now."  And, you know, "So here's my CV."  And I came for a visit, and, you know, told Dale Pervs, I says, "Look, you have a songbird biologist here, Richard Mooney, who studies the neuro-activity in the brain, the electrical currents.  Another one, Steve Nowicki, who studies the--what is it called--the behavior itself of imitation, and myself, who studies the genes involved in that.  If you put the three of us together, we'll be the only place in the world that has all three major neurobiology and behavioral tools to study this one question.  That is why you should consider me."  So I made an opportunity for myself.  Plus, by that time, I had been more competitive.  So suddenly--like before I had published these papers, and here's this person of color, you know, with these, you know, high profile papers behind his back.  So, why Duke?  Why the South?  At that time I was also doing a lot of genealogy research, and I wanted to come here to figure out our origins, you know, this confusion that was in my family about ethnicity, race, where did we all really come from, and so forth.  So I had that reason.  So, people tell me why did I apply to only those three schools, because they felt that I actually could have gotten into a lot of different places with the amount of progress I had made by that time.  And I don't know.  You know, I didn't, that's where I just honed on.  I decided this is where I want to be, that's where I want to go, and that's where I'm going to go, good.   Ah, when I got here, you know there was a realization...  Yes, you asked a question that brings up a lot of things.  So just stop me if you need to stop me, alright.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I got here, why did I choose Duke over the other schools?  There are several reasons, two major ones.  One was the resources here were better than what I found at UNC and at Hunter College.  And they were state run, city run schools, and I liked them, you know.  I liked the atmosphere and so forth, but here I had more resources.  I felt in order to be a good scientist, I should go where the resources are at.  Some people complained to me, you know, Duke is a prestigious place--they said--let me backtrack--some are saying "Great, wow, you got a position at Duke, that's a hard thing to get.  Go for it, be the best scientist you can be."  Others say I'm a traitor, you know, because at UNC, they're more, it's a more diverse background, more African-Americans there.  At Hunter College, 60% under-represented minority, meaning it's not under-represented.  I can have a bigger impact on changing diversity and helping my kind, so to speak.  And I realized--I said, you know what?  What we don't have enough of today is people who are leading by example, alright.  I want to go to a place like I had at Rockefeller where I have more opportunity to have the tools to be the best scientist that I can be, so that somebody can say that that there's a person of color leading that field, being a leader as opposed to trying to, you know, be the person who's an activist to change everything.  I felt that if I can set--you're talking about role models--set an example, then I wouldn't have--some other people have said in the past and which I've heard, that black people aren't as smart.  And so that was the main reasons why I chose...  Oh, I said two main reasons.  That was one.  Second, was that Duke has this program like some of the other, you know, research run institutions where if you are a faculty member here for more than five years, they will pay for 70% of my children's college tuition when they go to college.  Or if they make it into Duke, they'll pay 100% of it.  And this has been going on for generations, since this university was started.  And it happened at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it happened at other places.  This was like emancipation.  It was the, it had this tingling feeling.  I mean, oh my God, my children are going to have an education in college wherever they want to go.  And guess what, the children of the Duke families who've gone here have had it for many generations, alright.  And this is when it really hit me.  This is an advantage that my family never had.  African-Americans were not allowed to be students or professors at Duke prior to 1965.  I forget what year it was, but it was in the '60s [1960s], alright.  And here this is an advantage now that I'm going to have.  So, it was more about my children and the future generation of the family and others that also helped me make that decision.
Story_ID: 20947
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, well, this is a good time to ask you about your children.  Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: So, my children, they're pretty good.  They're less maintenance than I am, you know.  And they have not given me much problems.  So, they're not as ambitious as I am, and I wonder why.  So, now one of my--I have a daughter, Electra, who's now just finishing college and graduated this year; and a son Cyrus, who's going to school at Elon University [Elon, North Carolina] for engineering.  And both of them, they did decent in college, but they don't have that fire in the belly, you know, to do something that's going to make a positive impact on the world, like my mother instilled in me.  And they just say "Dad, you know, we just want to live a normal life." (laughter).  And I think part of it is that I think they grew up with less struggle than I have.  They had more advantages, they lived a more comfortable life.  So, for them it's not a matter of survival, it's a matter of more choices to do what they want to do.  And I'm not going to throw my kids out on the street and say, you know, look, pick up your feet and do what you need to do.  You know, I'm nicer than that.  And so I think they're going to be good kids.  They are good kids, and I think they'll be successful, but there is a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 20948
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah that's, it's not an easy question, in that what I've seen in the African-American community is some things that dishearten me.  And that is, what I've learned when I was part of the African dance troupe, we went to Africa one year when I was a graduate student.  And I saw a lot more poverty over there in Senegal, where I went to, than I've seen anywhere in the U.S., well, anywhere let's say in the big cities in the U.S.  There's some in Native American reservations that are worse.  And so, and, but I noticed something different.  In Africa, the Africans have a lot more self-dignity about themselves and pride.  It's just the way they present themselves, the way they go about doing things.  And when they come to this country and go into science or other careers, they tend to do better more quickly than African-Americans who are born here in this country.  In this country I see a lot of African-Americans who have low self-esteem, compared to what I see in Africa--low esteem compared to lots of other different ethnic groups.  They have low expectations.  And I'm not saying this is for everybody, but as a community, it's a higher probability.  And it's hard to overcome that.  And I'm wondering, you know, how do you overcome that?  Because I felt that I've overcame it, and I can tell you that I've had low self-esteem at some point in my life.  And there are a few examples.  I remember what created it the first time around was I was a child.  It was several years after Martin Luther King was killed, you know, because I don't remember when he was killed, I was too young.  I mean, I was born already, but I don't remember any of the events.  But I remember there was an anniversary of his death, and I'm watching it on TV, a documentary on TV with my mother, and asked her, "Why did they kill him?"  And she said because he was a Negro, alright, and they didn't like Negroes and so forth, and there's discrimination, and, you know, the color of his skin and...   I'm looking at my color and I'm looking at Martin Luther King's color and I ask, "Are they going to kill me, too?"  And, you know, that innocent child feeling that you're less than, because of the color of your skin.  But I remember at that time, you know, even though I'm mixed, I didn't think about that at the time.  You know, I'm probably not as dark as other people, you know, who have this concern as well.  But I'm remembering that I wanted to be more white.  I wanted to straighten out my hair and so forth--to not feel like, you know, I'm going to be killed or something bad.  And then later on I remember, even after getting--publishing six papers as a graduate, an undergraduate student, getting into graduate school at Rockefeller University [New York, New York]--it was, you know, one particular person there.  I won't name names, but he just felt that I was there because of a quota, not because of my intelligence, and made a point of expressing that in so many words.  And I actually didn't realize until later that I internalized that kind of feeling, that I'm not as good as the other students.  And these are some really good students they brought to Rockefeller.  And you know I'm wondering, am I just as good or not?  And the only way that I overcame that, you know--luckily I had my past six publications.  I realized later on that this guy didn't have any publications before he came there.  So that helped me overcome it, right, to a certain degree.  But really it is that I had published these papers, got a job at Duke University, and you know, he quit science and so forth.  And so it was, you know, for me it was that success overcomes that kind of feeling that I see in the African-American community, and some others, including Native American and so forth, those who are impoverished.  And so what we need to do is not just teach people in the African-American community, you know, science and math and reading and writing and so forth.  We need to teach them how to succeed so that they can get some pride about their successes, and that will then help grow the community for themselves, to grow themselves out of the situation that they're in, as opposed to having other people wanting to do it for them.
Story_ID: 20949
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back on your career, to this point--now, you're a full professor here, right?
Speaker 2: I'm actually an associate professor, not a full professor.  I should be a full, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I'll go for a promotion soon.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And so you--
Speaker 2: There's assistant associate and full.  So I'm what they call a tenured professor, so I have a job for life here now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, and you told us what you were working on, and you've got lots of years left, apparently.  You even look younger than what you actually are.  So, when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Which seems like a crazy question.
Speaker 2: Right.  (laughter).  Yes, it's an interesting question about legacy.  Yeah, I'm 47, which most people say I don't look as old as I am.  And I do see some other people my age who do look older.  So, you know, I've been around.  At the same time I feel like I have a lot more to go.  And even ten years ago--am I 47?  Yes, okay.  I'm 46, sorry, okay.  Even ten years ago, 13 years ago, when I first came to Duke, I felt like, you know, I'm already too old, you know, at 33.  I need to try to really hit the ground running, because I'm going to get too old and my mind's going to fade away, and so forth.  And I feel that same way now.  So, but in terms of legacy, I would say that you know, I've got a lot of awards that are prestigious and, you know, I've done things that I've known that are hard to do.  I'm a Howard Hughes investigator now, which is the, you know, something that's really hard to get as a scientist.  So, I'm not going to be naive and humble and say no, you know I'm just some regular old person, scientist.  No, that's not true.  I feel like I have accomplished a lot.  And part of that legacy is two things.  One is overcoming adversity to succeed in something that's hard for people to do in that kind of adverse situation.  So, I learned to have a philosophy about going about life.  And some of those statements that I said, you know, in this interview, are part of that legacy that I've made in statements that do get published and so forth, and that has then influenced other people.  And I've been told that I do serve as a role model.  So, Black History Month, I get calls all the time from kids in their schools, they're doing a report on me, or e-mails.  Okay, and they want to talk about this, and sciences and so forth.  And I feel good about that.  Just catching them at a young age to influence them that, I can be like that, too.  So that's one legacy, a cultural one.  A scientific legacy is that, you know, I believe that our work, or at least if I had to look at the papers that get cited the most--that's how we evaluate ourselves--what are other scientists citing our work for in their own publications?   And the thing that they cited me for the most is the discovery of relationships between genes, behavior and neuro-activity in the brain, particularly the genes and the behavior link, and understanding how brain pathways for complex behaviors like vocal imitation could have evolved.  And so, it's both concrete scientific discovery as well as a hypothesis about how brains evolve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I notice, I watched the DVD of your presentation at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: You were late coming in.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But when you came down the aisle, the children began to cheer.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: I don't know what that was about, because I don't know what you said to them previously, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You must be making a connection.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway, another related question is, when you look back, again, at what you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently than you did, if you could go back and re-do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If I, well, from a philosophical approach, if I could do things differently, I would be even more assertive about taking the path in life that I want to choose.  Sometimes we waver a little bit and think, and you know, and try to decide what to do.  It's important to think about what you want to do, but sometimes it's also important that once you make that decision, you just keep going for it.  And I've done that, but I think I can do that better.  That's the philosophical approach.  From a scientific perspective, you know what?  No, I don't think I would have done it differently.  I can't see that under my circumstances there would have been a different way.  I think that the path that I'm taking now is the path that's meant to be.
Story_ID: 20950
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, I know you mentioned your wife before.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Do you want to say something more about her now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my wife--we met, you know, when I was nineteen and she was thirty, or twenty-nine going on thirty.  And we had two kids.  And you know she worked with me, we worked with each other a long time in the lab.  But unfortunately, several years ago things just went sour, and after being together for 25 years, we separated.  And so she's still working here at Duke University in neuroscience.  She actually got her Ph.D. in bacteriology, worked in skin disease, and now is working in tumor diseases.  And she's helping to run a laboratory here at Duke, not her own lab, but somebody else's lab, it's a physician.  And you know, we communicate, we talk.   We, you know, the kids visit each other's places and so forth.  And what I think happened there is that we just grew more distant as our careers kept progressing.   And also, she may not like to hear this, but I think we just outgrew each other.  And also, I think she felt that she had sacrificed some of her career to try to help raise the kids, where I, you know, helped my career, propelled my career forward.  And she really did help my career a lot, but I tried to help hers out a lot, too.  But I think there was just a difference also in the level of ambition in terms of what we wanted to achieve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I consider, you know, her--she's also a role model to a lot of people, particularly Puerto Rican women who want to go into the sciences.  And she has gone through a lot more adverse situations than I have in growing up as a child.  And so I, you know, I'm really proud to see that she has gone where she has, you know, gone all the through the Ph.D. path and being a scientist and making discoveries and doing what she's doing.  So, I'm just hoping our kids took the best of both worlds.  (laughter).
Story_ID: 20951
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now is there anything--I want to ask you about--that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Right. I would just say that what I really hope that people can get out of stories like this is really an understanding of a path that people can take to try to really achieve what they want to do.  They may not achieve it in the time that they want to achieve it, but there's always some path that can be found.  As my Ph.D. advisor once said to me, "Understand everything I say, but only believe in 50% of it for yourself."  That is, you know, your path may not be exactly the same, it may be different, but there'll be some overlap.  But find your unique niche that will work for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are there promising young black or Latino students coming into Duke here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I have seen over the years a change in the field of science.  So when I started as a graduate student, I forget, less than one percent of Ph.D.'s were African-American.  Unfortunately it's now not too much more--two percent, 2 point something percent.  But a change has happened, and through a lot of different efforts, we've gotten talented people coming through the ranks of African-Americans through science, brain science, physics and so on, such that when I first came to Duke I felt like I was in the middle of Europe.  This was in '98' [1998], alright, even though I was in the south, alright, which has a more diverse makeup than the rest of the country.  But when you walk onto Duke [ Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] campus, you know, it's mostly Europeans as far as I can tell.  And I felt like I was in a foreign land.  In the last, since that time, since '98' [1998], things have changed a lot.  There's been efforts to increase diversity of the makeup here.  When I came to the department, there were no, not only African-Americans, no students of any under-represented background in our department.  Since then we've been at about nine percent.  And having me here, I've been told, helps.  So, the problem that I see we face now is what I call the leaky pipeline.  What is that?  There are students who are interested in sciences, and start out, all the way from elementary school to high school to college, and at each level, the percent of African-Americans and other under-represented minorities gets lower and lower and lower.  They're dropping out of the sciences all the way to the faculty level where it's only a few percent.  But yet in the general population, the under-represented minorities are no longer becoming a minority.  That is, the people of color are actually growing in percentage of the population, so it's going in the opposite direction.  What's going on?  What I think is happening is that the students who are really interested in science are not getting the proper education or the proper training, is one.  And the other is that they're feeling like they're in a foreign land, in a foreign territory.  So you get some, you know, hot shot straight A student out of high school from somewhere, put them in a middle of a place like Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], which to them it still feels like the middle of Europe, a different culture, a different background, where they don't have their hands held for them to try to help them through.  They come into a sink or swim environment, and they don't know what to do.  They're afraid to talk to the teachers, and so forth.  So you have these brilliant kids who're just dropping out.  And so, I'm now principal investigator and director of the grants--or really a funding mechanism called Neuroscience Scholars Program, for the Society for Neuroscience, where the goal of that is to try to fix the leaky pipeline--take these talented students who come into the brain sciences and give them mentors who will explain how to survive in this different kind of cultural environment than what they may be used to, and to mentor them through their careers up until the point of getting the loans and even beyond that.  And to bring them to what we call our Annual Society for Neuroscience meeting, where 30,000 neuroscientists come together every year and expose them to the community and teach them how to network.  And so it's working, because a number of these scientists who came to this program--I came to this program--are now getting their own laboratories.
Story_ID: 20952
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Right, that's a good question, because when I make my decisions about what I want to do in my career, the question that I ask myself and even I paste in my notebook, is what do I want to be remembered for by the time I die?  And really what I want to be remembered for is making significant discoveries of how the brain works, in particular, how does it produce complex speech behaviors and cognition, alright.  And that, and how that has influenced our understanding of our own selves, our own brains, and the brains of other species on this planet, of other animals.  So, my memory that I want to be remembered by is a science memory.  Now there could be the cultural memory for the person who has changed the cultural makeup of science in the country and so forth.  If that could happen, that would be great.  And I think that could happen, but it really is understanding the brain.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Alright, you're welcome.
Speaker 1: That was a good discussion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm glad.
