Story_ID: 8844
Speaker 1: ...[Larry] Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And observing is Ms. Lee from the 'Akron Beacon Journal.'  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Dorothy middle initial, O Jackson.  That's D-O-R-O-T-H-Y middle initial O and, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 9th, 1933 in Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm deputy mayor for intergovernmental relations for the city of Akron.  And I have been for eighteen and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Thursday, August 1st, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We are at the Wooster Branch Library in Akron, Ohio.
Story_ID: 8845
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: You know, I would have a hard time in choosing my really favorite color.  But if people see me, they'd probably say, "She likes black and white."  But I also like blue. I enjoy color.  So I can't tell you I really have a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: All of it.  I love desserts. I love to cook.  And I love desserts.  And I'm always ready for a pound cake.  I can eat it for breakfast, lunch or dinner or midnight snack.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.  I love to walk in the leaves.  I love to hear the crunch.  I love the colors. I love the food.  I love the way I feel.  I love the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  I would love to go again to Vienna, Austria.  Because it was so beautiful.  And I loved hearing musicians when we walked down the street.  I spoke at the United Nations for the International Year of the Family.  That was my first time going to Vienna.  And I loved it.  I loved Salzburg [Austria], too.  And my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] did take me there for my birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  I have a favorite bible verse. "They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength.  They shall mount up with wings as eagles.  They shall run and not be weary.  And they shall walk and not faint."  And I find that verse so much.  Because in my own personal life.  Many times I've had adversity.  And many times things have happened.  And that has been the verse that--even when I am so tired and maybe things have been going a little--opposite direction, that verse can always just settle me back.  And I have it beside my desk.  I have it in my living room on a little placard.  And people know that I like that verse.  And--and I--I love to think about the eagles.  And I even went to the zoo. And I've given talks on the eagles.  Because it--it's just kind of special to me.
Story_ID: 8846
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family background.  And it--can you give me the name of your mother and her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I would almost need to look on a paper to give you the date.  But I can tell you--I can tell you that my mother's name was Dueallie Hoffman Jackson.  And she and my father were married in Oklahoma.  My mother was born in Plano, Texas.  Moved to Oklahoma when she was seven years old.  Met my father there.  And they were married and lived in Oklahoma until 1928, when they moved to Akron, Ohio with five children.  And two of us were born in Akron.  However in talking to my older sister [Thelma Christopher] today, she let me know that two others were born in Akron that did not live.  One was--died shortly after birth.  And one was about two years old that got pneumonia and died in my mother's arms.  And I did not know them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your mother was born in Plano, Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 1891.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--.
Speaker 2: December 21st. And she died in 1952 in Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now your--give us your father's name. And oh--okay.  Can you spell your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's name was spelled D-U-E-A-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: And that's pronounced how?
Speaker 2: Dueallie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dueallie.  And your father?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William Jackson, Sr.  And that's W-I-L-L-I-A-M. And he was born on Chickasaw Nation Indian Territory in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the date of his birth?
Speaker 2: November 5th.  But I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: 1887, I think.  I mean 'cause I--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 1887.  Okay.  And what do you know about his early life?  And--.
Speaker 2: I don't know much about my father's [William Jackson, Sr.] early life or my mother's [Dueallie Jackson] early life.  My father, I do know was a great swimmer.  And when it--we went back to Oklahoma every year for a vacation.  Every year we went back.  And my father wanted to teach us how to swim in the big oil tanks. And my mother was afraid of water. And she was afraid for him to take us in.  And I still carry that fear today.  Because she would say, "Oh no William.  The girls might drown."  He would say, "No they're not.  I'm not gonna let them.  I'm not gonna let them.  See the little boy.  He's going in.  They're gonna be fine.  They're gonna be fine."  And she would say, "No, no, no, no.  The girls might drown."  And so I, I--although I've had many lessons.  And I've never learned to swim.  Because I always had that fear of water.  But I was determined that my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] would know how to swim.  And she--I gave her lessons when she was about four. And so--.
Speaker 1: Did your mother or your father have stories about their ancestors and how they came to live in Oklahoma?  And, you know, or in Plano, Texas?
Speaker 2: No.  Not that I remember.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Them saying how they came to live there.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandparents.  I have pictures of my mother's mother [Annie Huffman] and father [John Huffman].  And I have pictures of my father's mother [Julie Jackson].  But I've never seen a picture of my father's father [Alfred Jackson].  And they--the one cousin that I thought had it--and I went to see her--who gave me the picture of my grandmother on my father's side.  She died two weeks after I left.  And I--the children that were there never gave me any pictures.  So I would love to have seen one.  I understand he was a very handsome man.  My father was.  So--.
Speaker 1: Was your father considered a part Chickasaw?
Speaker 2: Creek.
Speaker 1: Creek?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I have their role numbers.  And I have the census with my grandmother's names.  And all of--I have a cousin in California.  She and I are interested in--she's done the real work in getting a lot of the census sheets.  And their role numbers.  And I actually brought some of them with me today.
Speaker 1: So, you know, the Creeks are originally from Florida.  So did he have a story about how his family got to Oklahoma or--?
Speaker 2: No.  I--if he did, I don't know it.  I wouldn't say he didn't have a story.  But I don't know the story.
Story_ID: 8847
Speaker 1: Did your parent's have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.  But the one story that I do remember them having is--I--my father [William Jackson, Sr.] didn't dance.  And my mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] did.  And I guess after they were married, my--they went--my mother would tell us that they would go. And when she would dance, my father would sometimes just sit on the floor to put his feet out. So that--and she said, "Oh well.  If this bothers him then she wouldn't dance."  But my mother still blushed.  They still--my mother and father still courted even after seven children.  And now that I'm older, I realize my father would drive a truck.  And he would pick up trash and do things.  And when he would come home in the evening, he would stop at the beginning of the driveway.  My mother would get in to the truck with him and ride to the garage.  And they would slowly walk back to the house.  And I realize with seven kids, that's what they had to do to have some quiet time to talk.  Because we were there.  But being young, you didn't.  And--but my mother still blushed.  And they were in love.  They were in love.  And they were--they were together.  If we wanted to do something--and so--there were certain things--like kids know that their mother will say yes to.  And--or their father will say yes.  And so you go to the one that you know you would get the yes.  And so I would go to my mother.  And I would say, "Momma, can I--?"  And she would say, "What did your poppa say?"  "Oh I didn't ask him Ma."  Then she'd say, "Oh let's see what your poppa has to say."  And he would do the same thing.  I would go to him--things that I knew that I could get a yes from him quicker.  And I would say, "Well poppa, can I--?  He'd say, "What did your momma say?"  "Oh well I didn't ask her.  I thought--."  "Well let's see what your momma has to say about that?"  And they were--they were together on that.  I guess maybe two great things that I always remember is that they taught us freedom of speech and respect.  We said yes ma'am.  We said no ma'am. We said please.  We said thank you. We said excuse me.  If we would get into it with each other, my mother would make us hug and kiss. And say we're sorry.  And it was like you didn't wanna do it.  But you were laughing by the time you did it.  Because you knew that she meant that.  You had to hug and say you were sorry.  And they believed in the rod.  They didn't beat us.  But they did whip us.  And the lecture they gave to us before they--and I was--my sister, Lucille [Jackson] who was four years older than me.  She didn't never need any.  I needed 'em.  I always was the one that would tell the kids, "Alright, it's okay.  We can play ball in the yard."  Even though I knew we didn't have to--weren't supposed to.  And then when I'd break the window, I remember my mother talking to me.  And she said, "Why now just come and sit on the steps.  And wait until your poppa comes home."  And so oh, I just wished that I could have got that beating  first .  But she would always talk to us.  And tell us why.  And she would--I remember her so many times saying to me, "If I don't correct you.  The Lord will correct me."  Or she would say, "I won't always be with you.  And if you act like that, people won't want you to be around them."  And I wished that she could have lived to see that people do want to be around me.  And people do come around me. And I--and I give it all back to her.  Because had she not done that, I'm sure I would have gone a different direction.  And they really didn't--they took us to church.  They didn't send us.  They took us.  And they had great pride in us.  And kids had fun at our house.  Kids loved to come to our house.  Because my mother was a very good cook.  And they loved--they loved to come to our house.  Because it was fun. We laughed.  We didn't have a television.  We didn't have a lot of things.  But we had a lot of love.  We had a lot of love.  And we ate as a family.  We ate breakfast as a family. They prayed with us before we went to school.  I can remember my mother standing on the porch and watching us walk in pride.  And I can remember in the snow--and when it was cold.  And our school was probably a good little walk away from home.  And I would come out at lunchtime.  And it would be cold.  And my mother would be standing on the corner with my lunch.  So that I wouldn't have to walk in the cold.  And yet she had walked in it.  So I--I'm so grateful that even though history will say we were a poor family, I know we were rich.  Only I didn't know it then.  But I know now that we were so rich.  Because we were rich in love.  We watched them have friends.  They had friends that came to our house. They prayed with them.  We went on vacations with the families that came from Oklahoma.  Sometime it would be seven of our cars in line going back to Oklahoma.  And we always went in August.  So it would be camp meeting time.  And we'd go back for the camp meeting at the church in a tent in Oklahoma.  And those are great, great memories.
Speaker 1: And would you always go back to the Chickasaw places?
Speaker 2: We would go back to Boley [Oklahoma].  The camp meeting was in Boley.  We had family in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  We had family in Tulsa [Oklahoma].  We had family in Beggs [Oklahoma].  We had family in Green Pasture [Oklahoma].  And they were very, very much into family.  And we are still that way into family.
Story_ID: 8848
Speaker 1: My sisters and I have three sisters that--are still living. We talk every day.  We talk.  And if one doesn't know where the other one is, you just call the other one and they'll know.  We still let each other know where we are.  And we're very close.
Speaker 2: Okay. So how many of you are there?
Speaker 1: It's three of us living. Four of us living.  I have my oldest sister, Thelma [Christopher]. She will be eighty-nine.  And my sister, Edna [Fitzpatrick] will be eighty in August.  And my sister, Annie [Stills] just turned seventy-six.  Now my oldest brother, William [Jackson, Jr.], he died in '92 [1992].  And my brother Jasper [Jackson] died in '50 [1950]--no--. What year did Jasper die--'55 [1955], I believe.  And my sister, Lucille [Jackson] died in 1964.  My mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] died in'52 [1952].  And I was the baby of the family.  But I dropped out of school.  I was going to business college [Actual Business College, Akron, Ohio] at night.  And working in a grocery store in the daytime.  My oldest--I'm the change of life baby.  And so--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I dropped out of school. And came home.  And love led me to leadership.
Story_ID: 8849
Speaker 1: I want you to tell us about growing up in Akron [Ohio].  And some of the sights and sounds or smells of  the neighborhood you grew up in. What that neighborhood were--.
Speaker 2: We grew up in East Akron on Ardella [Avenue].  Now I was born on Ardella.  And that was the street just before an open field and clay beds. And it was an integrated neighborhood.  Because not only did African Americans come to work at the rubber factories, but people came from foreign places.  And they--so we had neighbors that were Russians.  And we had neighbors that were other nationalities.  And we had neighbors that had come from the South too that were white.  And so our school was integrated.  And we were integrated in the schools, not in the churches.  But in the schools we were.  And so I grew up playing with kids of other races.  The street was our field.  The street was our ball field.  And so we played baseball in the street.  We did our sled riding in the street.  We had our snowball fights in the street.  And we grew up in that neighborhood.  A little corner grocery store--I remember going to the store many days with my father [William Jackson, Sr.] working on the truck.  Sometimes my mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] would need to wait until he got home to see the money.  And we would go to the grocery store, and get a quarter's worth of salt pork.  A quarter's worth of bologna or a quart of buttermilk and a box of cornmeal. We always had meals. We had a garden.  And so my mother would always cook good meals.  And she would always make desserts.  And my father, when he worked on WPA [Works Progress Administration]--they would--my mother would make these small pies--apple and peach and sweet potato.  And my father would take them and sell them.  We would go and pick behind people.  And get potatoes.  And pick up potatoes.  We'd go pick berries.  And my mother would always pack a lunch for us when we went to pick berries.  We'd have picnics. And we'd go to the park and have picnics with the family.  My father would walk us--we were not far from the Derby Downs .  And my father would walk us over so that we could look in the fence.  We--and see the kids racing.  My father would walk us to Goodyear [Tire Company].  And we would go.  And I remember--I was telling the man from Goodyear this year, the derby--I remember the little boxes of candy that we would get and the dolls and the toys.  And my father would walk us over there to see the movie at Easter.  To see the movie of Jesus's crucifixion.  And so I remember being a happy child.  And I remember my brothers and sisters as happy children.  And the nice thing that I--my--children today--a lot of children today--you will see that they're carrying the burdens of the world.  Because they hear 'em.  And they know 'em.  And they have TV.  And they get it in many different ways.  But my mother never gave us the burdens of the day.  I remember having electrics--a stove in the kitchen.  But my mother cooking on a wood stove in the basement.  I remember us having the switches for lights. But we had oil--kerosene lamps.  She never told us that they didn't have the money to pay that bill.  She didn't give us that burden.  So we didn't carry--we didn't carry the burdens of the day.  So we could be carefree as children.  And so I think that's a lot of thing that happens to our children today.  That they have heavier burdens than we did. And they miss out on their childhood.  We had--we were the silly kids that could play and have fun.  And my father liked to wait up until we'd be ready to go to bed.  And--when we were getting to be teenagers. And we'd be so--we'd say, "Momma, make him go to bed.  Make him go to bed."  And one of his sayings that he would always give us.  And he would tell the kids, "Let's play mouse.  Everybody to their own house."  (Laughs) So--and he would often say, "It's nine o'clock when I was a boy."  And he would look at his watch and say--and he had a pocket watch.  And he'd pull out that pocket watch.  And he would say, "Decent girls go to bed at nine o'clock.  You have to go--."  He really was sure that we had to go to bed at nine o'clock.  And they made us make up our beds in the morning.  And I remember I used to say--I always had a word.  "I didn't know why we had to make up the bed.  We're gon' go back to bed in it at night.  We're gonna mess it up again."  And he would say, "Pigs don't make up their beds.  They root out a place.  But you are not a pig.  You're a people. And so people make up their beds.  Pigs don't.  But people do."  They were a lot of--they had lots of wisdom and lots of good mother wit.  And I just remember those wonderful, wonderful times as a child.  One that always had a reason.  Or wanted to know why I didn't--you know, we had to wash dishes.  And I would say, "Well it's only one fork.  It's only one plate." Or I would say, "I'm bored."  And he would say, "Get up, and go wash your dishes."  And I would say, "It's only one fork.  It's only one knife."  He said, "Wash the dishes anyway."  And I was still bored.  "Oh you have to clean the stove and sweep the floor."  And so it's funny that even today you--that hearing the word, "I'm bored." You don't hear that from me. Because I know what to do.  When I was off sick, a girl said--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) There's always something to do.
Speaker 2: Are you--didn't you get bored staying at home?  I said, "No.  I may be boring.  But I am not bored." Because there is always something to do.  And that's--I think that's a gift that he gave to us.  He gave us the gift of knowing how to use your quiet time to be quiet and to be still. And to--and I can still do that.  I can be in the house without a television.  Without--we didn't have TV anyway as children.  But I can be still.  And I can be quiet.  And I can get up and do something.  And a part of washing dishes and growing up was--you had to scrape the dishes.  You had to rinse the dishes.  And then you had to wash the dishes in order.  You know, your glasses would go first.  And then you had to clean the stove and sweep the floor.  And clean the floor.  It was all a part of dishes.  It wasn't just wash the dishes.  So they taught us the value of good hard work.
Story_ID: 8850
Speaker 1: Let's talk about school now.  Now where'd you go to school?  And how did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school. I wasn't that smart. I went to Robinson Elementary School [Akron, Ohio].  I liked school.  It was--wasn't an option.  You were going to school.  And so I liked it.  And my father [William Jackson, Sr.] was a--I think he would have been a great mathematician.  Because he would drill us when--around the table.  But he would drill us with things that he was familiar with.  If you had three cows and you sold two pigs, how many cows do you have left?  Or if you had--you know, he did it to us with things that he knew. And he would just drill us with that.  And make us begin to think.  And my mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] always was there.  When we came home from school my mother was there.  I remember coming home from school.  And I was the hardest person on shoes.  And I don't know if you noticed.  I took my shoes off as soon as I came in here.  But I remember my father would trace our feet on cardboard.  And he would cut out the cardboard and put it in our shoes.  And our shoes were shined at night.  They may have a hole in 'em. But they were shined.  And so we would shine our shoes.  And they'd be lined up.  And so I'd run around without shoes in the evening and at home.  And then they were ready for us to go into school. And I would wear 'em out so bad that my father bought me boy's steel-toed shoes. It's in one of those pictures.  In one of--and the kids would come and stand on my toe.  And say, "Slim, can you feel it?  Can you feel it, Slim?  Slim, where'd you get those shoes at?"  "Poppa bought 'em."  But--.
Speaker 1: That was your nickname then?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, Slim. "Slim, where'd you get them shoes?"  Because then I was slim.  Not today (laughs).  But I was skinny.  And it seems like I was always this tall.  I'm sure I wasn't.  But it just seems like it.  I was--and then the boys didn't grow tall. So I was taller than the boys. And I would shrug my shoulders, thinking that it might make me shorter.  It didn't.  It only gave me bad posture.  And--but my mother would try and get it--me out of that habit.  And when I would come home, I remember her always putting a book on my head to make me walk across the floor.  But when I went out, the kids teasing was stronger.  And so I would crouch.  So that maybe I wouldn't be taller than everybody.
Speaker 1: Now in grade school, did you have any, any particular teachers or mentors in the community that, you know,  just stand out? You know, in grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, my teachers--Miss Sullivan was my first grade teacher.  And Miss Marriott, my third grade teacher, that's in--in that picture that I had were just--my mother was a very kind soft-spoken lady.  I never heard her raise her voice.  I wish I could--my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] could say the same.  But my mother never raised her voice to us.  She spoke to us softly.  She spoke to us kindly.  She hugged us.  She would--even before your spanking she'd sit you on her lap.  And she would hug you.  And she would tell you how much she loved you.  And she would give you your spanking.  And then we would get on our knees.  And she would have prayer with us to ask God to help us to be better.  And so I'm always drawn to very kind people.  And so my teachers in Robinson--Miss Marriott and Miss Sullivan--it was two sisters.  And they were just--they were very, very kind teachers.  I remember Mr. Vandersol, who was my seventh grade teacher who was special to me.  And every morning he wrote--he wrote across the bulletin board.  It was across the top of it.  And every morning when we came in he pointed to each word, and we read it.  And now these many years later, I still remember, "I will study and get ready.  And perhaps some day my chance will come."  And we said that the first thing every morning.  He would--when we went in his room he would point to those words, "I will study and get ready.  And perhaps some day my chance will come."  I--and I feel that being Deputy Mayor in Akron as the first African American woman with a twelfth grade high school education that my chance did come.  And I'm very grateful for their kindness. They were very kind.  But they--they were disciplinarians too.  And then we had one teacher, Miss Joy who--she was tough.  She had her little ruler.  And we would always say, "That mean Miss Joy."  But Miss Joy cared that you learned. And so I remember happy days at Robinson.  And I'm grandma at Robinson now.  I go back.  And I hug the kids.  And I've cooked for five hundred of them.  And had them come to my house to help me cook for Black History Month.  So--and I just chaired the brick campaign for them in getting people to buy bricks to put on the side, so that they can have money for activities and programs that may not be available in the budget.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I just remember happy times.  And it's funny now how the school seems small.  When it seems so big when I was there.  But it's still there.  I still go to church in that neighborhood.  I don't live there now.  But I still go to church there right down the street.  And I still go back to Robinson.
Story_ID: 8851
Speaker 1: Let's talk about high school.  Now what high school did you attend then?
Speaker 2: East High [School, Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what was East High like?  And did you like it?
Speaker 2: I loved it. We had two sessions when I went to East High.  Ninth and tenth graders went to school in the afternoon from--like about 12:45 until about 4:00.  And--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was the school crowded?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Is that why?
Speaker 2: It was crowded.  That was why.  And so the ninth and tenth graders went in the af--and our class was the last class that went the split session.  And then eleventh and twelfth grade went in the morning.  At the end of our driveway at the school we had a little place called  Parine's [ph.].  In fact, I just went to my fiftieth class reunion last year.  And so we still correspond with each other.  With our classmates from East High.  And my favorite teacher there was--oh my.  I had another favorite teacher from Robinson [Elementary School, Akron, Ohio]  who was Mary Ellen Bowers, who was our music teacher.  And she still follows me to this day.  When she reads in the paper that I'm getting an award I will look up. And she would quietly be in the room.  She still comes to my office to see me.  She has still followed me.  And Miss Mostinick. We stayed in touch until she passed away just a few years ago.  But she was our English teacher.
Speaker 1: But--.
Speaker 2: And.
Speaker 1: Miss Robinson was your favorite in high school?
Speaker 2: Miss Mostinick.
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In high school.  And Miss Bowers in elementary school.  She was--she was a music teacher.  Now I cannot sing or hum.  But she never told me that I couldn't sing.  She told me--she would let me come when they would rehearse for music festivals.  Because she would let me wash her bulletin board. And when it was over she would always tell me how good I washed the board.  And I was so proud.  Didn't get to sing.  But I got to stay in the room with them.  And I got to wash her bulletin board.  And it was just--you know, she never told you what you could not do.  But she lifted up what you could do.  And I think many times kids need that.  Had she told me, go ahead.  Get out of this room.  It's no need in you staying.  You cannot sing.  You're not gonna be in the choir.  You're not--.  She didn't do that.  She'd just tell me how good I was at washing the board.  She laughs about it today.  But I still can't sing.  Can't hum.  Can't hold a tune.  No, not at all.  But she was just that kind, kind lady.  And she's still--she still is.
Speaker 1: Okay now.  What activities were you involved in, in high school?
Speaker 2: I played baseball and--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Baseball?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In the street.
Speaker 1: Not softball.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  Well softball.  We called it baseball.  It was softball.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (inaudible).
Speaker 2: And when I would go to the Urban League-- [National Urban League].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) There's a--okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was on the team at the Urban League.  I was not on the team at school.  And volleyball--I was good at volleyball. We had a swimming pool in our school.  I did not learn to swim.  I took double gym. I took the swimming.  But then, you know, hair was an issue too.  Because we didn't have good caps.  And the water would go gurgle, gurgle, gurgle and you had a swimming class in the morning, you were not too happy to have your hair like it would be the rest of the day.  We didn't have the perms then. And--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear).
Speaker 2: And then I was afraid of water too.  And then we'd--but my mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] gave us lessons.  We took lessons at Lincoln [Elementary School] pool.  We took 'em at the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association].  But that fear--I just never--and I regret it.  I wish today that I knew how to swim.  And I've even gone as an adult to go back to the Y. I think I'm gonna take lessons.  But I've gotten as far as the window.  And didn't really go and take them.  But--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Were you--were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: I was a good--I was--let's say I was a good student.  I wasn't a smart student.  I was a good student.  But not a smart student (laughs).  My grades were probably average.  I wasn't an honor roll kid.  But I always tried.  And I always worked at it.  And I was always at school every day.  I had one African American teacher.  And I remember walking out of his class in ninth grade.  Because I was the only black in the room.  And he was telling stories one day.  And all the whites were laughing.  And he was telling the story about--in the summer they go out in the sun.  And we go in the basement.  And a few other things like that.  And I just got up, walked out of class and walked home.  And when I went in the house my mother said, "Well what are you doing here?"  And I said, "(Crying) That old teacher.  He was--."  She said, "Come on."  She walked me back to school.  She never talked about that old teacher.  She never said anything about all that--anything.  She just walked me back.  She opened the door.  She said, "Now go in and sit down.  And don't do that again."  And the teacher came out.  And they talked.  I don't know what she said to him.  I don't know what he said to her.  But I bet I never walked out of class again.  That was the only time I walked out.  But it was--I think that was a good thing.  Is that they didn't--you know, they didn't take you aside.  And think that, you know, you're that precious little child.  That she couldn't of done anything wrong.  It must be the teacher.  No.  Your job is to go in there and sit down.  And so she just quietly opened the door.  "Now go in.  Sit down.  And don't do that again."
Story_ID: 8852
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were you thinking about doing at--career wise or in high school [East High School, Akron, Ohio]?  Did you have any thoughts about where your career is gonna go from there?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In the twelfth grade in our yearbook--I think I--in the yearbook that I wrote that I would like to be a receptionist for a handsome doctor.  Funny thing is--and that's what--someone asked me--and I don't know who it was.  Before I came in here. They said, "What do you think about these HistoryMakers?  Do you think it's good?"  I thought, "I think it's wonderful."  And the reason I'm willing to come is because I think now when our young people can see you can be--Useni Price [sic, Perkins] wrote that poem, "Hey black child.  Do you know who you are?  You know who you really are?  You know you can be anything you wanna be if you try to be.  You can be." And I--.
Speaker 1: Useni Perkins, right.
Speaker 2: And that's the--.
Speaker 1: Perkins.
Speaker 2: Perkins.  Yes.
Speaker 1: That's the thing that our young people can begin to see.  And I think they'll pick it up from all the HistoryMakers that they'll--they can be more than that.  Now we did have black doctors and a black dentist as a child growing up.  But I didn't know how to reach my heights to think about being a doctor or a dentist.  But I thought I could be a receptionist.  Because the receptionists that worked in our dentist's office was very kind.  And she always smiled.  And she made our appointments.  And, oh that's what I'll be.  I'll be a receptionist.  But I wanted him to be a handsome doctor.  Not just a doctor.  He has to be handsome.  That I would be--but--because I didn't know how to lift my sights any higher than that.  And my mother told us to take typing in high school.  Because she said it would help you--help me get a better job.  Beside my bed at home now is a typewriter.  In my office beside my computer is a typewriter.  I think on the typewriter.
Speaker 2: Do you get the same feeling from the computer?  Or--.
Speaker 1: I had a hard time with the computer.  Because I didn't have to--you touch it softer.  The touch was different.  The keys were a little bit different.  And I found myself with the hands on the wrong key.  But as I say to young people, this is a computer age.  I'm--you know, I'm not really computer illiterate.  But I'm not the wiz banging on a computer.  But I use the computer everyday.  I can take e-mail and send e-mail.  And love that correction. And get lost.  And holler for somebody to come and help me.  But I do use the computer everyday.  And we have to do that.  And I say to young people, but the most marvelous computer is right here (pointing to head). And so you keep plugging into it.  And what you plug into it is what will come out.  So you have to plug good things into it.
Speaker 2: Now as--in high school was drawing to a close--and I hope I haven't left anything out.  Is there something else in high school we need to talk about that's really, you know, a--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I don't--.
Speaker 2: Milestone?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I was a library aide in high school.  And--but--.
Speaker 2: But you had this--you're getting ready to graduate from high school [East High School, Akron, Ohio].  And you make--you come from this very sweet family.  They really sound sweet.  And (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They are.
Speaker 2: And you got this attitude of service.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And--so where did you see yourself going from there as a--?
Speaker 1: We really didn't have--no one told us about scholarships and grants and--and my parents [William Jackson, Sr. and Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] didn't have the money to do that. And they didn't know about that.  But my mother wanted me to--continue to improve my skills in the office.  And so I went to business college [Actual Business College, Akron, Ohio] taking typing, shorthand and bookkeeping.  Shorthand that I let the kids talk me out of in high school.  Because the kids said, "Oh that's hard. You don't wanna take shorthand.  You're--."  And ended up paying to take shorthand.  Because I let--when I could have taken it free in school.  But--so I went to business college at night.  And we had a neighborhood grocery store, Roebuck and Son.  He was--he always said, "The best boss you every had.  The best boss you ever had."  But I worked in his grocery store in the daytime.  And went to school at night.  And then when my mother became ill I just quit school.  And quit my job.  And came home.
Story_ID: 8853
Speaker 1: My thirty-five year old brother had had a stroke three days before we were going back to Oklahoma.  And my mother was taking care of him.  And while taking care of him she became ill.  In October she became ill.  And so I just came home and took care of my--.
Speaker 2: Was she ill for a long time?
Speaker 1: No. She died that December [1952].  She just had--she had cancer.  So she died very quick. But she was--she was aware of her death.  My mother [Dueallie Hoffman Jackson] and father [William Jackson, Sr.] were both saved.  And they loved the Lord.  And they just really believed.  And I remember the morning that my mother was so sick that she wasn't get--she didn't get up anymore.  And that morning that she was so sick was a Sunday morning.  And my father stayed in the room a long time.  And we were laughing.  We were awake.  We wouldn't get up.  Because we, "Hah they didn't get us up to go to Sunday school."  And so we were gonna wait.  And my father came out of the room.  And just closed the door very quietly.  And he came over.  And he said, "Your mother is very sick.  And I'm going to call the other children."  And so he went.  And he called my sisters that were married.  And when they got there we all went in the room.  And we all stood around the room.  I sat beside my mother.  And my mother said to us, you know, that she was sick.  And she said, "And I've been sick before. And the Lord has healed me."  She said, "But this time it is not his will."  And I remember her putting her hand on my leg.  And she said, "I asked the Lord for one thing.  And that was to let me raise my children."  And she said, "Now you're the baby."  And she looked at my father.  And she said, "Husband I have lived true to you."  My sister Annie [Stills] was a Christian then too. And so she said to Annie, "Always remember mother to the children."  She said, "Now I don't know when I'm going.  I just know I'm going. And I'm ready to go."  She said, "And I don't know when.  But I know that I am."  And we all cried.  It was just like oh. You know, we just--but she wasn't--she was very--just very calm and very quiet and not--and she kind of raised her hand.  And, you know, she said to Lord, "I am ready to go."  And she lived until December 21st [1952]  And I took care of her. And she would--when my sister, Lucille [Jackson] would come home from work, she would say, "Dorothy has me all cleaned and ready to go."  And I say, "Ready to go where Momma?  You're not--."  And she said, "Oh."  And she would tell us little things all the time while she was sick.  She would say, you know, she wanted to be buried in pink.  And she wanted a gray casket.  And she said, "I want lots of flowers."  I remember she and the neighbor that lived next door to us.  They would all--whenever anybody died they would always go to their funerals.  I think they must say that about me at work. Because any time any of my friends die.  I will go and see about the family.  I will take food.  Because I--that's what I saw my mother do.  I saw her cook.  And take things to people.  I saw her go to be a comfort to people.  And people have done that for us.  When my mother and father both died people came.  People brought food.  People brought flowers.  People remembered us during those times.  And I try to still do that.  And I think kids catch that when they see their parents do it.  Not by really saying that's what you should do.  But to really--to really see it.  And then--so my formal education--I have six hours of college credit.  Because at that time when I did that for my mother and my brother I became the mother to my family.  And then in 1954 I was a single parent.  My daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] is my daughter and my friend.  And--so I went back to take some courses.  And then I didn't have good guidance--and so people would say to me, "Oh you really don't need a degree."  I went and talked to a white advisor at the University of Akron [Ohio]. Who said, "Oh you don't need a degree.  Aren't you happy at Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.]?  Why don't you just take some courses that, you know, will--things that you like to do."  And so I must have sixty or eighty hours in non-credit courses.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Had I--yes.  Had I known, had somebody guided me.
Story_ID: 8854
Speaker 1: You worked in clerical--.
Speaker 2: I worked--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Came out and go (unclear) a different--.
Speaker 2: When I--well I was--my first job was a clerk in a grocery store.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in Roebuck grocery store.  And then when I was expecting my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] I worked for Wilson's Book Exchange in clerical work.  And I worked until three hours before I went to the hospital because I never received child support.  Nor was I on welfare.  When I--I went back to work when she was a month old.  And I became a nurse's aide at [Akron] Children's Hospital [Akron, Ohio].  If I could do it all over I have no doubt I would be a nurse. There is just no doubt at all.  That's what I would be is a nurse.  I worked at Children's Hospital.  And then because I had to work on Sundays--we only got one Sunday off a month.  And I had accepted the Lord.  And I wanted to be off on Sundays more than once a month. So that I could work with the youth in our church.  And so I applied for a ty--I took a typing test at the Bureau of Employment Service.  You would have never hired me.  I had forty words a minute and ten errors.  And so they said to me when I--but it was just that nervous non-testing thing.  I could type better than that.  But it was a nerves.  And so they said to me, "We have a job for you at Goodwill Industries."  And I was highly insulted.  Because Goodwill to me was where we could get some second hand clothes.  It was like--I don't wanna be a secretary at Goodwill.  So I called my sister who was a secretary for Judge Roulite [ph.] and Attorney Sproul [ph.]. He was an attorney then.  And she said, "Oh well go."  She said, "You don't have to stay.  Just go and get their experience."  And so when I went to Goodwill and applied, it was just in an old warehouse.  And the personnel director was very smart.  And she said, "Well what do you think we have here?  A bunch of drunks."  I said, "I don't know."  She said, "Well come on."  And she started walking me through the building.  And I saw all these handicapped happy people in wheelchairs and on crutches.  And I think she could have told me that we were gonna pay you a penny and I would have took the job.  And so when I came back. And they offered me the job after I toured the building.  I--it was a quick yes from me.  They hired me as a temporary--three months while they looked for a handicapped secretary.  My boss had one lung and five ribs removed.  And--but she had a brilliant mind.  She was a public relations director.  And we became the walking-talking team.  I had the strength to do the things that her body wouldn't permit her to do.  And she had the brains to think of the things.  And I could carry them out.  And I learned so much from her as I worked there.  And then she became very, very ill.  And had to move.  And do--many times she would be ill.  And they'd change directors.  And the director--they would offer me to take her job.  And I'd say, "No.  I don't want that job."  I could have--I would go to her house.  And sit beside her bed and take notes. And go back and do it.  Because many times she was ill and not able to come.
Speaker 1: Now why didn't you want the job?
Speaker 2: Because I felt that, that was her job.  And just because she was sick she was gonna be able to come back.  And I didn't think that was right.  It wasn't right to me.  However when she moved I felt that I should have it then.  However they gave the job to a male that became secretary there.  And they gave it to him. And I--he suddenly--but they offered me her office.  They said, "Now we'll give you her office."  And I said, "No.  If I don't have her job I don't need her office.  My office is still the same."  And so I would go to talk to the director.  Because suddenly he felt the importance of the job.  And it was like no.  It was not gonna work with us.  And so I'd started to look for a job.  And nobody would hire me.  Because everybody would say, "Oh Goodwill needs you."  Or, "You won't be happy."  And I said, "I'll be happy selling peanuts."  But I knew that I wasn't gonna stay there.  And so I worked for just two short months at Firestone [Tire and Rubber Co.] as a secretary.  Because I couldn't find it--and actually I called one of the board members at Goodwill. And said, "Every place I go nobody's hiring me.  They're not saying I'm not passing the test.  They're just saying, Goodwill needs me.  And after you rest you'll wanna come back." And he said, "Oh."  I said, "So I'm going to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  'Cause I had a good record.  And I wanna know why am I being stopped by not getting a job."  And he said, "Oh don't do that.  We'll give you a job at Firestone."  I said, "I already applied and I passed the test but the personnel director told me, "You won't be happy." And I told her, "I'll be happy selling peanuts."  It--you know, I don't have to be happy at work.  I'm happy when I go home." So if I'm not happy at work.  I'm gonna be happy when I go home. So it--no matter what the world does to me.  That's how our--that's how we grew up.  That once you stepped inside that door you were safe.  You were home.  You were gonna be happy at home.  And so he called the personnel director.  And she called me. She was very angry.  And said that John Moore had called her.  She said, "I'll give you the job.  But you're gonna hate it.  I'll put you in a G2 group. And you'll file all day."  I said, "I'll do the best job I can."  And so she sent me to Firestone decoded fabrics.  And they let me wait all morning.  And they'd come look out the door.  And they'd grin.  And they'd say, "Do you still--you wanna come back?"  I said, "No."  You know, I have recipes to this day.  Because I always carry a pad and pencil.  And I was taking--writing recipes down and reading magazines.  And when I finally got into see Mr. Garsky, he said, "You're very patient.  Aren't you?"  And I said, "I came to get the job."  So it--. You know, it was fine.  I--it was fine for me that I waited.  And so it was--it was quite a time to be there.  It was a lot of racism.  And it happened at the time when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died.  And we're in this office.  And people were saying things.  And one of the guys said something about were you--or was he there.  And the other one said something.  One day they started to say something about old black Joe.  And I remember putting my pencil down on the desk.  'Cause I wanted to say, "We don't sing old black Joe.  We sing new black Joe." But I didn't say anything.  I just got up and walked to the water fountain and got some water and came back.  And they'd say, "Have a good day."  And I would say to myself, "The only good day I'm a have is when it's the last day.  When I tell you it is the last day.  That's gonna be the good day that I have here."  And I got a call from a reporter from the 'Beacon Journal' [Akron, Ohio].  "Now what are you doing over there?  Do you like it?"  I said, "I hate it.  But I have to work."  She said, "Well go and see Jack Saperstein at [Akron] Metropolitan Housing [Authority]."  She said, "He's tough to work for.  You will last about three months.  But if you tell anybody you worked for him for three months you'll get a job any place you want."  So I took off.  And I went and applied.  They were looking for a man with a degree.  I was a woman with high school.  HUD [US Department of Housing and Urban Development] had just began to hire coordinators of social intended services.  And so I assured him I could do the job.  'Cause I was doing these things for Goodwill.  And so we went back and forth.  And finally he called.  And he offered me the job at five thousand dollars.  They were gonna pay the man ten [thousand dollars].  And he said--.
Speaker 1: Did you know at the time that--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It didn't matter to me.  I was getting out of Firestone.  It did--they could have paid me a penny.  I was going.  And in--he said--we took the job on handshake.  He said, "I will give you the job.  But if you cannot do it.  You will promise me in three months you will not sue me.  You will quietly walk away and leave."  And I said, "I can do the job.  And if I can't do the job in three months I will quietly walk away and leave."  And I shook his hand.  And sixteen and a half years later and five directors later I left.  I--and some of those things I brought you--I was written up in every national magazine of housing.  Because of the programs that we did.  And wh--I had daycare programs for children that were free.  I had summer youth employment.  I had homemakers for the elderly.  I took the seniors on trips.  I had infant stimulation and helping to train mothers with babies.  I had--any kind of program that you could think. I wrote up guidelines for the tenant councils.  In fact, I have a letter from HUD that should be in those things I brought. Saying, "Bravo, send us ten more."  Because I wrote a manual on how to--how to form tenant councils.  How to work with them.  How to train them. And it came out of--out of life and love that would help you.  And I could commit it to writing.
Story_ID: 8855
Speaker 1: It was at AMHA [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority] when I received a scholarship to go to Gallaudet [University, Washington, DC].  I speak and teach sign language. And have taught--.
Speaker 2: And Gallaudet's a special college that--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Gallaudet is the--Mm-hm, the only college in the world--.
Speaker 2: In D.C., Washington.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes. It's in Washington D.C. So I audited the course.  It was four hours to a master's degree. And I audited the course.  Because I didn't--.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Can you spell Gallaudet?
Speaker 1: G-A-L-L-A-U-D-E-T.
Speaker 2: Okay.  'Cause people--you know, the transcribers need to know.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes. At Gallaudet. It's at Florida [Avenue] and 7th Avenue.  And I had one hour in sign language.  And before I left I had met this Catholic priest, Father Wilson who taught a sign language. One of my jobs was--at Goodwill [Industries] was bringing our daily chapel service.  And that's where--when I went to Gallaudet--when I was at Goodwill.  Not at AMHA. And when I was arranging the day--daily chapel services--and two of our deaf always came.  We had thirty-five deaf that worked there.  Nobody did--none of the hearing could interpret for the deaf.  They did pad and pencil.  They knew a few signs that they picked up. But no one interpreted.  And two deaf came to chapel everyday.  And they were Catholic.  And they worked their rosary beads during those twenty minutes.  And I used to stand in the back when some speakers were good. And I would pray, "God I wish I could tell 'em a part of what they're missing."  That was just my only prayer.  I didn't--I prayed that for a year.  And Father Wilson brought a deaf man in for a job.  And a Catholic girl--We had a big office.  Open space. Catholic girl came over and said, "Is he a priest?"  And I looked.  I said, "I don't know.  He looks like one."  And she walked away.  And he yelled, "Dorothy come here!" And I went over.  And he had this big grin.  And he stuck out his hand.  He said, "Sure I'm a priest.  I'm Father Wilson."  "How'd you know?"  Said, "I read your lips." (Laughs). "What (whispering) (chuckling)?"  He said, "I'm an interpreter for the deaf.  And I have Lawrence Balton back.  And he's applying for a job.  So have you been here?"  He said, "No." I said, "Come on."  And I started walking him through the building.  I'd say he's deaf--she's deaf. And he would sign to them.  And I said, "I wish I could do that."  He said, "Do you mean it?"  I said, "Yes I mean it."  He said, "If you mean it.  I want you to give up one lunch hour a week.  And I will come and teach you."  So I took him to my boss.  And he told her the story.  She said, "Will you teach us all?"  He said, "I will teach every one who will give up one lunch hour a week."  And he would come on Mondays.  And every week I would study.  And I'd know my home--my lesson.  And he would say, "I'm not coming back.  Dorothy's gon' be your teacher."  And without my knowledge they applied for me for this scholarship.  And I went to Gallaudet [Gallaudet University, Washington, DC]. At that point that I learned that I was going I--when my boss first asked me, "Can you go away for a month?"  And I said, "No--."
Story_ID: 8856
Speaker 1: You were on your way to Gallaudet College [Gallaudet University, Washington, D.C.], you know, on a special scholarship to learn sign language, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I had--before I learned that I was going, I actually learned--my boss said to me, "Can you go away for a month?" And I said, "No."  Couldn't go away for a month.  I made twenty-five dollars a week.  And I paid a dollar a day for the babysitter.  So, no way I could go--take off for a month.  And one day in the cafeteria a girl said to me, "Congratulations."  I said, "For what?"  And she grabbed her mouth.  And I went to my boss and said, "Why is she congratulating me?"  And she said, "Well it's never mind now."  I said, "Why?"  She said, "Well we got you a scholarship for Gallaudet.  But you said you couldn't go away."  Oh I said, "Oh I can go."  So I went to my babysitter.  And I said to her--well I went to my sister first that I lived with.  My sister, Lucille [Jackson].  And I said, "I have a chance to go to Gallaudet to learn sign language.  Will you keep [daughter] Rene [Lynn Jackson-Aniere] for me?  And will you pick her up from the babysitter?"  And she said, "Yes."  And I went to the babysitter.  And I said, "I have a chance to go to Gallaudet to learn sign language.  Lucille will pick up Rene.  And will you keep her for me?  And I won't be able to pay you. But one day I will.  One day I'll be able to pay.  I can't--I won't be able to pay now."  And she said, "Oh yes."  She would.  So at that point I went to the church.  And I said, "I have a chance to go to Gallaudet and learn sign language. And I want you to pray for me.  Because I know, I can learn.  But if they give me the test, I can't pass the test."  And so they didn't give me the test until two weeks after I was there.  And I could see Professor Phillips standing over me shaking his head saying, "I don't believe you. According to this test, you are not to be able to learn sign language.  And I'm watching you do it everyday."  And before I left, I said to all the deaf, "I'm going to go to Gallaudet. And I'm gonna to learn to talk for you."  And my boss would hear me.  And she'd say , "Stop telling them that.  You're not going to learn.  This is a language.  You don't know how to speak the language.  You're going for an orientation."  And I'd go see the next deaf.  And I'd say, "I'm going to Gallaudet.  I'm gonna learn to talk for you."  And she would get so upset.  She would continue to call me in her office. "You must stop telling them that. You're not going to learn to talk.  You're just going for an orientation."  But I knew I was going to learn to talk for them.  And when I came home, I knew seven hundred words.  And I started interpreting the day I came home.  I've interpreted for [U.S.] President [William] Clinton.  And one of those pictures is in there with me and [U.S. President] Jimmy Carter. That I met to talk about the needs of the handicapped.  I think I really put interpreting on the front burner in Akron [Ohio].  And I taught the first beginners' sign language class at Akron U [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio].  I taught classes at the Y [YMCA, Young Mens Christian Association].  I've interpreted for many, many people.  I interpreted for the Gospel Meet Symphony.  I coordinate still that program.  I've founded the deaf ministry at our church.  At the--several other churches, not only our church.  And I've taught hundreds of people.  And I still speak and teach fluent sign language.  In fact, I've had the deaf say to me when I sing, "I feel like I can hear when I watch you interpret."  So it to me is a gift that the Lord has given to me.
Speaker 1: There's a certain rhythm you have to have--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: To really make it flow.
Speaker 2: And to make it beautiful.  And I believe in that very, very strong--I try to keep up with the speaker as they speak. So I've interpreted for Lou Rawls and for Ruby [Dee] and Ossie Davis.  You're gonna be doing them.  Give them my love.  I love them dearly.  They spoke here for me when I was chairing the Life Membership for NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And I count them as my friends.  I had the privilege of being invited to their anniversary. And I went to New York [New York] for that.  So I've interpreted for many, many people.  And taught many classes.
Story_ID: 8857
Speaker 1: You've got like a snowballing kind of a volunteer history, right? You do one thing.  And one thing leads to another.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that?  How all that, you know, kind of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well sometimes your friends volunteer you.  Sometimes your family volunteers you.  Everybody knows I love to cook.  And so many times, there're fundraisers in the community.  And people bid on me. I'll donate a dessert buffet.  I can't sit down and write them a big check.  But I would donate a dessert buffet.  And people would bid on that.  I've donated picnic baskets.  I've donated brunch for people.  And, and it's a hot item when it goes on the list.  That people will--really, people will take my bid.  I've served on--oh Lord.  I don't even know how many boards and committees in this community from Akron General Hospital to the CRA, Ford National City Bank, for United Way--for United Way Women--for Access.  I go to the homeless shelter and serve.  I was just at the boys' homeless shelter. The lady was telling me last night, "Those kids are having the greatest time."  I went over and taught 'em how to make cakes.  And how to wash their hands and how to measure. And I challenge young people. I'm in the schools a lot.  I was--one of the alternative schools talking to the kids.  And that's where a lot of mothers are single.  And kids that have been in trouble.  And that--when the principal called and asked me to come.  She said, "The kids aren't gonna listen to you.  But we'll have six teachers and a policeman."  And I said, "Okay.  But when I stand up, I'm in charge."  She said, "No, we'll have six teachers and a principal."  I said, "But when I stand up, I am in charge."  And so when we went, the kids came in.  And none of them sat in the front.  They were half way back. They slumped down in their seats--laying in their seats.  They were talking.  And the whole time the principal introduced me, they were talking.  And she was giving me my nice introduction.  And they were laughing and talking.  And I got up.  I said, "What are y'all doing?  They don't pay me to be here."  They looked.  I said, "They don't pay me to be here.  I'm here because I wanna be.  See you talk and I talk.  It's called attitude. I don't deal with attitudes.  But I'll tell you what.  I'll take any one of you and I will teach you anything I know." And they were so good.  They started to listen. And I talked to them about real life.  I talked to them about--I'm a single parent.  I talked to them on how important it is.  And I said, "You girls stop being so dumb.  Don't be dumb like I was.  You boys make these babies.  You better pay for 'em."  And girls start clapping.  And so I shared with them. And I said, "You know, if--" of things that had happened with me--and how if I had been smart, I should have took him to court and made him pay.  Because I suffered and the child suffered.  But I just talked real life.  And I talked to them about staying in school.  And good grades equal good dollars.  And I said, "You know--." And in my pocket--at that time, I was serving on the advisory board at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio].  And I was interviewing deans. I said, "I have a key.  This key will open the Shrank Building [sic, Shrank Hall] at the University of Akron.  Because I'm going up to read resumes."  I said, "And you know what?  I have three piles.  The job description says you have to have a Ph.D."  I said, "So if I pick up the first application.  And they don't have a Ph.D. it goes over here.  I don't even need to waste time to read it. I just get the name and get their education. They don't have it.  I don't even need to read it.  It's over here."  Here's a next one.  It's got a Ph.D.  But he hadn't done anything.  It goes over here.  If I don't have enough good ones, I might read this one. Ahh, here's one with a Ph.D.  He's worked in his field.  He's published papers.  He's volunteered in his field.  He's done--I need to read this one.  This might be a good candidate."  I said, "So no matter how much I do.  No matter what I have done.  If I apply for one of those jobs--even though I could do it.  I can't get it.  Because when they pick up mine and they look at education.  It says twelfth grade high school.  Don't even bother to read it.  "She can't get that job."  It's put over here in this pile.  And so I just talked to them real life.  And so when I finished, I said, "You guys were so good. You were just so good."  I said, "And I really thank you."  I said, "Wherever you see me.  I don't care who I'm with.  I want you to come up and touch me.  And tell me hi.  Tell me where I met you."  Smart mouth kid.  He's laying in his seat.  He's just way down. He raised his hand.  I said, "Yes?"  I thought he had a real question.  "You said speak to you at the mall."  The kids start laughing.  I said, "Yeah." He didn't let it go. "What mall?"  More kids laughing. I said, "Hey it don't matter to me.  Where ever you see me.  Rolling Acres Mall, Chapel Hill."  He still would not let it go.  And he's still laying down in his seat. He hadn't sat up to ask me a thing. "Speak to you for what?  You gone buy me something?"  By this time all the kids are rolling.  I decided ain't nobody in the room but me and you buddy.  I lunged, "No I ain't buying you nothing."  Well you could have heard a pin drop.  The teachers were on their marks.  It was like they didn't know if I was gonna be beat to a pulp or what.  But I picked it up immediately.  And I said--and I still only looked at him.  I didn't look at anybody else.  I said, "You know what?  You'd make a great leader.  You're a natural born leader." As soon as you said that to me everybody laughed.  "That's called leadership. You're a leader.  You're a natural born leader.  And you know what?  All you have to do is come to school everyday on time and do your homework.  And you know what?  You're gonna be a leader.  And you know what?  I will buy you something.  You're my guest.  It's me and you.  We're going to lunch."  The kids said, "Ahh."  You would have thought I said, you know I was gonna do a million dollars.  I said, "Wait a minute.  How many is in this room?" And they told me.  I said, "You know what?  I'm a deal maker.  I make deals.  I keep deals.  Let me make a deal with you. I want you all in school everyday on time. I want you to do your homework everyday as soon as you go home without television.  I know y'all all got VCRs.  Do not stay up and watch Arsenio Hall."  They cracked up laughing.  It's like, "Oh she really crazy."  "Ah now, now wait a minute.  Wait a minute.  It's about going to bed if you're gonna get up.  So put it on your VCR.  And watch it later.  But don't stay up.  Go to bed.  Eat your breakfast before you come to school.  Not a Hostess Twinkie."  I said, "I will guarantee you your grades will improve. I will guarantee you."  When's the next grading period? So the teacher tell me.  I said, "Let me make you a deal.  You come to school everyday on time.  You do your homework every day.  You don't stay up late.  Your grades will improve.  And when they do.  I'll be back.  I'm buying the food.  I'm cooking the food.  I'm serving the food.  And I'm sit down and eat the food with you."  Well the teacher--the principal called me in just a couple of days.  She said, "You've turned this school around." She said, "The kids are saying they're gon' have lunch with the deputy [mayor]."  She said, "One of 'em has drawn a picture of you and him.  And he's got a big pile of pancakes.  And he has slamming with the deputy." And I said, "Ah, that's the name of the lunch."  And she called me later.  She said a--this big strapping boy--six feet in the office.  Tears rolling down his face. The teacher had sent him in. He said, "I can't go home.  I'm having lunch with the deputy."  When she called me, she said, "Thirty seven of these kids have made it."  And I said, "Great." She said, "You can go buy 'em some pizza."  I said, "I'm not buying pizza.  I told 'em I'm cooking.  I am not buying pizza."  I used real tablecloths on the table.  I had napkins.  I had flowers on the table.  I bought flowers for every student.  And for every child. I cooked chicken, ham, green beans--salads, cakes.  A full course meal that I fixed for them.  My sisters came and helped me serve.  And I had things in their ovens.  And those kids were so good.  And they went around and talked about how some of 'em stood.  And said, "You know, when you first told us that, I thought, well I can try it.  Why not?"  Some kids made the honor roll.  And one little girl came up after.  And they saw one of the articles in the paper.  She came up after.  She said, "Can I talk?"  And I said, "Yes."  And she went up.  And she said, "We all wanted to write it.  But we couldn't say it."  And she started to cry.  She said, "(Crying) All I just want to say.  Thank you for believing in us."  And she started to cry.  And I grabbed her up and hugged her.  And that's one of the pictures that's on one of those articles.  As I was walking around the room talking to the kids.  And thanking them individually, this one kid said, "Mrs. Jackson, I went from a zero grade point to a two point."  I said, "Great."  The kid next to him said, "Mrs. Jackson, and he went off of drugs too."  It almost took my breath.  It was just like, "God, did I make a difference with those kids that he would believe me when I tell him it's gonna destroy your body.  It's gonna destroy your mind.  You won't have a mind if you stay on it."  And I still follow those kids.  I saw one of them at prayer meeting last night.  One of them has started coming to our church.  And just to watch and see.  And then the kids when  I'd cooked for the five hundred.  They called and said, "Can you cook for us like you did for those other kids?"  I said, "How many?"  They said, "Five hundred."  I said, "Five hundred!"  So I had the teachers have a contest with the fifth graders to say why do you want to help the deputy mayor to cook. And so five of 'em were selected.  And they came to my house.  I bought 'em aprons.  And they had to wash the potatoes to boil.  And some of 'em didn't know the difference between a blender and a mixer.  They had to do their math.  Because it--we'd look at one recipe.  And if one recipe took two eggs and one cup of milk.  We're gonna do five times that much. How much does it take?  And they had to learn you can't lick your fingers.  You can't put you hands out. Go back.  You gotta wash your hands.  For some of 'em it was the first time they used a nail brush.  You gotta clean your nails before you cook.  You don't just start cooking with--and you can't scratch your hair and decide you're gonna go back and cook or lick something off.  We had a little pizza party.  And then they helped me serve the food.  So it--it's been--it's been a good walk for me in this life.  I've had a lot of adversity.  And a lot of things happen.  But God has been good to me.
Story_ID: 8858
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in politics though?
Speaker 2: Politics led me to politics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Six hours before I was gonna be fired, I was appointed deputy mayor.  They--Housing Authority Board of Directors was made up of a point five-member board who were appointed by the politicians. You know, appointed by the cayor, appointed by the county executive of--and so they had had the same board president for thirty-five years, I believe he had been president.  And the political party got the majority on the vote.  I mean the majority on the board.  And they made the decision that they were gonna get rid of that board chairman.  And they were gonna bring in their own board chairman.  And they did.  And when that happened, the word on the street was that they were gonna fire the director.  And they were gonna fire the assistant.  And they were gonna fire the cabinet.  And they did indeed do that.  And they got a new executive director.  And members of--my fellow cabinet members--I watched them being fired one by one. And they hadn't got to me yet.  Be--I was--In fact, they even say it in the mayor's office today.  I'm their non-political one.  I was not really involved.  I voted.  And I helped people.  But I never--You know, I wasn't--I wasn't the political one.  But I got a call.  And was asked to apply for one of the jobs. And first, I got a call to volunteer to help to screen.  It was the--Congressman Tom Sawyer who was then mayor.  And he had--who was just been elected as mayor to come in.  He wanted people to come and help to screen his candidates that he was gonna hire for his cabinets.  I was excited to do it.  Because I was hiring people all the time at AMHA [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority] and also at Goodwill [Industries].  And so I thought, "Well I can go with the professional that does it.  And I can learn more from them--from what they're doing."  And so I was--went in and was happy to do it.  And at the end they said, "Why don't you apply?  Get you one of those jobs."  And I thought they didn't know I didn't have a college degree.  They just knew what I was doing--what I did in the community.  And I am--I didn't even live in Akron.  I lived in Cuyahoga Falls [Ohio].  I didn't even vote for the mayor.  And so it was like, "No."  And so, "Come on.  Just give us your application.  Give us a resume.  It doesn't mean you're gonna get the job.  Just give us one."  And I remember calling my pastor, Reverend Fowler.  And he was in a meeting.  I said to his secretary, "I must talk to him.  It's urgent that I talk to him."  So--because I was miserable.  It's a lot of things worse than being fired.  If you're there when everybody's been fired around you.  And you--things are not the same.  So I went out.  And he came in to meet with me.  And he thought I must have a very serious problem to pull him out of a meeting.  And he sat--I remember him sitting on the arm of the chair.  And he said, "Dot, what did you need?"  And I said, "Well pastor I have been asked to apply for deputy mayor.  And I don't think I can do that job."  And I remember him with a little chuckle.  He said, "I'm glad.  I'm glad you feel like you can't do the job."  He said, "I would hate to think that you think you're so good that you're gonna step in there and do that job."  Said, "Well let me ask you one question."  I said, "What?"  He said, "If you get this job, do you think you can help more people?"  And I said, "Oh yes."  He said, "Then on that basis, apply.  And we'll have prayer."  And so he had prayer with me.  And I walked out of the office.  And I had gave to them my resume.  And they said, "We know you do more than that.  Give us a real resume."  So I put a few more things down.  And then they came and they said, "Well you have to apply.  You have to make an application."  I thought, "I'm not applying.  I don't care what Pastor Fowler said.  I'm not applying for a job I can't do."  And the last day when we were to get the application in, a well-meaning politician--black called me and said, "You know, Tom's [Sawyer] hiring his first two black cabinet members."  And I said, "Yes.  And I'm applying for one of the jobs (chuckles)."  And he said, "Well that's why I'm calling you.  You know, this is--be the first two.  So we have to make sure we get our very best."  And they named to me the people who were best.  And they informed me that, you know, I hadn't worked in politics.  So I didn't know it.  And I said, "Oh thank you very much."  And I hung up the phone.  And I said, "He can't tell me what I can't do.  They may have the degree,  but I know how to do the job."  And I whipped open my drawer.  And I typed up (typing sound)--typed up my application. And called one of my staff members.  And say, "Can I trust you?  I want you to take this and apply."  And it got in the last few minutes.  So it was a shock to me (chuckles).  It was a shock to the city when I got the call that I had been appointed.  And I actually wasn't appointed until after--I would--I didn't go in the first day.  I didn't get appointed 'til--and start until the 6th of January.  I didn't go in on the first.  And when I got the call, he said, "You know, it's been the hardest two weeks of my life.  But I made my decision."  And he said he remembered watching me volunteer all over the community.  And seeing me and doing so many things.  So sometimes, I think he's a smart man.  Sometimes I say, "You weren't too smart giving me that job."  But I think I made a difference in being in the job.  I think people have a much closer feel to city hall.  I think they feel like there's an open door.  Think they feel they have access. And I think I've been able to do a lot of programs.  And I think probably the thing I like most about my job is that I've been able to effect change.  And I think the thing I like least about my job is sometimes I can't make a change.  Because sometimes it's not in the power of the city to do all the things that people need.  I had a call last night at home.  And someone calling to see if I could help their child get a place to live.  I wish I could.  You know, and--but you can't.  You're--we're not in charge of housing.  It's run by a different form of government.  So it--it's been a good thing.  And I often say to young people, "Sometimes I think God uses strange ways to get us from where we are to where we want to be--where He wants us to be.  That maybe you sometimes think it's painful in the process of what you're going through."  But perhaps I never would have moved.  I never would have left Goodwill.  I'm sure I'd of never left Goodwill had things not happen.  I guess that's why I like the eagle too.  Because the story is told when the eagle--it's the--the mother builds the nest.  And it's strong.  And it's got all these wires and bristles.  And she covers it with soft and down and feathers.  When she's ready for them to know that they're to fly, they start moving those little pieces.  And the eaglets begin to move from side to side.  And then when it's so painful, then they look up.  And they see their mother.  And she takes them up.  And they fly out.  And they learn to fly with her dropping and coming under them until they can go.  I think that's how it's been in my life.  That as long as I'm comfortable, I don't think about looking at anything else.  But then when briars begin to prick, you begin to look up  and you see that well God has another place for you to be.
Story_ID: 8859
Speaker 1: What do you think lies in the future?
Speaker 2: Well I'm prepping--I'm prepping to retire.  (Laughs)  I don't know what really lies ahead.  I guess there's a lot of things that I would like to do.  I keep saying it.  But I haven't done it.  I wrote a cookbook that's never been published.  I'd like to get it published. When my sister was ill that I took care of her, I started writing a--some things that I have written down.  And it--I'd said I would name my book, 'So You Want to Cheer the Sick.'  Because they're so many ways that, you know, people can help and things to do.  And I enjoy teaching people sign language.  I enjoy speaking.  I enjoy talking to single parents and working with them.  So I don't really know what's in the future.  I--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So you don't see yourself as seeking a higher office or--
Speaker 2: No. No.  I will be seventy next year.  I am--I don't  see myself--when people would say, "Well why don't you run for this?  Or why don't you run for that?"  I always tell 'em, "I'm running for home.  I'm running for home. I'm not running--." No I don't see my self running.  If I were younger?  Yes, I would.  I would run for an office.
Story_ID: 8860
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and aspirations for the black community?
Speaker 2: That more and more of them will become prepared to run.  I want to see our young black people stay in school.  I want to see them get an education. I want to see them to stop filling up the prisons.  I want them to know that, yes, there's a lot that they can do.  That there's a better way.  The new face of the homeless.  And I go to the homeless shelter.  I go once a month.  I used to go every other week.  But I go once a month and I serve lunch.  I do whatever they need. Sometimes I make sandwiches.  Sometimes I hold babies so the mother can eat.  Sometimes I pass out food.  Sometimes I've peeled onions for an hour.  I go on my lunch hour.  And some of my friends join me.  And--I--and the new face of the homeless is to--it's so many young blacks.  So many young black women.  So many young black men.  I remember doing a manual when I was training my summer youth when I was at AMHA [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority, Akron, Ohio].  And I had showed kids standing on the corner on the cover and I put--kids like this is a waste of time.  But, you know, you really--and so my hope is that they will realize how gifted and talented they are.  And they will really get out there and work and go and move on.  And move on into political seats.  And--because politics do control our life. And we need to have more and more young black people ready to go. And if they don't keep their record clear. Of course with [James] Traficant, the  [U.S.] congressman who has been ousted and going to jail.  And said he's gonna run from jail.  God help us.  But I just think that our young people have to stop shortening their lives.
Story_ID: 8861
Speaker 1: What would you consider then as your legacy here--and about to retire.  I know you're still gonna be volunteering somewhere. But (chuckling)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously laughing) I think my legacy has been that people know they have access to get help.  I think my legacy has been with handicapped people. There's a handicapped housing named, Dorothy Jackson Terrace.  That was the first handicapped housing in the country for my work with the handicapped.  I think my legacy will be that deaf people have access to many things that they didn't.  I interpreted for a deaf girl who raced in this All-American Soap Box Derby.  And her brother raced this year.  And she came in to town.  And I sat two rows in front of her.  And I told her, "And you're gonna win next year."  So she's--she's looking forward to competing again next year.  I think my legacy will go very strong for that.  I've been able to help and get TTY's.  And have classes for our policemen and our firemen in the city.  And so I think my legacy will be--and I hope my legacy will be that I have been kind to people.  And that people have made a difference in my life.  And so many people have contributed to me.  And I stand on the backs of so many others who have given so much.
Story_ID: 8862
Speaker 1: Now I know you're still volunteering and doing many, many things.  But how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I--I would like to be remembered--you know, a strange thing happened.  Monday of this week, I was in Washington [D.C.] with my granddaughter in the Maryland area. And a Dorothy Jackson in Akron [Ohio] died.  And it was--came in the obituary.  And I got a call the first thing in the morning in Maryland from one of my girlfriends.  And I thought, "Well, you know how'd she call me here?"  And she said, "In the paper--" She said, "I got a call this morning, that said, 'Hey girl, have you read the paper?'"  And she said, "No.  What?"  And she said, "Dorothy Jackson--." Because we've had about ten friends die in the last two weeks.  In a--like a week and a half we had eight lady friends die in Akron.  And so she said--she said, "Hang up.  Hang up."  She called my house.  I wasn't at home.  She called my office.  I wasn't at work.  And she said, "Oh my God."  She called my sister.  And she said she tried to have a cheerful voice.  And she said, "Good morning."  And my sister said, "Good morning."  And she said, "How are you?"  She said, "I'm fine."  And she's thinking, "How could she be fine?"  And so she said, "Well where is that old Dorothy Jackson?"  She said, "Oh she's in Maryland.  You want her phone number?"  She says, "Yes, yes."  So she called me in Maryland.  I said, "Please call my sister back.  And tell 'em.  And please call my office and tell 'em."  I said, "Because maybe they haven't read the paper yet."  And they said so many people had called my office.  There was fifteen calls on my answering machine when I got home.  The church said people called the church, "Are you sure?"  The people at the funeral home said people were calling, "Are you sure?"  She said one lady told her, "You must go downstairs.  Have you seen the body?  Go and see.  You must be sure it's not Dorothy."  And I think the thing that people--I hope will remember me is that I tried to be kind.  That I tried to help people.  That I tried to--to really be out there and do something for them.  And--and just as the lady that walked in tonight and said, "Mrs. Jackson, can I talk to you?"  And I said, "Can I take your phone number?"  I don't know who that lady was.  I said, "But give me your number."  And I will call her.  Her number is in my purse.  When I leave here, I will call her to see what she wanted.  And people feel that way.  They feel like they can walk up to me.  They don't care who I'm with.  And I don't either.  And they will stop me.  And they will talk to me.  And they feel--even though I can't help them. Sometimes all I can do is listen.  I think I've tried to do three things.  I've tried to be available.  I've tried to be accessible so that people can talk to me.  And I've tried to be accountable.  So that they know when I--when you see me out in the community. The mayor's office can tell you right now where I am.  I still did not take my beeper off.  If they needed me, they know that they could get me.  They know where I am.  They know that I didn't say I'm working over at so and so.  I'm at Wooster Branch Library in there and visiting.  They're--they're here from Chicago [Illinois].  And they're interviewing me.  And so I--I've tried to be accessible and available and accountable. And, and I just feel that I'm grateful to have this job.  And I'm grateful that I have the opportunity.  And the [Akron, Ohio] Mayor [Don Plusquellic]  allows me to serve on many boards and on many committees.  And we've directed a Holocaust Program.  And I hope that through that program our--we've had sixteen years of it.  And young people will learned that man--and humanity demand that we help anyone.  And so if they can learn that there is a better way.  And we recognize young people with national youth volunteer program.  I've led the employees in campaigns and fundraisers.  And at Christmas, we do holiday baskets for needy families.  And, you know, they're able to give back.  That people can do something.  And we're probably one of the highest givers in the community with helping many, many different places that need help.  We have dress down days that people donate money.  And then we give it to agencies and organizations.  So I hope that the legacy I leave will be that someone will pick up the mantle and keep going.  And I--I try to teach.  I try--I teach sign language.  And--so that there're people that can step in.  And I've had young girls will say to me, "When I grow up I'm gonna be just like you."  And I always say, "You're not gonna be like me.  You're gonna be better than me.  Because you're gonna go to school.  And you're gonna get a degree.  You're gonna be better than me."  I've helped a lot of people with scholarships. I've helped people to raise money.  I've given money to try and help people to do that.
Story_ID: 8863
Speaker 1: (Signs message simultaneously) Thank you for coming to Akron [Ohio].  We hope that you feel the wonderful spirit that's here.  And, and thank you for telling our story.  I know all the people that you'll meet while you're here.  I saw the names.  And I know them all.  And I know they all have a story to tell. And I hope that it will inspire young people to know that especially--young African Americans to know that yes you can be anything that you want to be if you try to be you can.  And just put your hand in the hand of God and let him lead you.  And he will do that.
Story_ID: 8864
Speaker 1: This is my third grade class at Robinson Elementary School [Akron, Ohio].  And I am standing in the middle.  That's one of those class pictures.  You can see I was the tall one standing in the middle in the back.  And my favorite--one of my favorite teachers Miss Marriott is standing to the side with the white collar on.  And it's interesting that some of those same classmates, we are stil--we are still friends.  And we had our fiftieth year class reunion last year.  I got a chance to see some of them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You're standing in the middle right in the back?
Speaker 1: Right in the middle in the last row.  Right here.  That's me.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (back row) and her third grade class at Robinson Elementary School, Akron, Ohio, 1940s. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8865
Speaker 1: That's my sister Lucille.  She was so special and wonderful.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's sister, Lucille, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8866
Speaker 1: This is my sister Lucille [Jackson].  And she's standing in the yard with my daughter Renee [Lynn Jackson-Aniere] when she was two.  My sister Lucille loved Renee dearly.  And Renee loved her dearly.  And she knew she had her heart all the time.  The top picture is a picture of when--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Before we move to the top, would you just say--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Before on like that picture in the yard with your sister Renee
Speaker 1: Your sister and your daughter Renee that that's August '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Alright.  That's in August of 1957.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Jackson's daughter, Renee, and sister, Lucille,  August 1957. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8867
Speaker 1: My sister Lucille [Jackson].  It would have been Christmas of that same year.  And my daughter Renee [Lynn Jackson-Aniere] and one of my sister Lucille's friends at Christmas and Aungia--Renee.  Aungia (ph.) is my granddaughter.  I know--Renee would say how could I say that?
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's daughter, Renee, sister, Lucille, and sister's friend, December 1957. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8868
Speaker 1: That's me coming from rollerskating.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I loved to rollerskate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I certainly have learned now that I've lost that.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson returns from roller-skating, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8869
Speaker 1: I told you about our close family and how we always had fun.  That's me sitting on my brother's lap (laughs) over here on the end.
Speaker 2: Over here?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson and her brother, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8870
Speaker 1: That's my sister Lucille [Jackson].  And we're standing at the car in our driveway at home.
Speaker 2: And which one is on the left and which one is on the right?
Speaker 1: I'm here.  Lucille is a little bit taller than me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Lucille is on the left?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (left) and her sister, Lucille (right), in the driveway of their home, Akron, Ohio, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8871
Speaker 1: That was at my high school [East High School, Akron, Ohio].  And it was a senior day at school. And you'll notice that I had on my boys steel-toed shoes, and my shoeshine box.  It was one of those days.  And my sisters--when I got the job as deputy mayor [of Akron, Ohio], my sisters took that little picture and had it blown up and presented it to me in a luncheon on the basis that I had to always hang it in my office.  So it hangs in my office.  And it's a funny sight.  And many people remember that.  And at the luncheon (laughs) they--the kids that I went to school all said, "Slim, Slim in her Brogans.  Slim in her Brogans."  (laughs).
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson on senior day at East High School, Akron, Ohio, early 1950s. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson]
Story_ID: 8872
Speaker 1: That's my daughter's [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] wedding.  And it was a happy, happy day.  And her fiancee and my daughter had lived in Hawaii.  That's where they met.  And so he had had her flowers flown in, and also my lei was flown in from Hawaii for the wedding
Speaker 2: Can  you give the date please.
Speaker 1: That was April 7, in--oh my God!  If she thinks that I forgot the date--1995?
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (right) at her daughter's [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere], left) wedding, April 1995. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8873
Speaker 1: The late Wilma Rudolph.  The great Olympic champion.  She was in Akron [Ohio] to speak for the JOG [Jobs for Ohio's Graduates] program.  And I knew the director of the JOG program.  And I asked him if she could speak for us, since they had already paid her to come.  And we didn't have the money to pay her.  And he agreed that he would let her come to speak for my breakfast, if I would give her a ride to the airport.  And I am so grateful that I had the opportunity to do that.  Because she died shortly thereafter.  And I just felt like she was my sister-friend that I met.  Because we spent a lot of time together that day.  And I met her children through the telephone.  Through  talking to them.  And we had lunch together.  I went back to the hotel with her.  Drove her to the airport and helped her carry her things on to the plane.  And so I am so grateful that I had that opportunity.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson with Olympian Wilma Rudolph, Akron, Ohio, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8874
Speaker 1: That's now [U.S.] Senator Hillary Clinton. At that time she was  the wife of our former [U.S.] President [William] Bill Clinton. I interpreted for her.  And there I was getting an autograph for my granddaughter.  So my granddaughter is blessed to have autographs of all of these wonderful people.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (left) with First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton (right), 1992. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8875
Speaker 1: My mother D-U-E-A-L-L-I-E Jackson.
Speaker 2: (inaudible)
Speaker 1: And I don't remember the year.  But it would have been in the '50s [1950s].  And she's standing beside the car in the yard.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's mother, Dueallie Jackson, Akron, Ohio, 1950s. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8876
Speaker 1: I remember my father [William Jackson, Sr.] saying to me when he learned that I would be--was expecting my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere].  It was, "Anybody can fall.  But nobody has to wallow."  And I will always remember that.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's father, William Jackson, Sr., not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8877
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Jesse Jackson.  And that's me.  I'm an interpreter for the deaf.  And I was interpreting for him when he was in Akron [Ohio], when he was running for president.  And I don't remember the year that he was a candidate [1984].
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (left) interprets for Reverend Jesse Jackson (right) during his 1984 presidential campaign. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8878
Speaker 1: I directed a deaf choir when I worked at Goodwill Industries. And that's my deaf choir.  And (ph.) Dr. Trelease who was the speaker.  That would have been in the daily chapel service at Goodwill Industries.  And I was interpreting his message for the deaf.  This was our singing choir.  This was our deaf choir that was in this area.  And so that's why I'm looking to them as I'm interpreting the message of Dr. Trelease.  And I interpreted those daily chapel services.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson and her deaf choir attend chapel services, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8879
Speaker 1: One of the things I did at Goodwill Industries was to take handicapped people on trips.  And our personnel director  was really the one that taught me how to do that.  And really worked on it.  We have--if you notice, we had ten wheelchairs.  And we had taken them to Washington D.C.  And that's at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. And you see--and walking behind we had two buses that we took.  And I sat on the arm of the bus seat and interpreted for the deaf. My daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] is in there.  She was two years old at the time.
Speaker 2: Would you tell us what year this was.
Speaker 1: It would have been in the '50s [1950s].  But this is my daughter that's here.  Probably about '57 [1957],  '56 [1956], '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '56 [1956], '57 [1957]. Right.  'Cause she was born in '54 [1954].  Right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  June of '54 [1954].  But that's my daughter right there.  And she went with me on all the trips that we took.  And this is Bud. Bud worked in our book department.  And Bud used to talk about books.  And the trips that we took were just local trips and easy things.  And one day as a joke we said, "Oh we're gonna take you to Washington D.C."  And Bud said, "Ah!  I read about it.  And I've heard about it.  I would love to see it."  And that gave us our challenge.  And so we set up a bank account.  And they could save ten cents a week.  And then we would do fundraisers.  And we would put races across the ceiling.  And we would sell chicken dinners and do everything to make money.  We made enough money so that each of those handicapped people only had to pay $10 to take the trip that we took to Washington D.C.  This is a girl that I actually graduated from high school with that got polio and ended up in a wheelchair.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson chaperones a Goodwill Industries field trip to Washington, D.C., ca. 1956. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8880
Speaker 1: This is at the Goodyear Airdock [Akron, Ohio].  And that was a rally that [William] Bill Clinton had when he was running for office.  And I'm over at the end of the stage interpreting for him.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson at the Goodyear Airdock, Akron, Ohio for a Bill Clinton rally, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8881
Speaker 1: This is when I was interpreting for [U.S.] President [William] Clinton at the Goodyear Airdock.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson interprets for President William 'Bill' Clinton at an Akron, Ohio rally, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson]
Story_ID: 8882
Speaker 1: We're at the [City of Akron] Holocaust Arts and Writing Contest.  Our first place winners, I raised the money to take them to Washington D.C. for one day to see the [United States] Holocaust [Memorial] Museum. And we also visited with the congressman.  This is our Congressman Tom Sawyer, who appointed me as deputy mayor [of Akron, Ohio].  This was in 1999.  This is my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] and my granddaughter  who joined me for the tour that we took.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (bottom right) at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum with contest winners, her daughter Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere granddaughter and Congressman Tom Sawyer, Washington, D.C., 1999. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8883
Speaker 1: These are my fellow cabinet members, when we were in city council chambers.  And it probably would have been in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (back row, second from right) with fellow cabinet members of City Council, Akron, Ohio, late 1980s. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8884
Speaker 1: I often go to schools and read to the kids.  And I'm grandma at the schools.  And I--if you notice, I'm wearing a Dr. Seuss hat.  And I bring the kids to my office.  And I give them a tour of my office.  And I--I love to cook.  So I usually bake something for them to have.  And buy some milk.  And those are the kids from Stewart Afrocentric School [Akron, Ohio], where I'm grandma.  I'm grandma at three schools.  And I have to be very careful that I didn't just say I was grandma at Robinson [Elementary School, Akron, Ohio].  I was grandma at Robinson first.  And I was grandma at Akron Downtown Primary School [Ohio] and grandma at Stewart Afrocentric School.
Speaker 2: Could you give us a year for this.
Speaker 1: That would have been probably two years ago [2000].
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (back row, third from left) volunteers with children from Stewart Afrocentric School, Akron, Ohio, 2000. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8885
Speaker 1: I received the Tree of Life Award from the Jewish National Fund.  And they had a dinner and raised lots of money.  And when they came in to tell me I had received the award for what I had done. And the money for the dinner would go to Israel to make a part in Kiryat Ekron [Israel] our sister city.  And so I along with  thirty-five other people--my daughter [Renee Lynn Jackson-Aniere] got to go.  We went to Israel and planted the first tree in the park in Israel.  They now have two parks in Israel, named Dorothy O. Jackson Park.  And my daughter did travel to see it.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson plants the first tree in Dorothy O. Jackson Park, named in her honor, Kiryat Ekron, Israel, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8886
Speaker 1: That was in Washington D.C. with President [William Clinton] and now Senator Hillary Clinton.  And then Vice President Al Gore.  I went to the inauguration.  My daughter  and some friends and I.  So that was taken in Washington D.C.
Speaker 2: [President William 'Bill' Clinton, First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and Vice President Al Gore at the presidential inauguration, Washington, D.C., January 21, 1993. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson]
Story_ID: 8887
Speaker 1: That's my granddaughter Aungia.  And my glasses were laying on the table one day when I was in Maryland.  And people had often told me, "Aungia looks like you."  But I could never see it.  And when she picked up my glasses, I started to laugh. And I said, "Oh Aungia, you look just like Grandma."  And this is me when I was sixteen And if you notice, how similar the glasses are at sixteen. I'm still buying the same glasses fifty years later (laughs).  That tells you a little something about me.  I'm not into that much style, am I?  Or I certainly would have changed glasses.  But it was so funny when she picked them up off the table and put them on.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson at sixteen and her granddaughter, Aungia. Right photo, 1949; left photo, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8888
Speaker 1: I received a [Bert A.] Polsky Humanitarian Award. And this was following the dinner.  And my daughter Renee [Lynn Jackson-Aniere] and my granddaughter Aungia. At the end of the evening you can see Aungia is a little tired. She's crossed her leg and put one arm on her chin.  But this was following the dinner.  That was a sell out dinner.  Humanitarian award.  And the money is used at the Akron [Ohio] Community Foundation to support programs.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (right) at an awards dinner with her daughter (Renee, left) and granddaughter (Aungia, right), not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8889
Speaker 1: This is my wonderful mother.  Dueallie that's D-U-E-A-L-L-I-E Jackson.  And I will always love you mom.  And I just thank you for telling me, "Don't act like that Dorothy.  Because if you act like that, I won't always be with you.  And people won't want you around."
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's mother, Dueallie Jackson, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8890
Speaker 1: And this is my father William Jackson, Sr. And poppa, I won't forget your love and all the lessons you taught me.  And I won't forget how you showed me how to help people.  And I will never forget your kindness to me at a time that had to be painful for you when you said, "Anybody can fall, but nobody has to wallow."
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's father, William Jackson, Sr., not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8891
Speaker 1: Baby picture (laughs).  And if you can see that little sad face and those big jaws.  And my sisters used to call me 'Dopey'.  Because I looked like the dwarf with those fat jaws.  And they still tease me at work today.  Because if I'm not talking and I'm thinking, I still don't--I don't smile.  And they'll say, "Don't say anything to her.  If she smiles, she can't work."  But that's my baby picture.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson's baby picture, 1930s. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8892
Speaker 1: When [U.S.] President [William] Clinton had his first town meeting on race, it was held in Akron [Ohio].  And  again I had the privilege to interpret for him.  Notice the little button on my blouse is not really a button.  That's that clearance to be able to be that close to him.  And he has a wonderful memory.  I just can't even believe how good his good his memory is.  And he  will write the note and put your name on it.  And I just am grateful that I had the opportunity to meet him.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson with U.S. President William 'Bill' Clinton at a town meeting on race, Akron, Ohio, December, 1997. From the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
Story_ID: 8893
Speaker 1: He [Bishop Desmond Tutu] spoke at Walsh Jesuit [High] School [Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio].  And I had the privilege to go over and to bring greetings to him.  And to meet him.  And when I went and bowed to speak to him.  He is so humble.  He stood up.  I  will never forget him telling us of seeing a picture of Christ with no arms when he visited someone's office. And how hideous he thought it was.  And why would anyone put a picture with Christ with no arms.  And he said, he was told, "It's because he only can use your arms and mine."  And what a powerful thing to think.  That how much God is using his arms to make a difference in  so many people's lives.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Jackson (left) with Bishop Desmond Tutu (right) at an event at Walsh Jesuit High School, Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Jackson.]
