Story_ID: 178636
Speaker 1: --Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Harry Bernard Johnson.  That's H-A-R-R-Y, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 21st, Tiptop, Virginia, small, small town in the southern part of West Virginia [sic, Virginia], Southwest.
Speaker 1: Now is it Virginia or West Virginia?  Now where (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Actually, it's, it's, the place I was born is in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The place where I was raised mostly was in West Virginia, but--
Speaker 1: So there is a Tiptop, Virginia--
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: --and a Tiptop West Virginia, right?
Speaker 2: No, it's a Tiptop, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you consider yourself a West Virginia person?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And what, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, at the moment, of course, I am a consultant for a company, private company, having retired from both the military and from the World Bank [Washington, D.C.].  And security is basically what I do, except I have done a number of other things.  But basically, I--my contracts, the present time, are in security.
Speaker 1: Okay, and yeah, one time you were head of security for the World Bank--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  That was a very interesting time because the World Bank, in spite of the fact that it's in Washington, D.C., which is a Mecca for black talent, has always been, back from Civil War days, had never had a senior manager that was of African American.  And it's an organization of 10,000 strong in downtown Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: So you're a pioneer in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it's a story within itself as to how I got to, to be a senior manager.  And--
Speaker 1: Well, we'll, we'll get to that later.  I just wanted--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to establish the fact that you were--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --senior manager.
Speaker 2: --yes, at--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the World Bank, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 17th of September, the year 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't--
Speaker 2: We're in--
Speaker 1: --you don't have to give your address (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, we're in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: In your home, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: In my home, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Story_ID: 178637
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --compelled to ask you and--
Speaker 2: Okay, fine.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The, the first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite food would be pork chop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It would be black.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, fall.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place near mountains.
Speaker 1: And last one is, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I think so.  I think I, I am, I like [Henry Wadsworth] Longfellow's, "Be still, sad heart--sad heart--and cease repining; your face the faith of us all; into each life, some rain must fall," you know, that.  I like that, Longfellow, a number of things that he has written, and James Weldon Johnson are my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178638
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna ask you some questions about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your parents' full names and spell them for us--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and their dates and places of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, my, my father was born in--his name is Joseph Johnson.  He just recently passed, and he was born in a place called Jenkinjones, West Virginia, and that's J-E-N-K-I-N-S-J-O-N-E-S--[sic, J-E-N-K-I-N-J-O-N-E-S].
Speaker 1: Jenkinjones, is there a story behind name?
Speaker 2: Not really (laughter).  It's a coal mining town, and I suspect that whoever was the first person to set up there his name was Jenkin Jones, I imagine (laughter).  It's, it's probably desolate.  And now, of course, it's, it's maybe three or four homes there, that's about all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year was he--
Speaker 2: And he was born in '24 [1924].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, '23 [1923], '23' [1923].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Eunice, and she spelled it E-U-N-I-C-E.  Her last name was Revels, R-E-V-E-L-S.  And she was born in Tiptop, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind Tiptop, the name Tiptop, Virginia?
Speaker 2: I think so.  It's, it's right there on the Trail of the, of the Lonesome Pine leading from, going into from Virginia into Kentucky, and it's one of the highest peaks.  If you let a, if you let a train a loose on the tracks, it'll go for forty miles in any direction without stopping.  'Cause it's kind of like, even though you don't sense it, the elevation, and it's not like on the top of a hill that's very pronounced, it is steady up, up.  And it's kind of like the top of, of, of that particular region's altitude, so--
Speaker 1: So it's something that starts--
Speaker 2: So that's why they call--
Speaker 1: --rolling one way.  I mean--
Speaker 2: It can go if--
Speaker 1: --it, it'll roll down, it'll go for forty miles without, before--
Speaker 2: That's right, mm-hmm, in any director.  I mean, well, in rection--in two directions, east and west, (unclear)--it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's when one train, one train track came through there.  And right where the station is, is where the point of balance was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's the only thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, Tiptop.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what year was your mother born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in '24 [1924] as well, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178639
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father [Joseph Johnson]'s side of the family, as much as you can tell us.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's very interesting, the fact that I really know very little about my father's side.  I didn't really know my father until I was sixteen years old.  He was, however, a soldier.  Actually he was a sailor.  He--I don't, I'm not sure.  You know, it's kind of colorful, his story.  His mother was without a specific husband, and he kind of lived around.  He kind of had, had a hard time.  I've learned this much later; made me a lot more tolerant of, of some of his actions as I learned more about what he had to go through and as I got mature.  But he na--he didn't know much about his, his family.  He, he did know his mother, and according him--and I did meet her.  She was Mexican.  And his father, that he thought, that he had been told, was African American.  He spent little or no time with his father.  That's as, as, as far as I can tell--determine.  Anyway, he left shortly after I was born and joined the [U.S.] Navy, and was at D-Day [WW2], at Normandy [France].  I know he was a cook, and he cooked for some of the people like [George S.] Patton and [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower and that sort of thing, later became the head of the mess hall, as they call it at the [United States] Naval Academy in Annapolis [Maryland], where he worked, worked himself up.  And he probably had a GED [General Educational Development exam], but he was very smart.  He was a man that could do anything, carpentry, plumbing, fix automobiles, and so forth.  He helped me remodel this house.  We kind of tore this house down and built it back up when we got here.  He was just extraordinarily talented that way.  And he just recently passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, unfortunately, I can't say much more about as far as his family is concerned.
Speaker 1: So he didn't, he didn't talk about his ancestors, or he didn't really know--
Speaker 2: No, because he--
Speaker 1: --as much--
Speaker 2: --really didn't know 'em.  I mean as--he told me one time that he said to his mother, you know, really, I would really like for you to tell me, you know, who my father was.  And she said I can't.  I don't know, you know, who your father was.  I could have been--you know, I used, you know, the Johnson name because he was a, a nice guy and so forth.  But in terms of saying--
Speaker 1: He truly doesn't know--
Speaker 2: He, no, he had no--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it, it was a problem with him.  Because as I started to become familiar with the computer, and I started finding out all these things about my mother's side of the family, you could tell that it bothered him, to the point where I stopped even mentioning it, because I could see that it hurt him.  He, he was always asking me if I could find out more, you know, but he didn't have enough information to, to go on.
Speaker 1: Did he even know what part of Mexico his mother was from, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He did not, no.  But he did--once he got established here he did send for her, 'cause she was not doing well there in the mountains of, of, of West Virginia.  And he set her up, up in Annapolis, where she stayed her latter, latter part of her life until she died.  So I got a chance to meet her, you know.  She seemed like a, a charming lady, very fun, fun lady.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I did also have a chance for my daughter to meet her so my daugt--my daughter could know what her grandmother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --grand--great-grandmother looked like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was in, you know, pretty--within a year or so of her death, so she was already kind of sick.
Story_ID: 178640
Speaker 1: All right, now, what about your mother [Eunice Revels]'s side?  You said it's quite a bit of information about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I have a tremendous amount of information about my mother.  My mother was a Revels.  Her father was James W. Revels, which was my, my first hero, because as I indicated, I didn't have a father there with me, so I lived with my grandparents for the first five years, basically, of my life.  And so her father, her father was basically a Cherokee and French extraction.  His father was Colin Powell--I mean Colin Revels, who was from Cherokee, North Carolina, kind of an interesting--if you know about the Cherokees.  They fought for the Confederate side during the Second World War, the Cherokee--I mean during the [United States] Civil War.  And when I was studying this, I found that I now know where my great-grandfather is buried, and that he's buried in a Confederate cemetery.  And I was thinking what was, what was wrong with him (laughter)?  What was on his mind, until I realized that the history of the Cherokees was that they did, very loyal to the American government in, in several wars, and--anyway--
Speaker 1: For those that stayed in the South, they weren't forced to, you know, leave for Oklahoma--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --actually--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were, were involved in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the slave--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --business.
Speaker 2: --they were involved in the slave business.
Speaker 1: Yeah, had, had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --land and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that they farmed and they had like slaves and--
Speaker 2: Exactly right, that's exactly right.  And I've learned all of this, you know, and since I've--in the last five or six years, and I've got a nice folder.  And I'm just really touching the surface.  I've got names of, of, of various people as they branch off from other ones that I want to get more involved with.  But my great-grandfather, which would have been--by the way, Colin [Revels], the one I just mentioned, which was my great-grandfather, lost a leg at, at [the Battle of] Gettysburg [Gettysburg, Pennsylvania], you know.  So, I have my--some of my aunts and all who remember him as their grandfather remember him, and I've seen a picture of him as to what he looked like.  And had, he always wore his hair apparently all the way down to his shoulders.  And he, he dressed more like an Indian [Native American] than he did anything else.  Now his father, which is interestingly enough, his father fought in, in the, in the, in the War of 1812.  I've got all the documentations and so forth.  And his father before that came from France, and apparently they were mountain men, uneducated.  And they went down to North Carolina to the mountains down in the Smokies [Smoky Mountains] and all, and they hooked up and married Cherokees.  So they were a part of the Cherokees.  They were in the Census Bureau listed as mulattos until 1920, and they became colored, you know.  I'm sure that was part of the policy, you know, but they were mixtures.  My--
Speaker 1: So they married black women and--
Speaker 2: Yes, they--
Speaker 1: --and, and--
Speaker 2: --they, yes--
Speaker 1: --and Cherokees I guess.
Speaker 2: --my grandfather [James W. Revels], my grandfather's, 'cause you asked me about my, my mother's side, it's interesting that I spoke only of my grandfather.  And I was going back through his history, but his wife was an African whose mother was a slave, you know.  And I was--to me, growing up, it was fascinating because, if you think about it, my grandfather was seven or--was sev--was--he was born only seven years after the Civil War.  So most all of the people that he knew, most of his relatives, all of his, his friends, and associates, were people who survived the Civil War.  They either fought in it or not.  And he didn't die until I was twenty years old.  It's by living with him, I had an opportunity to talk to him about how things were, who did he know, what did he see?  And I'm sure that that had a lot to do with the fact that I ended up majoring in history in college.  I mean I have a fascination for it.  I'm not a scholar.  I tell people quickly I'd love to be a scholar, but I've spent my time that other people have spent to become scholars doing a lot of other things, you know, like soldiering and managing and so forth, and just able to follow history as a hobby.  But now that I have time, I'm deep into it.
Story_ID: 178641
Speaker 1: Now these Revels, you said fought in the, in the War of 1812 and in the--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --Confederate Army [during the United States Civil War]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --are also related, they were like second cousins to Hiram [Rhodes] Revels--
Speaker 2: To Hiram, right.
Speaker 1: --who became a--
Speaker 2: A con--a congressman, yeah.
Speaker 1: --congressman.  He was the first black congressman--
Speaker 2: First black, right.  He was actually--
Speaker 1: --congressman from Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 2: --out of, out of Mississippi, yes, right.  His--
Speaker 1: He kind of migrated there, though, but he was born in that part of the country with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the rest of 'em, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, in, in--(unclear)--I can't tell you what his ancestors, even though I've seen it on, on the computer, there's tremendous documentation of him.  But he was my grandfather [James W. Revels]'s second cousin.  So, I don't know how that hooks up--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--
Speaker 2: --at this point.
Speaker 1: --his--he had two cousins too that are probably related to you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on some level, John Coblin [ph.] and Lewis Sheridan [Leary]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they, they were with, those cousins were with John Brown at, at Harpers Ferry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's amazing.
Speaker 1: And there is a website with, with all of them pictured and their relationship with their--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, someone took this on as a project in North Carolina--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --document all that history--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and to link them together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at North Carolina not too long ago, went down to the Smokies [Smoky Mountains].  When my father [Joseph Johnson] and--passed and my wife[Sandra Ford Johnson]'s mother passed, all within a ten-day period, and when it was all over, the burial and so forth, we needed to relax.  And as I said to you earlier, I always think of mountains when I wanna relax.  And so I went, went down to the Smokies, and while there we went to Cherokee, North Carolina.  And I saw some evidence of the files of, of, of some of the Revels, but I didn't have the time to, to get into it.  But it's one of the things I'm gonna do in the future.
Speaker 1: And so it doesn't get lost, one of our other HistoryMakers, [HM] Susan Woodson of Susan Woodson's Gallery in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is related to Susie Revels, who is one of the daughters--her mother was Susie Revels, who is a daughter of Hi--
Speaker 2: Of Hiram.
Speaker 1: --of Hiram Revels.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's nice.
Speaker 1: And the--her uncle was Horace Cayton, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] who wrote the book, 'Black Chicago,' [sic, 'Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City'] with Saint, St. Claire Drake.  So it's a, it's a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --lot of connections here, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Lot of connections.  Yeah, so that's, that's gonna--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --give me plenty to do for the next ten years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, sir, okay, well--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --okay, so, a lot of history.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Any, anything else--
Speaker 2: Now my mother--
Speaker 1: --any--
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Mattie Revels], on her side, she was the daughter of a slave, and very little was, was, was able to be maintained from out of, you, know, her existence from the slavery.  Her mother survived slavery for a while, and she was born, my grandmother was 1884, so her mother was pretty senior when she was born.  She had some other kids earlier.  And she died in the turn of the century.  And she didn't know much--from what I'm told, she did not know much at all about her, her family.  She was apparently sold as a youngster, so her, her real mother and father, without any documentations of who they, who they were.  Nowadays, I, I think if you, if you were to take the time and, and, and the resources, you could probably figure that all out, because there were records kept some place.  They just--and she was illiterate, didn't know how to read and so forth.
Speaker 1: They may--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --not know themselves--
Speaker 2: No, but somebody knows.
Speaker 1: Somebody knows.
Speaker 2: Now my grandfather was, according to the census records--that's another great source.  I mean I love to, to look at those because you can actually see who lived in what house and what their names were and all that information, plus narratives.  I just find it interesting what the Census Bureau had to say about your family in, in years past, you know, like, these are illiterate people, and they apparently don't know how to pronounce their own names.  And you could see a lot of racism and so forth in their writings, which is kind of interesting.  But, so we don't really know what tribe or any of that type of thing that, that my grandmother came from.  But she didn't die until about '65 [1965] I think, so I, I knew her well too, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was a great cook (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 178642
Speaker 1: Any stories from any of your [maternal] ancestors that come down that, that are--or, or your, or your [maternal] grandparents [James W. Revels and Mattie Revels] that they told that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, it is one that is interesting.  My, my grandfather [James W. Revels] had sixteen kids, one of which was my mother [Eunice Revels].  And he had--his boys were all very physical kinds of men.  They were really rough, had reputations for fighting and things of this nature.  And when my mother, who was one of their favorites, got pregnant by my father, they went looking for him, a couple of him.  And my father tells me that he was in, in Germany, I mean in Germany during the war [World War II] and went to a crap game.  And when he walked in the door he heard one of my [sic, her, Johnson's mother, Eunice Revels Johnson] brother's voice, and he knew right away who it was.  And he ran because he said those guys you didn't fool with, and he knew they were after him.  So he really--
Speaker 1: Were they in the [U.S.] Army too?
Speaker 2: Couldn't of--
Speaker 1: Were they, they, they in the Army too?
Speaker 2: No, my, my, my uncle was in the Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The same uncle that I'm talking about one day when I was at the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] academy, some, some police officers from New York City [New York] came down to give a lecture to us on something.  When it was over I said, you know, "I know there are a lot of people in, in, in the police force in New York, but I have an uncle that's up there.  I thought maybe you might know him, and his--"I, I said, "His name is Joe Revels."  And they said, "That's the meanest man I've ever seen."  He called this other guy, and said, "Hey, here's Joe Revels' nephew," and you know, I mean, that he just had that kind of reputation.  They were all that way.  They were not intellectuals at all.  They were guys born in the mountains, and they were, they were honest men, but they were physical.  That's, that's the better word that I could use.  So I, I think that's the only interesting thing.  How my father explained later, and it's been pretty much proven by my talks with my aunts and uncles, that he couldn't come back.  If he had to come back while any of my uncles were around, it would have just been a, not too good, so he waited.  And there's an interesting story there.  I was a basketball player.  In fact, athletics saved me because I moved around a lot.  After my grandfather I stayed with for five years was not able to, to keep me anymore, I started living with various people.  And so I, I really drifted into a kind of a situation where I could have easily become a hoodlum or you know, some--less than academic kinds of a person and, and done the things I've done, and except for I was a good athlete.  And I thought as, as an athlete, I had, I had another support group that most people don't have, and that is I had coaches.  (Unclear) as I had men that, that, that played a particular interest in, in me.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So, so I, I was just an ordinary kid that was on the wrong side the street.  The, the, the people that I lived with, my aunts and uncles, were ordinary people.  You know, they were not professors, teachers, lawyers or anything, just laborers.  And that was my reputation in the, in the communities that I lived in.  And one day I, I went out for football.  And I caught a pass, and my name was in the paper.  And people started responding to me differently, and I remembered that.  And so when the kids that would have gone, do bad things would say to me, hey, let's do such and such, I'd say no, I can't do that.  I mean, you know, I have, you know, I'm get--I got a responsibility and stuff like that.  They laughed at me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now I wanna get back to this--
Story_ID: 178643
Speaker 1: --But I wanted to talk about coming up, 'cause you said you were with--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your grandfather [James W. Revels]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You're father [Joseph Johnson] disappeared.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Eunice Revels] died--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you're very young.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother died?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I was eight, but she spent six years in a sanitarium.  If, if you can remember when you had tuberculosis in those days, they, they don't have those places now, but they had a series of sanitariums throughout this country where people with tuberculosis would go because it was contagious.  So I actually didn't see her at all to have any recollection of her until basically her funeral.  So, but I was eight when she died, but I didn't live with her.  I lived with my [maternal] grandfather for my first five years, my grandfather, [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Revels].  And almost like in, in--out of a book, one day he calls me in and he sets me on his knee, and he says, "Hey, I can't handle this no more."  And I'd, I idolized him, you know.  I walked like him; I tried to talk like him; and everything he would do, you know, I'd do it.  In fact, we'd go hunting together, and he'd let me bring the rabbits home and stuff like that, you know.  It was just, I guess a lot of kids feel that way about him, 'cause I didn't have--to me he was father, grandfather, uncle, everything all wrapped up into one.
Speaker 1: How, how old was he when he--
Speaker 2: In those days he was in his seventies.  He was a strong man.  He was in his seventies.  And, but, anyway, at that point, I started living with various aunts and uncles until I was about twelve, and none of 'em worked out, you know.  I mean I, later in life, I, I--it, it turned out it was an advantage because I got to live with them.  And all of their children, who are my cousins, we have special bond with, and I, I did with them later.  So, I then went to live with a lady who was my aunt, and it worked.  And she did something, she had--I think she said she went to high school--went to two years of school.  And her husband had gone like to two years of school.  I mean, you know, in those days, you know, it was no requirement.  They lived back in the mountains and stuff.  But this woman was extremely smart, 'cause whereas everybody else had tried to discipline me, everybody felt that my problem, the reason why I was not easy to get along with was I needed more discipline, she just took the opposite approach.  And I don't know why she did that.  She just go, just gave me love.  I mean, regardless of what I did, she never raised he voice.  She would just hug me and maybe cry if it was really bad.  She showed disappointment, but she never showed anger.  And you know, it finally, it, it, it, it kind of grew on me, you know, and I wanted to please her.  And, and so to please her I had to do right things, and so I ended up changing my whole personality.  By the time I left her, in which I only stayed there until I finished high school, I was totally a changed person.  I cared about how other people felt about me.  I, I tried to be decent, and I, I had listened to all the things she said.  Of course she was very religious, a very religious lady, quoted the Bible.  Almost everything that happened, she had a Bible verse to quote for it and that type of thing.  So, she was very--and this is a lady that she--you know, no, no classes in psychology.  She, she, she had raised only one child of her own, and--but it turned out good for her in the long run, because as I, as I left and became successful, I took care of her, I mean I took care of her from, from then on in.  In fact, when I was in college, she had to--they had--she and her husband had to separate because the coal mines where he was working folded.  And he was in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] working as a janitor, and she was in New York working as a day, you know, working a live-in situation.  And I got them back home and got them a house, and, and from then on in I gave them, you know, an allowance until, till the time they died, and took care of them.
Speaker 1: Now what was her name--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Attie [ph.] Attie Matilda Hairston was her, the name she, of her, of her husband, Attie M. Hairston, H-A-I-R-S-T-O-N.  And his name was James Hairston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had no children of his own.  He died of silicosis, which is coal miner's disease, black lung, as they call it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 178644
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you to give us a sense of what it was like to grow up.  What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells that you remember from growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  It's almost two sections of growing up.  It's three, really.  One was the, the living in Tiptop [Virginia], in this small town, I mean where, you know, there's plenty distance between houses--  it's not a town; it was a really rural area--and hunting, and fishing, and, and really great eating.  I, I didn't realize until I was probably in my thirties that we were poor.  I didn't, I never even--it never even occurred to me (laughter)--(unclear)--'cause we always had something to eat.  But I loved to hunt; I loved to fish; I loved the outdoors.  And that is what I remember most, going hunting with my grandfather [James W. Revels].  He would, he would come into bed and wake me up at three, four o'clock in the morning and say, you know, come on.  And we'd whisper, and we'd go out hunting, and the fact that I could walk along beside him up there, you know.  And I can remember when we would come home after we had killed our rabbits or whatever, as we would get, get home, and the people could see us that were up, we would bring--he'd give me the, the catch, you know, so I could bring it home, you know, and I got a lot of credit for that, you know.  And of course we--he went hunting not for pleasure.  I mean, back there in the '40s [1940s] we're talking, during, this was all during the civ--World War II [WW2].  He went hunting so that the family would have something to eat (laughter).  So, the other, the other part is the, is the, is the miserable part in between the time I left him and the time I came to live with my aunt [Attie M. Hairston].  I was just living in, in, in homes in which, you know, you just, you were not really a part of that family.  You know that they took you because it was the thing to do or maybe my grandfather or something had, had encouraged them to.  The only thing that I can say about that period of time is that it was just miserable, you know.
Story_ID: 178645
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we were talking about the lady that raised you [Johnson's aunt, Attie M. Hairston].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now and you were telling us about the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're at, you're at three different stages.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We've done two, and the third stage is--
Speaker 2: You have done two.  The last one--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of growing up was, was just like going to heaven.  I discovered that I was a good athlete, and that brought me status in a community that I otherwise would not have had.  I, I started to meet people from a different persuasion.  And I started thinking in terms of a future, whereas before I didn't think I had a future.  I had a lot of people interested in me because of my, I thought, athletics.  But as I've grown old, older and met people from, from that town of Bluefield [West Virginia], I, I--it was only later that I realized that perhaps I did have maybe some charm or maybe something other than, than sports, 'cause I had a low esteem until I got into sports and didn't think I had any of value, I mean after so many rejections.
Speaker 1: Now, you're about six five?
Speaker 2: Six four, yeah.
Speaker 1: Six four, okay.
Speaker 2: And I've always been big.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, not, not heavy (laughter).  I was just big.  One time I was muscular, but not so much now.  Yeah, but still, when you come in that kind of environment as I told you that I came up under, your es--your self-esteem is, is damaged a little bit, you know.  And so sports and athletics, and so I worked hard to be, to be good, and I was.  And I was the captain of the team that won the state championship.  It never had happened before in that community.
Speaker 1: It's a basketball team?
Speaker 2: Basketball, right.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your team, the--
Speaker 2: Was Park Central [High School, Bluefield, West Virginia], Thundering Herds, that's what we were, small school, but we were, we were pretty awesome.
Speaker 1: Now this is West Virginia?(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We won that--yes, in Bluefield, a small community in the extreme southern tip.  In fact, there is a Bluefield, Virginia, and a Bluefield, West Virginia, separated only by a state line.
Story_ID: 178646
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And now let's go back a minute to grade school.  Now, now what--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --grade school did you attend--well, you probably attended--
Speaker 1: Well, I went to a lot.
Speaker 2: --many, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I went to a lot of grade schools.
Speaker 2: But when did you spend the most--which one did you graduate from?
Speaker 1: Well, I graduated from Jones High--Jones Street Elementary School in, in Bluefield [West Virginia].  I went up there.  For a brief period I, I stayed--it was kind of interesting, I stayed at a place, a community center one time.  It got, it go so that I wasn't even in a home, actual home.  I--one of my aunts put me up in a (laughter), in a, a home for women.  And, but, you know, if you had little kids and stuff like that, they had a little way that they would accommodate you.  I stayed down there.  It was called the Carolina Community Home.  But I went to Jones Street [Elementary School] in, in Bluefield.  That's where I finished my grammar school.
Speaker 2: Now you say when you, when you were a young man, you were, you were prone to get into a lot of trouble.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And plus you were big, I guess, too.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And so you were a bigger mouth to feed.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you caused trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: I caused a lot of trouble, right.
Speaker 2: And your relatives didn't feel completely obli--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --they felt obligation, but not completely obligated.
Speaker 1: But not completely.  What they would do is they--it was usually the aunt, right.  It was usually the aunt that was my blood relative.  And I got along fine with them.  But their husbands is what I didn't get along--the authority figure, you know.  And I would have--I just could--you know, even if I tried to do right, it seemed like I couldn't.  I mean we're talking things that, you know, like your chores was like slopping hogs or you know, cutting wood if you bringing it--you know, it is, this is, this is rural living, and we're talking the '40s [1940s] here, you know, outdoor plumbing, no out--I mean outdoor toilets and things of this nature.  Again, it was all I knew, so I didn't think of it in terms of it being hard, hard times.  It was just hard times for me because of the domestic situation I was in at the time, you know, my family, until I went to live at, with my, with my mother [sic, aunt, Attie M. Hairston], I mentioned to you.  I call her [Attie M. Hairston] my mother, by the way.
Speaker 2: Were, were there any teachers that took an interest in you--
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: --coming up?
Speaker 1: Not really, not until my athletics showed itself, and then everybody was interested, principals, I mean who would (unclear)--who ordinarily probably wouldn't have even known my name in the school.  But, you know, I've played ball, and that made a difference.  And I, again, as I've gotten older, I've learned that it didn't make as big a difference as I thought.  But it didn't matter to me now, as I look back, 'cause the thing that's important is something made a difference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And as long as I thought it was basketball or whatever, that was good enough to help me to get out of, you know, to, to, to turn myself into the kind of person I, I wanted to be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, did you, did you like to read when you were, were young?
Speaker 1: I loved reading.  I still do.  I love reading.  Interestingly enough, I hardly ever have liked fiction.  I only read historical novels from the time I was a child.  I was going to major in, in college in math.  And my, my coaches said, you know, don't do that; you know (laughter), you're gonna--it's gonna take so much of your time playing ball.  You know, math is not a thing for you, so I said well, in anger more or less, I said well, if I can't major in what I want, I'll major in history 'cause I like it, that's, you know, that's easy, to me it was, it was.  But, man, what a wonderful thing that was because there I was in the midst of Qualls [ph.] and Samuels [ph.] and all those guys, it, you know, it turned out to be just great for me.
Story_ID: 178647
Speaker 1: As you approach high school [Park Central High School, Bluefield, West Virginia] you started to get involved in athletics and stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you, you played basketball on a state championship team.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You played football.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I got an injury, a real bad injury that is kind of interesting, that my arm was--had a compound complex fracture.  And you can't see this, but it's still significantly shorter, my right arm than my left, because it didn't have a growing period.  Now if I stood up and stuck--hold them out together you'd see a big difference.  For--I did not wear a short-sleeve shirt until I went to college after this incident happened.  It happened when I was about fourteen, fourteen or fifteen.  And so, it was difficult for me.  In fact, I played ball and played on a, a, a team and acquitted myself very well with only a left hand.  I only could use the right hand as a stub to, you know, to help me catch the ball and, and so I--it helped me a great deal when I got the use of my right hand back, 'cause I was on the basketball court, either hand was just as--I was just as comfortable with one as I was with the other.  But this aunt [Attie M. Hairston] that I'm telling you about, I was not living her when this happened.  But she went to--she was working, doing what they called day work, for the white doctors who were going to amputate my arm, because they said it--
Speaker 1: They were going to amputate--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --your arm.
Speaker 2: --were gonna amputate it.  And she begged them, give me one more day.  They said, "What for?  It's all torn up.  It's got nothing, and if we, we don't do, take it off, he's gonna get gangrene, and he's gonna die."  And she's, just kept saying, "Give him one more day."  So finally after a while, to make a long story short, they decided that maybe gangrene wasn't gonna set in.  So they set it, but they said I'd never be able to use it.  And so, for years they were right.  It was just, after they took the cast off and everything it just hung there.
Speaker 1: How old were you when they, when that--
Speaker 2: I was thirteen or fourteen, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: What happened?  Do, do you remember the incident?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was playing football, and I stiff-armed a guy.  I was running with the ball and stiff-armed a guy, and as I stiff-armed him, somebody else came, you know, if my arm is like this, and they just came down and just tore it all, all apart.  And interestingly, I, I heard somebody said, "Oh, my God, look at that!"  And I thought, "Oh, boy, somebody's hurt," because when you have a traumatic--I saw this in [the] Vietnam [War].  If you have something very traumatic to happen to you, it sometimes takes a while for that injury to--your brain to, to, to comprehend what has happened.  So you can have a normal conversation.  I mean, I've seen it.  You, you can have a normal conversation with somebody, and you, and, and, and, and your arm is totally blown of, or some sort of really--and then it hits you all of a sudden, and then, of course, the pain.  And, and most of the time people pass out, which is what happened to me.  And I thought, "Oh, boy, somebody's hurt really bad."  And then as everybody kind of peeled off, they--you know, and then finally I looked over and I saw it was me (laughter).  And I didn't remember anything after that for quite a while, 'cause they put me out--I went out, and then when they got me to the hospital.  What's intere--you know, the thing is you gotta think now, it was, everything was segregated when, when, when all this, all these things I'm telling about happened.  And so they even had a special section for coloreds in--that's what we were called.  So I was in a section of the hospital, which didn't get all of the, the best doctors and the best attention, you know.  It was just in a little side, like a little room over there for, for where coloreds went.  And so, had it not been for her, they would have taken my arm off.  I'd have to live a life with, with just one arm.  Being an athletic type of person I am, that would have been a disaster for me.  So, I guess you might say that's one of the things that I re--that I don't forget, I think about it--when I think about her [his aunt, Attie M. Hairston].
Speaker 1: She saved your arm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She did.
Story_ID: 178648
Speaker 1: And then, of course, I remember that then--I'd really, I'd always remembered her [his aunt, Attie M. Hairston] at different family reunions and other things as somehow I was particularly drawn to her.  I mean she would always seem to talk to me.  It was a little bit different, you know.  And I try to do this with children, I try to talk to children when I meet them and not just give them cursory type things because it's a big difference.  She would actually--if she asked me how I was doing, I could tell she was listening to what I was saying, as opposed to just saying, you know, that's good, you know, son, you know.  She would actually listen and ask questions, make me think.  And, and so that always struck me.  I always said well, I think I'd love to live with her.  But at that time she was married to a guy that was worse than any of the other guys, you know.  He was a World War I [WW1] stupid kind of a backwoodsman that mistreated her.  And later she left him.  And then when she left him and got hooked up with this guy, James [Hairston], who was a, a great guy, that's when I end up--was able to go live with them, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But you know, it was interesting that I couldn't accept her way of treatment.  It was so strange to me, because I, at that point in life, I'd figured everybody had an angle, and I wondered what hers was.  I mean why is she doing this?  You know, it's this thing that--thought that came to my mind: why is she treating me this way?  I mean, she did things like she'd my clothes and wash 'em, and fold 'em up, and put 'em in the drawer.  She made sure I had, you know, fresh cornbread, or anything that I said that I liked she made sure I had, treated me that way.  So I said, figure, I can't figure it out, so I'm leaving; I'm, I'm getting out of this 'cause it's something terrible here.  So I left and she put the state troopers on me.
Speaker 2: How old were you when you left?  Was that be, before you hurt your arm or after?
Speaker 1: No, this aft--this was, this was, this was after I hurt my arm, 'cause when I hurt my arm I wasn't living with her, so this was afterwards.  I'd, I'd been there with her about six or seven months, so I--my arm was still--I was, I only had--
Speaker 2: Partial use--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Partial use, but still.  Anyway, she had the state troopers to pick me up.  They picked me up there near Huntington, West Virginia.  I was heading to Cleveland [Ohio], where I had a cousin, that was living there, that had, he had a truck, and I was, as far as I was concerned, I was finished with everything.  I was just gonna go up and ride the truck with him, you know, with that kind of mentality.  But as I--when they picked me up, they, they, they, they brought me back to, to where she was.  And I'll never forget when I walked in, she, only thing she did was, was, you know, to hug me and, and, and say, "Please don't," you know, "leave me," you know, and blah, blah, blah.  And the policeman said, state trooper said, you know, "If we catch you out there again we're gonna put you in jail," and stuff like that.  So, I stayed and you know, and then it--I didn't, I didn't think about leaving anymore.  I, I--that's when I said okay, I'm gonna make this lady happy.  And it seemed like all I had to do was just do something nice, and she would be happy, so I started doing it.
Speaker 2: Now this is your mother [Eunice Revels]'s sister, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, my mother's sister.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I later found out, as she was getting older, she told me that she told my mother that--my mother had asked her that if she ever got into a position to take me, would she?  I didn't know that at the time.  So she was all this time, the reason she was paying so much attention to me and everything was because she felt like one day it was her dream to get me.  And so she was watching all these happening to me and, and interfering wherever she could, you know, like when, when one uncle would say get this kid out of here, she would try to reason with them and do things like that.  It usually didn't do much good till I came to live with her.  Again, like I say, the approach that she had of just treating me nice, I mean, this lady--can you imagine living with a person that never raised their voice at you? Never did anything like that.
Story_ID: 178649
Speaker 1: Well, it's contradiction to the model that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we are--most of us who are older--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --have lived under, where--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's the model that the country uses--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, to a large extent, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --governments.  You, you hear people talk about, you know, the reason why it was so much crime is because we don't punish people enough.
Speaker 2: We don't punish--yeah, we don't any discipline.
Speaker 1: People say that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We need to punish 'em more.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: We should increase the penalties--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --put 'em in jail longer--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, make it harder--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --go back to the chain gang--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all that sort of thing, you know.
Speaker 2: And that's what everybody else did.  It's just some personalities that doesn't work with--you have to be smart enough--I think this lady [his aunt, Attie M. Hairston], while she had no formal education, was probably one of the smartest persons I've ever seen.  She had to be smart enough to understand that my personality was such that I didn't respond to that type of stimuli.  In fact, my coaches, all of my coaches had to treat me differently.  You--I did not respond to being chewed out.  I was a self-motivated guy.  When I made a mistake, I felt bad about it.  I like for you to point it out, but if it was obvious, I didn't need for you to.  And I just had that kind of--I still have that kind of personality.  I get angry when people get angry with me (laughter), even though I'm guilty or whatever.  That's not the way to motivate me.  That's--some people, you know--and I've learned from, from supervising and managing people even in combat and stressful cir--circumstances, that while there are some standards, you also have to treat people as individuals.  You know, some guys need a good kick in the butt every once in a while.  And others, when you kick 'em in the butt, you lose 'em.  And so, you've got to learn which ones you can, which ones you cannot do that with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had the same--seemed like she had that ability.  But she was loved by everyone.  I mean she was just loved by everyone, everybody's Aunt Attie, all my cousins, which is forty-some of us at the start.  Now we're down to a small amount, but they all loved her.  Everybody loved her.  I wasn't the only one.
Speaker 1: And she had no children of her own?
Speaker 2: She had one, and she has a son that lives here, in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so he's my cousin.  He came home from the military when I was like a senior, and was there for a little while.  But--I mean we never got to be like brothers or anything of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm fond of him.  He lives here.  He's getting up there in some age now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 178650
Speaker 1: Now, when did your arm heal up?  Did--well, it certainly--
Speaker 2: I think I was--
Speaker 1: --was healed up by--
Speaker 2: --I was about a senior in--so I was about seventeen when, when I--without really knowing it, I was, I was actually using my right hand.  I was told to, to, to, to use my right hand every time I could.  And--but I had gotten to be totally left-handed.  And so I tried and tried and tried.  And I think playing sports or when you don't have time to think consciously about what you're doing, you're just doing it.  And it started, and it even grew, I mean--and to a point when I got in college, I, I, I, I chanced it and sort of wore some--'cause at, at first it was so noticeable people would actually look and laugh or comment about it, and I was subconscious.
Speaker 1: Was smaller than--really much--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: --much smaller.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, much smaller.
Speaker 1: It had atrophied sort of, or what?
Speaker 2: Had, it had, yeah.  From all the time that we spent--now see, now today, with the technology the way--they wouldn't have put me in a cast for so long.  They kept me in a cast--I was in a cast for it seemed like almost a year, you know.  I mean, they don't do that now.  But that was state--well, at least that's how the state of the art for people being treated in the other room, so (laughter).  That's how they treated me anyway.  And so obviously your arms can't grow.  I was in a, still at a growing stage in life.  My arms couldn't grow.  But when it finally came out and I started using it and so forth, it started to grow, and it's not that noticeable now.  I mean if I had a short-sleeve shirt on, if you look closely, you could see it, or if you saw me reach, you could tell there's something different.  But it--so I was just fortunate, really, I mean--she--they took me to a hospital where she [his aunt, Attie M. Hairston] was living at the time.  And so she took the time to come and, and see me.  She had to walk I found out to get to this hospital, and she came up there.  She did what is called day work.  I mean she worked each day, and she got five dollars a day working for the rich people in the town.  She walked about four miles every day just to be able to come to the, to the hospital.  And she'd stay up there at the hospital.  I remember it.  She'd stay at the hospital with me, sometimes overnight, just to make sure that no one messed up, got the, go the wrong word, and they called me off--hauled me off some place and cut my arm off--until the doctor said that we're not gonna do it.  So she would leave there and go, walk to work, walk back, and so forth.  She didn't have a husband at that particular time. She was in between.  She had left that, that bad guy.  But anyway, that, that lady, I think about her every single solitary day, you know.  She was that big an influence on me.
Speaker 1: You were lucky it sounds like.
Speaker 2: I was lucky.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And unfortunately, you know, some of my cousins and other people with that didn't have that--haven't, haven't done very well in life, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was lucky.
Story_ID: 178651
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [Park Central High School in Bluefield, West Virginia], did you get involved in other high school activities, other than sports that you--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You know, I--they had acting clubs and stuff.  I cannot act.  I, I cannot pretend, like I can't get drunk (laughter).  I really don't know why that is, but it is a trait of mine.  I must be in control.  I must have things as, in terms of the reality of, of, of the way it is.  I don't like anything distorted, changed, or anything.  I like--I don't even wear, wouldn't wear sunglasses until I had to wear the tinted ones because my eyes would run, because I, I wanna see everything exactly like it is.  So, I, I, I didn't get involved in anything, other than sports.  But I, you know, I was working hard.  I, just to give you an example, when I was in high school, I, I worked for a jeweler named J. W. Waters.  He was probably the more prominent jeweler in town.  I went over to his store, downtown Bluefield [West Virginia], which was about a mile from where I lived.  And I cleaned the, the, the, the--well, first of all, I delivered papers.  Then I went to his store and I cleaned, cleaned the place, you know, washed down the counters, do all this kind of stuff, the awnings, outside windows, and set it up and then walked back--I didn't have a car--and walked back to school.  School started like eight o'clock, and just figure I'd been up since three-thirty, four o'clock.  When I finished I played sports and had practice.  Then I went back to that, to that, to that store and I worked.  I worked half a day on Saturdays too at that store.  And then the other half I did what we call knock on doors, asking can I do anything for you, this type of thing, and you know, and then plus I had, tried to have a little girlfriend or something, a little time there, which was mostly on Sundays, about all I ever had.  And so, so I was very, very busy.  And I had to, I felt, you know, the--while my mother loved me, she didn't haven't anything.  I mean, when I say my mother, you know, I mean my aunt [Attie M. Hairston].  She didn't have anything.  So if I, if I wanted clothes and things of this nature, I mean to, I had to earn 'em, and, and I accepted that.  It was not a problem at all.  I mean I didn't think it was anything unusual.  I did notice that there were other kids who, who had a lot more than me.  And I, I noticed also that there were kids that didn't work and you know, and all of that, but I didn't feel like I was disadvantaged because I had to do that.  I was just so grateful after I turned my, my thinking around to, to loving this person and this family that I was with that I would have, I would have worked till I died, you know, just out of gratitude of having finally found a home.  Because people can be cruel.  I, I (unclear) interesting story about one time I, I left one parent and went to one aunt and went to live with another one.  On the, on the first day I got there, she said, "Go up to the school.  It's up there on that corner.  Go up there and tell 'em who you are," and, and that sort of thing.  So I mean I didn't even get an adult to take me to the school.  I had to go up to the school, you know, find the principal or whoever and try to get that done.  Then, never forget going into the classroom and even some of the teachers were not as sensitive as they should be.  Finally the teacher--the principal brings me into this classroom and says--now all these kids are in there, just gonna be my, my friends and all--and says, "Here's this boy.  He just walked up here, says his name is Johnson.  He's living somebody named Hairston, and he doesn't know their address," or, "he doesn't know anything," you know.  Now the kids are laughing, you know, and you, you know, and I'm standing there, you know.  And I, I never forgot that.  I mean, this was not--this was just ignorance.  It wasn't an attempt on the part of the principal or the teacher or the kids to hurt me personally.  It's just ignorance.  And when you don't have the traditional mother and father kind of an upbringing, it's hard for you to imagine how important belonging to something really is, to, to, to, even to the strain on a kid of not, not being able to say, well, my father is this, you know, 'cause they, they'd say things like, "Well, who is your father?"  Well, I mean I had a name, but you know, well, "Where is he?"  Um, you know, I don't know, you know.  The more you have to say those kind of things, you know, it, it kind of gets at you a little bit.  So, when I finally got to this place and had something stable, it was, it was great.
Story_ID: 178652
Speaker 1: How are your grades in high school [Park Central High School in Bluefield, West Virginia]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Good.  I mean I was--let me, let me just say, as far as grades are concerned, in high school and college, and I have two master's degrees, and I've been through a lot of military schooling, and I went to the FBI [federal Bureau of Investigation] academy and all, I have been very fortunate that I've never had to study very hard.  You know, like, I've known some people who are very successful people who got some very good grades who really literally studied hard all the time.  I never did.  I had a great social life all the time.  I, I had lots of fun, but I, I paid attention in class.  And I--now history, that was different.  I worked hard in history, and I didn't consider it as work 'cause I loved it.  And since I couldn't major in math--I didn't like it, and I didn't take any math after whatever I had to take at the beginning.  I was, I guess I was just lucky.  I was--I wasn't lucky.  I guess I was just, I had the right mental acumen, I guess, to be able to, to, to, to do well.  I write well, I've always been able to write well, and I listen, and I recall.  And the things I read, I, I pretty much remember.  You know, I, I'm not a genius or nothing.  I'm not gonna project that image.  There are always a heck of a lot smarter people than I was everywhere I've ever been, but I've always done just as well.  I, I, I was thirteen out of--we only had sixty-some people in my class.  I, I was twelve or thirteen out of, out of that group, and then college I was probably in the--I had a 2.8 out of, out of a 4 point system.  It was--I, I, I was a couple of times on the honor roll, I mean the dean's list, as they call it.  But I was a big time jock too, so I mean I was doing that and everything else.  So I, I've, I've, I did all right in school, but I wasn't the brain that some other kids were.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when, when you graduated from high school, did you have an athletic scholarship--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or some--
Speaker 2: I had a bunch of different scholarships--
Speaker 1: And, and you had sort of just emerged as a, as a major athlete I guess with--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --arm coming back together--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --like that.  So you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: --surprised kind of.
Speaker 2: --you know, the thing is I, I was very good even (laughter), you know, I was, I made all-state, and I was selected as the captain of the team, but also, I had, I had something else that I didn't really appreciate until much later on, and that is determination.  I mean I, I took this whole business of being an athlete very seriously.  I mean it was more than just a guy going out and playing ball.  This was everything to me.  This was my reputation.  This was my pride.  This was everything, and so I played hard (laughter), you know.  And you know and to lose, I mean, well, we had some great kids in, in school, and I lost two games in high school, period.  One, it was after state's tournament I told you about where we won the state championship in West Virginia.  We went out and played Little Rock, Arkansas, in the national tournament and got beat.  And we lost one other game in three years.  So, I can--
Speaker 1: So you played basketball with, with--
Speaker 2: With--
Speaker 1: --one arm, not--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --working right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for a while and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see, yeah, laughed initially, but as the game went along they stopped (laughter), you know.  I mean I used to--I had, what I had was, see, I la--the problem is you can even see some of that deformity there.  Well, I had no problem with my shoulder, so, I mean I could, using my shoulder muscles, I could, I could move my arm, you know.  But, but I had--I could use it like to help catch to stabilize the ball, you know.  And then there--I could occasionally dribble, but I dribbled with a different kind of a motion than with the elbow.  I'd use the shoulder.  And then eventually it all got together, and it was no, not that much difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you shoot with your left or right?
Speaker 2: I shot with my left and right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, like if I went in for a layup, I could shoot with my right.  But most of my jump shots, hooks, and things of that nature was with my left.
Speaker 1: Okay, that made you difficult to guard, 'cause they know--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --which way you were (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They didn't--especially now when I got 'em both together, I mean that was really something when you had to, had to defend me.  You know, and--you know, there's a league, a black league.  They still have it.  It's Central Inter--Intercollegiate Athletic Association, the CIAA.  They, they still have it.  But in, in the '50s [1950s], the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], before integration, all the black athletes you see now on television on any given Saturday or Sunday, most of them would have been congregated in one of about fifteen colleges, especially all the best ones.  You know, we had guys in intramural that were, you know, all-staters from, from their states.  They couldn't make the team.  I, I had a offer from Tennessee A and I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial University, later Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], which had a great, great team, in--when I finished college.  And they told me, here I was one of the leading scorers in the state, and they told me if you come to school here, by your junior year you might make the varsity.  But they were gonna give me a scholarship for the whole time.
Story_ID: 178653
Speaker 1: All right, Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], now what was Morgan State like when you got there?
Speaker 2: I think Morgan State was at the apex of black colleges in their, in their span.  They--it was a Mecca of, of, of talent.  Almost all of our professors taught from their own books.  They were extraordinary people, and they had vision.  They had vision for the blacks and had standards for us.  It was--they used to always say an A at Morgan is the same as an A at Harvard [University, Cambridge Massachusetts], I mean, and we worked hard.  In the, in the class we had brilliant people.  I mean we've had Rhodes scholars.  I mean, Graves, [HM] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.], have you interviewed him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was there.  It just, we had--I think it was at the apex.  I mean after integration, which was a two, two-edged sword.  I mean it was wonderful.  Certainly it was a time that had to come, and, and, and so I wouldn't want to say that it was anything wrong with that.  However, it did bring with it the loss of a lot of programs and the lessening of the concentration of African Americans.  So, we had both from the standpoint of we had best students and the best teachers, and so, it was a wonderful experience; I loved it, and there was a feeling of, of cooperation.  And this was right at the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement in terms of the colleges.  You know, so we were involved in the civil action aspect of things, even though I, I didn't do well with that.  It's always bothered me that I did not have the kind of control of myself to be able to, to take the kind of abuse that some of my friends could, could take.  I couldn't do it, and you know, I, I stopped worrying about why I couldn't.  I just couldn't, you know.  And so they told us that if you can't do, if you can't take that, you know, don't come 'cause you'll hurt the program.  And I, I stopped.  I tried--
Speaker 1: Now that--
Speaker 2: --a couple of times--
Speaker 1: --that's--
Speaker 2: --and I stopped.
Speaker 1: --that's something that was widely discussed in those days and especially in the North--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about they'll be discussions and, and (unclear) at church--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --barber shop--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and stores--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, record stores--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You'd hear older guys talking about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, I couldn't do that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I couldn't have nobody beatin' on me and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: --the dog on me.  I'd kill the dog.  They'd have to kill me--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: --because I wouldn't be able to do it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And people would say that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And yeah, yeah, you know, we admire the people that were able to take it, but--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --a lot of people couldn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Most people, I--
Speaker 2: Right, no.
Speaker 1: --guess it in just--
Speaker 2: I know they couldn't.
Speaker 1: --the United States couldn't take it.
Speaker 2: And they took a--I, I, I really admired those guys.  I'd watch them go off--you know, after I had my experience.  I, I went down and literally just, just (laughter)--well, I mean it was a kind of a, a terrible thing.  One of the, one of the guys who were there, you know, actually, and he, he spit on me, you know, and I, you know, I just couldn't take it.  So, you know, I, I became physical (laughter), and so, they pulled me behind and steady talked to me.  So, the next time we went down, I, I, I, I was determined, you know, 'cause I'd watched how the other guys had performed, and I'd said you know, I, I can do this; I know I can (laughter).  But I--and the same thing happened, and before you know it, I was physical again.  So finally they--you know, hey, Harry--you know, no problem, just you can help us in other ways.  And so I did, but I couldn't do that; I just couldn't.  Something about my personality I just couldn't handle it.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in school did you hear about, in that regard, did, did you hear about Robert F. Williams in North Carolina?  They had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there.
Speaker 2: No, you know, the, the, the, the--let me see if I wanna put it this way.  The, the intellectuals--I was not an intellectual at, at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Insofar as my private activity was concerned, I was a jock.  You know, in fact, if you ask anybody about me from Morgan, that's what they'll say.  "Oh, Harry Johnson, oh, he's captain of the basketball team; he's a jock."  I hung out with jocks, stuff like that.  However, I, I--that wasn't all that was me.  I, I knew about the student union, the president of our student body, and the kinds of exchanges that was going on between them.  And I was, of course, well read on, on, on what was going on in the world, so I knew about things.  I just wasn't involved with it.  But yeah, I mean like, for example, I, I sat with Malcolm X a number of times and talked with him about his philosophy and things of this nature when they would come on the campus.
Story_ID: 178654
Speaker 1: We had a general there [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] that used to--had been a [United States Military Academy at] West Point [West Point, New York] graduate, and was a colonel by the name of Fowler [ph.], Fowler.  He turned down his ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] commission out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in order to be able to go to West Point.  And so by the time I was in college, he should have been a general.  Everybody knew that, but they had, they had quotas.  So, a lot of the generals would come over, and he'd have them over to sit down and talk with us in our ROTC programs and things of this nature.
Speaker 2: So he ran the ROTC program--
Speaker 1: Yes, un-huh, he was--
Speaker 2: --at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: --in charge.  He was a, what they called in those days, a PMS and T [Professor of Military Science and Tactics].  Now they call 'em professor military science.
Speaker 2: Was he--was his, what's his first name (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Fowler--gosh, I can't--
Speaker 2: It wasn't Ross?  I know a Ross Fowler--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, this, this person I think is dead.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ultimately, I think he ended up--he was the most--one of the most magnificent guys you, you have ever seen.  I mean he was, he was a brilliant man, I mean just immaculate in his appearance and all of that.  And I think we all had, you know admired him.  But he never made general, and, and the only reason why he didn't was because of, of, of his race.  And I--and he started drinking after he retired, and ultimately he went, went downhill, you know.  But his name was Fowler.  I can't think of his last name, Colonel Fowler.  But if you talk to anybody that went to Morgan during the time he was there, they'll all say the same thing about him.  He was a, a helluva model, ra--you know, role model.  And that's why--but if I think back, every one of those ROTC instructors were the best that we had in those days.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had a heck of a program.  (Unclear) we went down to--in the summer, we would go to a summer camp in which we would compete against the other colleges from all over the East Coast.  And Morgan would always take first.  I mean we just had so many talented guys.  I think we've had, in fact, I know we've had more black generals coming out of Morgan than any other school.  It's (unclear) a long tradition of having excellence in their military program there.  But we were, we were involved in student actions and activities and so forth.  And this is between '58 [1958] and '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 178655
Speaker 1: Now one of the athletes that was there [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] we were discussing off camera was Leroy Kelly--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Leroy Kelly.
Speaker 1: --and you, you discussed--he went on to become a Hall of Fame--
Speaker 2: Hall of Fame football player.
Speaker 1: --running back--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --following Jim Brown--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with the Cleveland Browns [Cleveland, Ohio], which--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I--and the thing I mentioned was that when he--and all do respect, I mean, I liked him a lot.  He's, you know, I, I couldn't say that he was a friend, but he--'cause I haven't maintained contact with him.  But he was an ordinary athlete at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  He was no star.  We had, we had some outstanding athletes there during those days.  This was before integration.  And I think Leroy Kelly came from a very large family.  And they had--like a lot of guys, I can tell you this, a lot of guys came to Morgan, not so much with the women, but with the guys, they came to Morgan with, with, with little, nothing, little, little of nothing.  And we helped each other, I mean, really.  Well, you know, we slept in, you know, closets and on the floors of rooms 'cause we couldn't pay for--well, I, I had a scholarship, so, you know, I didn't have to, have that problem, but I helped a lot of other guys.  It--we, we had expressions and so forth, and there was a bond that would--that generated between us that's still close right to this day.  Anybody that, that I knew, that Morgan guy, we're still very close today.  It's like when we see each other, it's like we never were separated, you know, just pick right back up 'cause of that.  Women, on the other hand, most of them seemed to at least be sponsored more.  You know, they, their parents I think invested a little bit more, a little--that was my experience.  I'm sure that that's, that would be a subject of, of, of, of, of a study, you know, to say, you know, the experience of a female in, in a black college in those days compared to that of a male.  Most of all the guys I knew were struggling; I mean they, they had very little.  You know, the jocks had the scholarship, but we made twenty-seven dollars a month in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  That's why I went into it (laughter), 'cause I'd get twenty-seven dollars.  Remember now, that's a lot of money back then.  But I think most of the women, they all had little allowances and you know, things were paid for them.  I think fathers invested a little bit more into them than they did in the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but I loved Morgan.  It was a great experience.  Unfortunately when I left, I haven't stayed in touch.  I pay my dues and all that, but haven't really gotten involved in the campus that much.  I'm in the Hall of Fame at Morgan, the Military Hall of Fame.
Story_ID: 178656
Speaker 1: Your--the chairman of the history department at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] was Benjamin Quarels--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the great Benjamin Quarels.
Speaker 2: Yes, the great Benjamin Quarels.
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.  What was--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are people that impress you with their demeanor, their size, their structure, or they have presence or something.  And, but then there are some that just impress you with their knowledge.  The man has had such a grasp of knowledge that I talked with a person just this last Sunday that went to Morgan at the same time I was.  And we were both talking about Benjamin Quarrels, in fact.  And he had the same reaction.  I mean, you--he--you had--you held him in such awe in terms of just the knowledge that he had, anecdotal type things he would tell you about a subject, not just the facts as to what had happened and when it happened.  But he would relate that to something that was a reality for today.  And we had such respect for him at Morgan that no one would miss a class; no one would be late; everybody was always there for him; and he never had to discipline anybody.  I never heard him ever say to anyone, "Would you please quiet down," or, "let's don't have any noise."  I when we got--we were there early, and we stayed until afterwards, and we gathered around him afterwards to try to get a little bit more, you know, and even people that were not history majors.  But for the most part, he ended up only teaching--because he was head of the department, he only taught the majors, you know, major subjects after a while, you know.  And--but I took every course I could with him.  He's a giant of a man.  I really admired him.  And his wife is here, and I see her often and talk to her about those time.  And she still has good presence of mind.  They have up a, up at Harpers Ferry [West Virginia], they have a, a museum for him up there.  It's not a museum for him, but it's--they have a black--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, there used to be a college up there, a black college [Storer College, Harpers Ferry, West Virginia].  And they have a little section, and he's the one that kind of did a lot to put that together.  I can't think of the name of that school up there now, Staffler [sic, Storer]--
Speaker 1: I always forget it too.
Speaker 2: --or Staten [sic, Storer] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 178657
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a black college [Storer College] there [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we interviewed the former president of it [HM Richard McKinney].
Speaker 2: Oh, did you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was he [HM Richard McKinney] black?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact he taught at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] afterwards.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I wonder who that was.  I can't think of the name of it.
Speaker 1: I, I--
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: He was just on television Sunday.
Speaker 2: W.E. [sic, W.E.B.] Du Bois--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when he started his, you know, his group before, the group before the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they had their meeting--that was, that was the headquarters where they had their, their first meeting up there, W. E.[B.] Du Bois was one of the leaders there.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) church--
Speaker 2: And that, that, that church--that, that school, like, like most of the schools, the black schools, except for Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], many of the presidents were white up until around the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].  I guess Mordecai [Wyatt Johnson] was one of the first, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], was one of the first blacks to actually head, head a black institution.
Speaker 1: Yes, [HM] Richard McKinney, and the school was Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia].
Speaker 2: There you go, that's it.
Speaker 1: Richard McKinney was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he was on Howard University [Washington, D.C.] television Sunday discussing the life of Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Richard McKinney is ninety-six years old and still can--
Speaker 2: He must have still good presence of mind.
Speaker 1: --run down the basement stairs and get his photos and run back up.
Speaker 2: No, that's great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, that must have been something to interview those guys.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, that--those were giants to me, for my generation, you know.  I mean I--you know, it's, it's almost like saying, you know, when I was twenty years old my grandparents, their generation were people who had experienced the West, the Western experience and stuff personally, and that's now, like you look in it at, at, at, at my generation have experienced the Mordecais, and the Malcolms, and the Martin Luther Kings and stuff on a personal level, knew those people.  To, to others, it's history.  But it's not history to me as much as just part of my life--
Story_ID: 178658
Speaker 1: You mentioned Malcolm X--I, I didn't, I failed to kind of follow up on that, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but what, what was--how did Malcolm X impress you?  What was he like?  What was his personality like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, you know, I think I was very, in spite of the fact that I tried to be intellectual--I was trying to be intellection--I think I was very immature.  This man was so far ahead in his thinking that I never really can totally grasp what it was that he was trying to do or trying to accomplish until much later in life.  He had an appeal in my view of people who were laborers, hard workers, disenfranchised, and city dwellers in, for example, Washington [D.C.].  And he had a nice following.  But among the intellectuals, he had nothing.  I mean, basically, to include members of my family, we thought he was crazy, be--literally--"what is he talking about?"  'Cause if you look, listen to him, he's talking about defiant and burning down and destroying.  And I was at a point in life where I was thinking that I was about ready to experience the great life.  And I was gonna finish college, and I was gonna get a good job, and I didn't wanna tear down anything.  I just wanted to get in.
Speaker 1: Was he talking about tearing stuff down (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he was.  He said and one of his philosophies was that, you know, we can--African Americans will never get a fair share in this country until we tear this whole system down and start anew, and that's likely gonna happen.  Yeah, he was--this was at, before his trip to the Mecca, and this was when whites were devils and--
Speaker 1: This was when he was--
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: --a spokesman for the--
Speaker 2: For the ma--yeah--
Speaker 1: Elijah Muhammad.
Speaker 2: --he was with the, Elijah Muhammad and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, so he tried to get some, something going on, on college campuses.  And he would go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and, and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and other places like that.  And they always got him an audience, 'cause he had a name, you know, so they always could get an assembly.  But he didn't get, he wasn't very successful, you know.  It was only--actually, it was much later in life.  In fact, after he died, a lot of people who felt the same way that I'm telling you about suddenly decided that, you know, he had a lot more going for him, and that they'd been with him all along, but they were not.  I'd learn to appreciate him later.  And, and, and after listening to what--reading what Malcolm--I mean [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and other people had to say about him after the fact, he became bigger.  It's like, to me, President [John F.] Kennedy is bigger in our--in, in terms of his contributions in our society after he died than he really was when he, when he was here.  And so, in answer to your question, I, I think, though, as on reflection, having sat with him, talked with him, that he really was an extraordinary man; he really was brilliant; he did have great vision, and I, I re--I wonder what contributions he might have made had not he died like that.
Story_ID: 178659
Speaker 1: Okay, any, anything else about Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and that experience you wanna share with us or?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest thing is the camaraderie.  I've never experienced that kind of camaraderie again in my life, even in the military, in Ranger training, and all of the other times, all the ball teams I've played with.  There was a feeling at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], '58 [1958] to '62 [1962], that, that all of us were on a journey, a journey that we were gonna change things.  Maybe that's still true with college sophomores who feel they're gonna do all this stuff.  But we helped each other.  We shared money.  We didn't--no one had anything to amount to anything, but whatever we had, we shared.  I think that's the main thing I, I remember that I think about Morgan and, and, and living on the campus.  I learned--for example, I was a--this was, this was very local, but I grew up listening to Muddy Waters and [HM] BB King, Guitar Slim, Slim Perkins, all these guys.  When I went to Morgan and ran into the Northerners, New York City [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] guys, and I had real problems relating to those guys at the beginning.  They had, they had, they had expressions and mannerisms that was just totally foreign to me.  I, for example, would never say a discouraging word about a female, okay, I just wouldn't.  And they would, and--but it didn't really have the sinister connotation that I attached to it.  It was a way of joking.  They joked among themselves about things that I didn't think was funny, you what I mean.  I just didn't relate to them at the beginning.  But the worst thing was these guys were listening to somebody called Miles Davis and (laughter), you know, and, and this thing.  And I'm saying nobody really likes that.  That's not really music.  And so, in the process of, of, of associating with them, I simulated, slowly but surely, a lot of their ideas, a lot of their values, and I changed a little bit, changed a lot.  And now I love jazz.  I mean, I mean, I, I don't, I no longer think of it as, as somebody just trying to act like they hip or into it.  That's what I thought initially.  These guys are just trying to be cool, and nobody really likes that stuff (laughter).  But now I love it.  I mean I can't, I can't go half a day without it, so.
Speaker 1: So it, it was broadening experience for you.
Speaker 2: It was a broadening experience, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: I learned to accept people from different cultures, and I learned to accept people who felt differently.  And one of the main things I learned is that violence is a limited mind's way of expression.  When I first--by the time when I reached Morgan at the age of seventeen or eighteen years old, coming from a family of very physical uncles and a, and a, and a code of, of, of conduct that was expected in terms of the physical aspect of solving problems, I brought that right on the campus.  I mean I (laughter)--so I mean, in places I'd gone, as I mentioned to you earlier in my life, I'd learned as a, as a child that what I should do when I go to these different, when I knew I was gonna go to a different community, I'd look around and I'd see who, who was the toughest guy, who they thought was the toughest guy, and I'd fight him.  It didn't matter whether I won or lost, just the fact that I would fight him.  And I didn't have to worry about anything again for a while.  So I went to college, and I, and I really had in back of mind, you know, sooner or later I have to whip somebody up here (laughter).  And you know, and that's the first time that people kind of called me off and said, "What's the matter with you?"  You know, otherwise, I'd be--this would be an honorable thing that I was doing.  Suddenly, it was, it was stupid.  And I learned that.  And then, that's right, it is a limited way of expression.  You know, a much smarter person can resolve issues without that kind of stuff.  But it took me a little while to get that done, but I got it done.  So, but that's it as far as I can think about Morgan.
Story_ID: 178660
Speaker 1: Now did you go right into the [U.S.] Army after that or what?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went right into the Army the day I took out my commission, and the next day I went into the Army.  And that day is a day that I often relate in some of the classes I taught to people.  When--in those days, up until soldiers started to get harassed in their uniform during [the] Vietnam [War].  You had to wear your uniform when you travel 'cause you got half, half price.  And it was, it was a, like a courtesy from the transportation media to extend, you know, we show the soldiers we're with you; you wear a uniform, half price.  So I was going to Louisville, Kentucky, and I had to ride in, in the back of the bus in uniform, second lieutenant, and I mean brand new outfit, man, everything spit shining, and I'm going to sec--I'm riding in the back of the bus.  And there's two white privates that are just privates, just, just finished basic training, they're sitting up front, and I'm sitting in the back.  And it was at--it was kind of funny because you take--you know, this country in Jim Crow laws, it was so blessed that we have gotten rid of that stuff 'cause of the energy that it took to try to enforce those things.  For example, if you get on a bus in Baltimore [Maryland], you could sleep, you could, you could get on the bus, sit anywhere you want to, you come to Washington [D.C.].  You get on the bus, sit anywhere you want to in Washington.  You cross the 14th Street Bridge, and the bus driver pulled over.  And it was a, always a state trooper there.  And the state troopers would be here; they'd be outside in case the bus driver had any problems.  The bus driver would get up and take a look, and he'd see how many blacks were there.  And he had a sign, 'colored beyond this point,' okay.  And depending on how many blacks were there, and making sure that all he whites got a seat, he would put that sign, it was set on top of a, of a thing.  So you had--if you were sitting up front, you had to get up and go to the back.  And so these two guys all the way to, to--they were going to the same place, it so happened.  They'd stand on the outside of the bus when I would get off and salute me (laughter).  And then they would stand there and salute me as I would come back onto the bus, you know.  And now, and I'll never forget in Charlottesville [Virginia] they added tremendous insult to injury in Charlottesville.  In Charlottesville, when you got off the bus in Charlottesville, the, the depot you couldn't go into; you couldn't go in there, okay, 'cause that's where they had a dining room, and everybody's in there.  You had to go around the back to the outside, go around to the back.  Now, to add insult to injury, they had a little place there where you rang the bell that, and it had a half moon on it.  Do you know what a half moon symbolizes?
Speaker 1: Outhouse.
Speaker 2: Outhouse.  They had a little half-moon on there.  You ring the bell, and they're slide it and say, "Yes."  And you'd, you order, they give you what you wanted, slam it back, and you, you had to eat out, either outside or there was a, a, a, a hanging--you know, a place where the bus would pull in that was covered.  You could stand there and eat, and that, you know, that was it; you couldn't go inside.  You know, and that was, you know, 1962, August of 1962.  I'll never forget that ride as long as I live.  Now when we got to, when I got to, to the bus station at, at Louisville, Kentucky, the military had a bus there, and picked us up, and, and took us there.
Speaker 1: 'Cause then you could sit anywhere you want.
Speaker 2: Sit anywhere I want to, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 178661
Speaker 1: But it was those, that, and that's, that's something.  When I was at, taking this course at Fort Knox, Kentucky, the--I was the only--it was two blacks in this class, and in the evenings they wanted to go out.  And I, I knew about segregation and everything, having come up in the South, but a lot of these guys were from New York and other places, didn't quite understand where we were.  And they wanted me to go to a movie with them.  They were going to see 'King Solomon's Mines,' and it was a drive-in.  And I thought to myself, well, you know, I didn't wanna say to these guys, hey, you know, things are different down here.  I kept making other excuses as to why not to go with them.  On this particular night they said, "Man, come on, Harry, you gotta go with us."  So, I thought, well, you know, I can get into a drive-in.  I said probably nobody cares at a drive-in.  So, sure enough, man, the guy (laughter) comes out of there, you know, and policemen--he, he, he called from inside when he saw me, 'cause you know how the cars were lined up, he called the police already, before I got there.  By the time we got up there to pay our money, you know, the police was there.  They wanted to drag me out and all of this.  What are you trying to do?
Speaker 2: So they--well, I know they don't have a balcony in the drive-in.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did they have any provisions for black people to watch a movie at the drive-in (laughter).
Speaker 1: You couldn't go.  You just couldn't go.  I mean there was a black drive-in somewhere.  I don't know where, but they said there's a black drive-in.  You go over there (laughter).  Now the guys I was with, you know, to their credit, in fact one of them got killed in [the] Vietnam [War].  I, and I always respected this guy, even though I stopped, and he wanted to, he wanted to get physical.  I mean he was genuine.  And--but you know, I said hey, I'd been through before; I know what's going on; and don't worry about it.  And you know, we couldn't even go place--find a place to eat.  I mean, he said, "Well, let's go get something to eat."  You couldn't do it.  I mean people--you know, like my daughter once said to me, "I would have never put up with that," you know.  And then that's when I had to realize, had, had--I had miss some training here.  I had to sit down and talk to her.  And here's the thing, from the time you are a child, you're told that if you want to be anything, you can't have a police record.  You can't have a police record.  And if you know that if you, if you've challenged this, and you end up being charged with something, it could affect whether or not you can, you know, have a future.  It, it, it gives you pause.  It certainly gives you pause.  And it wasn't a matter of, of being afraid, and certainly it wasn't about a matter of not being angry, 'cause everybody was angry, but it was a matter of calculating that and saying, is this the time I want to make my move, you know, or is it really worth it, you know?  And so that kept people in line a lot, I mean those who are trying to aspire to be something maybe special.  You know, you had to play that game.
Story_ID: 178662
Speaker 1: But anyway--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that was--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --that was how I started coming into, into the [U.S.] military.  And it was that way until 1968, when I guess the Fair Housing Act [the Civil Rights Act of 1968] passed.  I remember having been to [the] Vietnam [War] and everything.  I was a captain and I was in Augusta, Georgia, and I, I wanted to get a place to stay.  Now, I'm feeling pretty good now.  I'm, you know, I'm a captain and you know, I got some money now, and I could stay where I, pretty much wherever I want to down here.  I mean I'm in the upper, upper class now, I'm thinking (laughter), you know, in terms of being able to find good accommodations, right?  So, I, I called up, and they didn't pick up on the fact that I was African American by my voice.  So, he said sure, we have, we have a nice place and so forth and so on, and so forth and so on; I'll meet you there, and I'll give you the key and you can, you know, so forth.  And I'd show up, and they'd say I'm sorry, we don't, we don't, we don't rent to blacks or you know, and some of weren't even that nice--why didn't you tell me? they'd say, who you were, you know.  So, it was, it was just difficult, that aspect of it, and, and even in the military, I mean some of the challenges.  Like I was the first black in an, in, in the Fourth Armor--in, in, in a tank battalion that was one of [George S.] Patton's tanks battalions.  And it was a long story as how I ended up getting there.  A congressman had gone over, because this battalion had done well, to present an award to them.  And he'd made the observation that there were no blacks in the, in the, in the Corps [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And so, the blacks--so he came back to the states and said, "We gotta have a black over there."
Story_ID: 178663
Speaker 1: --How I ended up being in the, in this [U.S. Army] armored division.  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: It's tank division now--
Speaker 1: Tank.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the tank division.
Speaker 1: Right, it's a tank and armored--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --armor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It, the branch is armored, but it's a tank, it's a tank--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --division.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm a platoon leader in it.  Okay, I have five tanks, forty men.  That was my first assignment.
Speaker 2: What's the name of the, the division in the--
Speaker 1: It was the 4th Armored Division.  It was the second of the 67th Medium Tank Battalion.  We had M60s at the time.
Story_ID: 178664
Speaker 1: They'd never had a black officer.
Speaker 2: It was one of the divisions of [George S.] Patton's Army?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it had never had a black officer.  They did well on a test in competition.  And so a congressman from New York--and I don't know his name; I wished I did because I'd like to thank him one day.  Anyway, he made the observation when they had a party for these guys at the Officer's Club, you know, big deal, the officers and their wives come through, and they have a, a line that they have pass through and all.  And, and when it was over, he said, "Don't you have any black officers?"  He said, and the battalion commander said, "No, that's why we're great; we don't have no blacks in the outfit, never been any blacks in that outfit."  So he come back to the states and said, "There got to be a black."  Now the reason I know this is the personnel officer for that battalion was, turned out to be in later times a good friend of mine who was a witness to all of this, and he explained it to me, okay.  And it made sense, what he said, based on what, what I could figure form what my side was.  So anyway, this guy got back and, and, and said do that.  So they decided okay, if we're gonna have to send a black over there, let's send, let's send, let's send them, you know, somebody that won't, won't hurt him (unclear)--so then I, you know, was a college All-American, and you know, I had decent grades, you know.  And in the summer camp that I had gone through be, you know, before be, becoming an officer, you know, I had become distinguished.  I had reached a what they called distinguished status, distinguished graduate.  So, I wasn't, you know, they figure this guy can't hurt 'em, I guess (laughter), so they sent me over there.  Now, here is what they did, they, they got a platoon, and they put together all of the people that were section eights, and section nines, in other words, people who were having problems, had disciplinary problems or some other kind of problem, medical problem, put them in a platoon, okay.  And when I arrived, they appointed me to platoon leader of this outfit, destined to fail, except for one thing.  I have always been a very effective leader, rather it's athletics, family or what have you.  And I got those men, they--it wasn't because they were not capable of performing.  It was because they had not had the proper leadership; no one seem to care.  We got together and started working together.  And one year later we took first platoon in Europe, okay, so it kind of backfired on 'em, the way it done--
Story_ID: 178665
Speaker 1: But anyway, there were many situations during that time, 'cause you know they segregated--I mean the [U.S.] Army was officially segregated in '48 [1948] by [President Harry S.] Truman.  But [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower had to make 'em do it in '53 [1953].  And so I'm on the--I'm talking about nine years later, and they're still all these pockets.  Well, what, what happened is that the unit is, all the units are so-called integrated, but still there are certain units that are special.  You follow me?  And this is not any law at this point.  It's just the powers to be are, you know, exercising their authority to do that.  Like you don't send blacks to this outfit; you don't send blacks to that outfit.  It's nothing in writing.  It's just something you just don't do, you know, that type of thing.  And so, certain jobs like blacks being chief of police, what they call provost marshal south of the Mason-Dixie [sic, Mason-Dixon line], you know, because they have to--the feeling is oh, they have to deal with the Southern sheriffs, and they won't work with them together, things of this nature.  We had so many of those situations.  And as blacks continue to, to, to, to, to get through and do well, even the type of education that they would receive, you know, the Army funds master's degree.  And I'd done very well at, made my promotions, and it was--I was selected to go to [the United States Army] Command and General Staff College [Leavenworth, Kansas], which is the very prestigious organization, I mean, where I don't know what percentage, probably fifteen percent of career Army officers get selected for that.  And if you don't get selected for that, you're not gonna make lieutenant colonel or full colonel and general.  And I not only was there, but I taught.  After I finished there, I graduated and then I ended up being a teacher there, you know.  And so I wanted to--when I finished it was--the Army was sending a lot of people to get their master's degree, and they wanted me to go get a master's degree in corrections, which is like confinement.  The white officers were getting assignments like criminal justice, administration of justice, traffic management, and things of this nature.  But all--and, and I checked.  Every black--and there'd only been three at that time, 'cause--but all three of them had gotten their master's in, in corrections.  And so when I told the people at the Pentagon [Arlinton, Virginia] who came down to tell me what they were gonna do for me, I said, "I don't, I don't want that."  Well, you know, that really pissed 'em off.  And I, I said, "I want, I want the same kind of degree the white officers get," you know.  So they wouldn't send me, so I got 'em on my own, you know.  And later on I ended up working in, in personnel, and I saw my records.  And this guy said I didn't know my place (laughter), so I tore it up and threw it away (laughter).
Speaker 2: We're dealing with in those days--in the U.S. military establishment since the [American] Revolutionary War has been mostly Southern.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now that's--
Speaker 1: Right, it has.
Speaker 2: --historians--
Speaker 1: It has.
Speaker 2: --have observed that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it's, it's something that, that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --makes a difference--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in terms of trying to--you've got like federal government ordering them to desegregate, but--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --still these people are used to segregation--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --and you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was, it was an interesting time.  I, I'm, I'm sure that the young people--and I've been out the military twenty years now, while I was working at the [World] Bank [Washington, D.C.] and all--but I'm sure that there are different subtleties, but I mean the issues are still there.  One, one of the observations that I've, I've noted and talked to some of the officers when I go to, to the, to the Army bases, to the saunas, and gyms and things is that a real concern on the part of the black Army officers now of the fact that there are little or no officers and senior people in the elite forces.  That bothers him, the [United States Army] Rangers, which I was very proud to be a part of, [United States Army] Special Forces, the [United States Navy] SEALs [Sea, Air, Land] and things of this nature.  And these are the units that could play a, a major role if we have civil dis--you know, any civil problems and things of this nature.  And you don't have any leadership in there.  And according to them, is that the blacks are not able to pass these courses because see, so much is personal--I mean judgment, you know, like you, you, you, you, as an instructor, you, you, you, you got a tremendous amount of power.  You can say you're out, you're out, I mean you failed to do this, you failed to do that.  And so they accept them into the program, but they're not coming out of the other end.  And these are not people that don't have the skills.  You know, these are not people that, that shouldn't be there.  So that's what they tell me on the side, but I don't have any firsthand knowledge obviously anymore.
Story_ID: 178666
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said earlier that you had some offers or were thinking about a career in professional basketball.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And you were a top scorer at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were scoring--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --over twenty-five points--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a game.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so what happened in terms of how--
Speaker 2: Well, I had a, I got drafted by what was then St. Louis [Missouri], now Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: So St. Louis Hawks.
Speaker 2: Yeah, which--
Speaker 1: They had Bob Pettit and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Walt Bellamy.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's a long story with them, but--
Speaker 1: Lenny Wilkins and all them.
Speaker 2: Right, well, Lenny Wilkins, yeah, he, he--well, there'd, there'd been a couple of people.  That--it's, you know, if you--some research, if you ever had the time, you'll know that one of the best athletes coming out of all-black schools was a fellow by the name of Cleo Hill.  Cleo Hill played at Winston-Salem, one of the big house games down there.  You know, the, the, the coach?
Speaker 1: Oh, I heard of--yeah.
Speaker 2: This was, you know, he, he was a, he was a year ahead of me.  And I played against him for four year--three years.  In my senior year he was, he was graduating.  But he went up there and didn't, and didn't do well, because Pettit and, and Lovellette and Hagen and, and them--
Speaker 1: Clyde Lovellette--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Cliff Hagen, right.
Speaker 2: Yep, right.  They, they, they, they ultimately got that guy, I read somebody--I can't remember his last name, fired.  But anyway, they bought the club or something, because they had just, they had come up.  This was just at the beginning.  He would have been like, he would have been the first black actually because I think [Lenny] Wilkins--no, Wilkins, Wilkins was in the [U.S.] military.  You know, you had to--everybody had to go and Wilkins had been assigned for them, but he wasn't there.  He was in the military someplace and he came.  This guy would have been the first.  During preseason he was our leading scorer.  But you know, they didn't--anyway, the Cuban [Missile] Crisis came up while I was doing my little summer thing, before I had a chance to try out.  Now, I don't want to exaggerate and say that, you know, I was that good, you know, thinking about the likes of those guys.  But if I had gotten a chance, I wa--I think I was good--I never played ball, and I played in the summer with people like Elgin Baylor and you know, and I played, you know, with the pros and guys I played with in college.  I never was just totally outclassed to the point where you say--the only person that ever I just felt totally like a child was Elgin Baylor.  I mean (laughter), Elgin Baylor--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Elgin Baylor was--
Speaker 2: --made me feel like a--
Speaker 1: --probably the most spectacular ballplayer of that era--
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: --in terms of being spectacular.
Speaker 2: Spectacular, he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he could do everything, yeah.
Speaker 2: I played against him over here in the summer league, and, and I asked to play him.  And I was--I gave it all my best shot, and it was like I wasn't even there.  He was just in a different league.  But I, I always felt that had I, had a, had a, had a chance to play professional ball, I, I think I would have made the team.  You have to feel that way.  You know, I certainly was cocky enough to think that way.  You know, I mean why not?  I had never failed in anything, you know, as far as sports, up to that point, at every level I'd gone to.  I started as a freshman in college.  With all that talent we just talked about, I walked in as freshman, and I started.  And so, I just didn't get that.  But anyway, the Cuban Crisis came up in the summer or the fall of '62 [1962], and they mobilized a whole [U.S.] Army.  And I was down at Fort Knox [Kentucky], and they shipped me to Germany and put me on the Czechoslovakian [later, the Czech Republic] border in this 4th Armored Division that I was telling you about.  This was right at the time when they had to have one, so I was the one, and I went there.  And so I couldn't get out of the service.  You, you couldn't get out of the service at that time whether you were--especially if you were regular Army until they had this, I think it was a [U.S.] Navy officer around 1966 actually said this wasn't fair because you hadn't declared war, and you just couldn't do that.  And so they started lettin' people out at that point.  By that time, I'd gone to [the] Vietnam [War], and, and as far as I was concerned, after Vietnam, basketball was child's play.  And I really didn't want to--I thought I'd lost it, you know.  St. Louis had lost interest in me, you know, and new kids coming out, you know, and stuff like that.  I was out of it.  I played in the Army, played on all the Army teams and won a whole bunch of championships and stuff.  I was still a good, good basketball player, but Vietnam changes a man.
Story_ID: 178667
Speaker 1: I mean I, I couldn't see myself--
Speaker 2: Now what happened in Viet--tell us about some of the things that happened in [the] Vietnam [War], and, and how did you get assigned in Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Well, it interest--you something off to the side, in Vietnam, basically, the only way I could get out of the service I was told if you wanna get out the service you gotta go to Vietnam.  So I mean I didn't volunteer to go to Vietnam, all right; I mean it wasn't one of those type things.
Speaker 2: Now the U.S. has started as a, a so-called advisors to the South Vietnamese government--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --after the--the French were kicked out in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: In '54 [1954], yeah, Dien Bien Phu.
Speaker 2: Dien, Dien Bien Phu, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they, the, the number of advisors kept increasing, and then--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --everybody started calling them advisors with quotation marks around them--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because they were doing more than advising at--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --some point.  And then it slowly crept into a war.
Speaker 1: That's right, a real unis [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, actually, just a little bit before that, let me just say that I had, I--they shipped me to Europe.  That's where I had initially went.  And that was the (unclear) battalion, and we did very well, my platoon.  And, and then I ended up being transferred to be the chief of police in Nuremberg [Germany] area, which was my basic branch for [U.S.] military police where I took over a, a stockade in the middle of a riot, a stockade in Nuremberg, the stockade in Nuremberg, Germany.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And then I got sent back to Fort Bragg [North Carolina], and that's when I was still trying to get--I just only been in the [U.S.] Army three years now, but I'm still trying to get out.  And they say okay, you wanna get out, you can go to Vietnam, so that's how I ended up going to Vietnam.  When I got to Vietnam, I was initially--when I got there they said, how would you like to go to Bangkok, Ban--Bangkok--
Speaker 2: That's Thailand, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I said Bangkok, Thailand?  Yeah, but the thing is I, I said no because I was afraid that they wouldn't classify that as enough to make sure that I could get out, so I passed up Bangkok.  And I was--I went and I became a staff officer in the field, intelligence officer.  And then I ended up getting my own company.  It was a reinforced company, about six-hundred people, two military police platoons, one infantry platoon, which was leg infantry, meaning not airborne, and one South Korean platoon, and a headquarters platoon.  Normally a company is somewhere between two two-hundred and fifty, three-hundred people, but with all my logistics and all the other kind of stuff I had six-hundred.  And it was--doing the, still doing the draft, so we had, we had people in that organization that really shouldn't have been in Vietnam.  I mean I don't know who should be in Vietnam, you know, whether I should be there or not, but after a while, you, you can see certain people just, just don't have the, the, the, the remotest possibility of surviving through this thing, you know.  But we were losing four or five hundred casualties a week during that time.  And so we needed manpower, and so some of these schools were turning loose guys to send them to Vietnam.  You know, the--when I say schools, I meant the, the training brigades were letting some guys pass that you could--they shouldn't.  And I, you know, we had--so I set up my own training program.  But we had a very significant combat mission.  I think I mentioned to you one of my photos as a show you what was left of a group of mine that was attacked in Phan Rang in--
Speaker 2: Right, were very few--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --left out of--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --about forty or fifty guys.
Speaker 1: --about forty.  That was an interesting thing that happened over there, because that particular battle, the company--the platoon leader for that, for that organization was an ex-police officer from New York.  And he was so shook by that, that, that he never was able to have any kind of, of a life at all after that.  I had some serious problems about my own leadership in terms of whether or not I had provided enough defense and all of that.  And I went to my battalion commander with this and said, you know, perhaps I should be relieved of my duties, 'cause I think I failed my men.  And he said, you know that's what war is about, you know, get back out there, you're the best company commander I got; just get out there and do your job, you know.  And, and that helped a lot, 'cause you can't help but, you know, it's--you tell people what to do and they do it and they die, you know, it, it, it, it wears on you.  I don't care who you are and what you do.  You know, you may know that it was right.  You may know that it was no other way to do it, but still it wears on you.
Story_ID: 178668
Speaker 1: So I had that platoon--I mean that company for nine months, and a staff position. The staff position I, I helped write the prisoner of, of war policies.  What we had in [the] Vietnam [War] in '66 [1966] was a situation where each field commander had his own rules as to how he was going to handle prisoners of war, and there was a lot of complaints.  We were losing a lot of intelligence, 'cause, you know, because sometimes we wouldn't get these guys processed by intelligence people long--quick enough for the intelligence to help us tactically.  They'd help, you know, strategically, but we needed tactical intelligence.  So, I got a--the word came down, and I was tasked to, to write that.  And I got some logistics, and I had a chance to study what the problems were in the field with the soldiers.  I went out with them in combat situations and see, okay: what happens when you, when you get a prisoner, you capture this prisoner?  What happens?  What are the concerns of the commander?  You know, how--what does he--what can he do?  What tools does he have to get this guy back?  Where is--where are the intelligence community and stuff like that?  And I wrote that, I wrote that regulation and took it down and brief General [William] Westmoreland.  And that was, with some minor changes, was a, was a, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, Westmoreland, for the sake of history, became the commander of the entire--
Speaker 1: He was at the time; he was the commander.
Speaker 2: --he was--right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I was in his--
Speaker 2: He's commander of the U.S. forces of Vietnam.
Speaker 1: All U.S. forces in Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he was--I met him, and he came to several areas of which I was responsible for, so I, I was close to him a couple of times and talked with him and, and so forth.  And I, and I had to admit that, at the time, I was impressed with him; of course, I guess I was a little gullible, but he was unique, and immaculate, and he had good presence, and he seemed to be saying the right things.  And of course, at that point it was a lot of trust.  I think America, and especially soldiers and all, still, in '66 [1966], had a lot of trust in, in our leaders.  It wasn't till a bit later that some of that trust start falling apart, and we start realizing some things.  But at that time, I, I, I believed in him and trusted him.
Speaker 2: Did you know, did you have any conception of what the, the history of the struggle in Vietnam was about at all and those things?
Speaker 1: No, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think, I think--
Speaker 2: That, that was basically typical of most Americans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  I really had never heard that much about Vietnam.
Speaker 2: I think there was a comic strip--
Speaker 1: And that's a shame.
Speaker 2: --by Steve Canyon called 'Terry and the Pirates' that--
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --used to have guys flying in and out of Southeast Asia, you know.  But that's about the only pop--
Speaker 1: Only (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --popular culture ref--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --reference to it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that I can remember.
Speaker 1: You know, I think the, the saddest part, again, I, in talking with you, I wanna make sure that I do not put too much emphasis on anything ethnic--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Milton Caniff--
Speaker 1: But it was a--
Speaker 2: --he did the comic strip, not Steve Canyon, he did two of 'em, 'Steve Canyon' and 'Terry and the Pirates.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 178669
Speaker 1: But, but to--
Speaker 2: Go on.
Speaker 1: You know, I want--I wanted to illustrate a point because it's, it's significant of my era.  And if there's probably anything that I could say to you or to history, it would be a reflection upon what racism can do to the mind of a person.  And, and I wanna relate that to [the] Vietnam [War] if I could with you.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, here I was an educated man, went to a black college, studied under giants of the field.  I had a member of my family has fought in every war this country's ever been in, and I can trace 'em, and I could then.  I mean I couldn't trace [the War of] 1812 and, and--but I could go back as far Civil War is concerned.  So I mean I knew it's been a tradition in my family.  We've all fought and sacrificed.  And yet I went to Vietnam thinking I had something to prove.  Now, if I felt that way, can you imagine what a person that's just, you know, a young kid, seventeen, eighteen years old right out of high school?  I mean I felt like I was, I was--I had to prove that blacks could fight, that blacks had, were tough enough, smart enough to be able to lead men into combat.  We've been doing it since the beginning of time.  I didn't have anything to prove, but at the time I felt I did, which, which I think says volumes about what Jim Crow laws and segregation and all these kinds of things can do the psychic of a people, that if a person who ought to know better feels that way, what in the world does a people who never had a chance to know better feel?  You know?  And so, anyway, that was, that was, it was one of the, the points that it, it, it' a subtle, it's, it's not even an easy point to make.  I'm not sure that anybody reviewing this will understand what I'm, what I'm trying to say.  But, to me it's, it's, it's an overwhelming observation, you know, of our time, of my time.
Speaker 2: Right, well, very few individuals really have the, enough knowledge in the black families to talk about that kind of generational--
Speaker 1: Ra, right, right.
Speaker 2: --sacrifice.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Ver, ver, very few I mean.
Speaker 1: Right.  But to think, you know, and I mean--you know, you, you're wasting a lot of time and energy, and, and, and, and so many, I'm sure a lot of young soldiers lost their lives trying to prove something they didn't have anything to prove.  That's the point, is it alters--eventually what you think alters your behavior, eventually.  You're gonna make a decision, you know, and in combat, you make decisions; you gotta make 'em quick, and they're, and they're permanent.  You (laughter), you can't say oop, no, I shouldn't have go this way, I mean it's somebody over there normally.  So if you decide to do something because you're trying to impress somebody, as opposed to it actually being necessary, you know, like when the commander says I need some volunteers, you know (laughter).  If you, if you volunteer to try to impress somebody, you're in, you're, you're in, you're in bad shape, you know, that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there, there is a book by John A. Williams written in the early '70s [1970s] called 'Captain Blackman.'
Speaker 1: Oh, I've got that book, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, with--
Speaker 1: I've got that book.
Speaker 2: --he fiction--it's a fictionalized--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but it's, it's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --an account of blacks of all the America's wars.
Speaker 1: Right yes.
Speaker 2: I think a man is shot.
Speaker 1: Go back to, to, to the Revolutionary War.
Speaker 2: I think a brother is shot in--
Speaker 1: Captain Black.
Speaker 2: --he's shot in Vietnam.  And he wakes up, and he's in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --World War II [WW2].  And he's shot again, and he wakes up--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: --he's in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, World War I [WW1].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was shot again, he wakes up he's in Civil War, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the Spanish-American War.  He (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --through it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got that, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, I know that.  Anyway, one of the things that I tried to do in my training afterwards, Vietnam and, and, and so forth, is try to tell soldiers or young troopers going in that you don't really have anything to prove about your race.  You have something to prove about yourself, you know, in terms of what your values are.  But don't try care--don't try to go into a heavily burdened situation like that carrying extra weight.  That's what that is, that's extra weight when you try to do that.
Story_ID: 178670
Speaker 1: Well that's a difficult--it's a dilemma philosophically for a lot of people.  I know people later on, black people, became a real issue in the community: should we--
Speaker 2: Right, even be--
Speaker 1: --fight in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: --involved, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--be involved in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean why should we--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who are we fighting--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --against?  We, we're, we're fighting--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to control a people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that we don't have anything to do with.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I felt totally committed to the war with, even with little information, with no information.  I mean I, I was gung-ho.  I mean I had, I wore my hair, you know, head bald and shaved and I mean, gung-ho is about as gung-ho as you could get.  I mean I really went over there thinking that, I mean I bought all the stuff, you know, thinking we were gonna make a difference, and we're keeping the world free for a democracy and all that.  And it was only later, in fact, I was a student, 1973, even after that, I'm sitting in class, and, and someone mentioned the fact that we lost the war in Vietnam.  I said, "We didn't lose that war."  We never lose any battles, but we did lose the war.  We didn't lose the battles.  I mean, the VC, for example, the Viet Cong, the, the, the ter--the, you know, the, the local unit that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that fought, not the North Vietname--North Vietnamese came down, they cease to exist after Tet [Offensive, 1968].  They lost so many people.  They just, they never functioned again as a unit after that.  We didn't lose any battles, but we did lose the war.  And, and I, and I, that concerns me now, the, the, the, the, the battles for the minds and, and, and, and so forth of people.  What happened is the American just pulled their support from that effort.  And when that happens--you imagine yourself, you're a commander, and you get a guy that's coming in to, to be under you, gonna be in a fighting scenario.  And his wife, and his mother, and his sister, and his brothers, and all of his friends told him not to come, told him you're crazy to go over there.  Now what kind of guy do (laughter) you think you're gonna get to fight, you know.  I mean he's saying I'm, you know, I'm not gonna get killed in this stuff.  And, and you have to, you have to take chances in, in, in, in a combat situation.  You have to, you have to ex--you have to expose yourself sometime.  And if you don't think that it's worth it, you won't do it.  And that's the kind of [U.S.] Army we ul--we ultimate had.  We had a beautiful Army.  The best Army this country has ever had, I think, was the Army we sent over there in '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  And it start falling apart even before Tet.  But after Tet, it was the worst Army we ever had.  And same thing could happen in Iraq if we don't watch ourselves.
Speaker 1: It was, yeah, it was a black cultural fact, I guess, that, that many brothers went over and they developed a culture, a subculture in Vietnam that was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --similar to what brothers develop now in prison, in terms of being--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --real race conscious--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and with all the symbols, red, black, and green and everything.  And they came back like more committed to their race and the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --prog--progress of race that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --than the war--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Many of 'em joined the Black Panthers and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.  That's where the dapping started--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --and all of that.  It was a culture.  But funny, you know, you could see it and even, even in my own command, and I was a very successful commander.  But blacks would--when the, when the fight was going on, there was no color line.  I mean there was no color line.  I mean if somebody went down, white or black, blacks and whites helped each other, you know, during the battle.  When the battle is over and the danger is kinda a little bit back, they split.  It, you--it, it--you just couldn't do anything about it, and that's the way they wanted it.  And after a while, I learned that that's okay.  It was okay, as long as they fought well together, it didn't matter, I mean, you know, certain kinds of music we wanna hear, certain kind of a way to re, relate to each other that was different and not totally understood.  It was almost like the situation of where I found myself when I went to college exposed to the guys from the North, and I didn't understand them and so forth and so on.  And that's the way it was, if you, if you stayed there long enough.  But we had this 365-day turnaround time, and it was, it was, it was a terrible policy.  You know, you, you got 365 days.  You don't, you don't, you don't really get to, to know each other that well.  So, that's how they ended up doing it.  But you're right, blacks did come back.  I know many of them that said I'm going home to make a difference.
Story_ID: 178671
Speaker 1: The thing that I remember the most about [the] Vietnam [War] was the, the impact it had on humans, not just the physical aspect of people losing lives and limb, but for those that survived what it does to 'em.  War changes your character; it changes your values.  And I wanna use an example for myself to--this happened without my knowledge, didn't even realize it until time later.  I decided to take one roll of thirty-six shots each month that I was in Vietnam before I went.  The film was, you had the buy the film, but you had a mailer.  I don't know if many people still remember that they even do that.  But we got--we didn't have to pay for mail in Vietnam.  So you had the mailer, and you put your film in, your address where you want it to go.  And they would, they would process it and send it to that address.  So I sent it to my mother's [sic, his aunt Attie M. Hairston] home.  So when I got back from, from Vietnam I went home to see my mother, and she reminded me that these pictures were down there.  And I told her not to look at 'em.  So I went down and I took a look at 'em.  The first month I took pictures, I took pictures of the sunset and the tropics, which I thought was beautiful, rice patties, kids.  In, in the second month, it was pictures of, of--they had a funny swayback pig over there.  I've never seen an odd looking thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, the potbelly pig--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they call it.
Speaker 1: And I, and I took pictures of some of the soldiers I was with, people that were working with me and things of this nature.  By the third month, I took only pictures of bodies.  So show you how my values over that period of time had changed in terms of what I thought was interesting enough to take a picture of.  And, and I tell you, to be quite frank with you, sitting right down in, in my basement at home, I cried.  That was the first time I'd, I'd actually cried.  I was down there for a long time, and my, my uncle [James Hairston], who had been in the Second World War [WWII] was a sniper, in the Second World War, in the Philippines.
Speaker 2: That's unusual too--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, black people to be in that position.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well, he was in a black--in a--(unclear) 93rd I think it was, was the only black division in the Philippines in the Second World War, and he was one of, snipers in one of the squads, 13th guy.  He was a natural for it.  He was a quiet guy, you know.  He could sit for hours and do nothing (laughter).  And he grew up with a shotgun, you know, and hunting and stuff back in--and he was from the mountains too.  But he knew what was going on downstairs I think.  I think he understood.  And my mom's kept saying, you know, asking me to come up or what was wrong.  And I heard him tell her, just leave him alone; he'll come up when he wants to.  But I just had to kind of realize, my God, what happened to me?  What in the world did I take this picture for?  I mean grotesque pictures, I mean.  So, but I didn't destroy 'em, but I never looked at 'em again till I got here, many years later.  And then I destroyed 'em.  So I destroyed most of 'em.  I still have some, some pictures right after combat, some pictures--but, but, not too graphic.  I got rid of 'em.  But, but the, but the point of making the comment is to reflect how you change your values, even when you don't even realize it.  So, that was, that was a sad part about it.
Story_ID: 178672
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you came back?  You went, went back to school, right, didn't you?
Speaker 2: One of the things that I came to a realization, after commanding people in in the [U.S.] Army that we had there, that I didn't wanna do that again (laughter).  I, I mean I didn't want--I made a decision at that point to stay in the Army, believe or not, because after Vietnam everything was child's play.  You know, it's hard to--you know, Winston Churchill once said there's nothing so exhilarating as being shot at and missed (laughter).  But in my case, I had never had such a total challenge to, to, to my existence.  I mean it took everything, everything that I had, all the strength, all of my background, all my history and everything to do that job.  I'd never been challenged like that before.  It's almost like a certain high that you get from that, that adrenaline.  I was so committed that there were times when my first sergeant, which was your number one enlisted man, would have to remind me that I hadn't had anything to eat or I hadn't had anything to sleep, I was so totally committed to what it was we were doing.  After that kind of an experience, to come back to something that was mundane or that didn't seem to have any redeeming values, such as basketball, just didn't interest me.  So at that point I decided--I had been trying to get out of the service for all that time and couldn't.  And finally, the Army says they'll let me out, and I said, "No, I wanna stay."  So I decided that if I was going to be a professional soldier, I wanted to be the best, and the best in the Army is the [U.S. Army] Rangers.  So I went to a school for military police--career officers, and I went to Ranger school.
Story_ID: 178673
Speaker 1: Now, did you think that you would go back to [the] Vietnam [War]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I pretty much knew I would.  I don't think anyone in Vietnam in the '66 [1966], '67 [1967] timeframe think--thought--that we would fi--gonna find an honorable way out of that.  I don't--I, I think not at the officer level.  No, 'cause now, we're beginning now to see what's happening.  I mean you've got the experi--you're there.  You see what's happening, and you know the nature of your enemy.  You know who you're fighting and their tenacity, and you can't, you can't see a possible win, not in the way we were fighting it.  And you know, I could tell you real quickly a, a good example of what I mean.  We didn't fight the Second World War [WWII].  We've never fought a war like that before.  But let's say that I have a company--let's say that--in fact this is a true story.  I'll tell you exactly the way it happened.  There is a combat unit at, in IFFV [I Field Force, Vietnam] that is under fire, and they need supplies.  So, as a company commander, this is so critical I decide to go with my detachment that I'm sending up there, which was I took a reinforced platoon to go up there.  We're on Highway One, going up through, through the valley.  All right, we get about halfway up there, and we draw sniper fire, and one of my men is killed.  Okay, now, I'm an American Army officer.  I've got the most firepower that any army--nobody's ever had this.  I have an artillery outfit that's just over the other hill.  I've got jets in the air.  I've got ships out on, in the South China Sea that I can almost see out there with all of their ammunition.  I've got a forward air--what, we called forward air command.  It's a little small aircraft that runs around that can see everything close.  I got all this power, and I--so I go on the phone, and I call the first one, my first direct support.  And I say, "I need--I'm drawing fire.  I've lost a person, and the fire is coming from this, this place right here," right.  And they say, "Are there any women and kids there?"  I say, "I don't know."  Well, I can't fire.  I have rules of engagement.  "I'm sorry, Captain, can't help you."  So I went right through every one of 'em.  They all said the same thing, rules of engagement.  I can't fire unless, you know, it may be women and kids over there.  So now, what, what am I gonna do?  I mean it's, it's, it's an interesting situation.  So I revert to the basic element of combat, what it is, I mentioned, fire and maneuver.  Takes me two or three hours to get up there.  I lose two more people, and guess what?  There's nobody there, okay.  They, they fight us, as long as they see that the can.  And then when they see they're gonna--you know, we're gonna get overrun, they leave.  Now, what do you, what do I do now as a commander?  Do I go back down with all my troops?  If I do, I get back down, they come right back.  See, see, those are the kinds of situations--we brought that on our own.  Now, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's humane.  It's the right thing to say that from a humane standpoint, but we're talking about war, and people die.  In the Second World War they would have called up and said the fire's coming from this coordinates, and that's, that would have been the end of it, and you would have moved on.  What are the consequences of that?  Took me a whole day?  Now, I've lost three people.  Now I gotta keep people up there, and they, you know they're in jeopardy.  So a lot of my force now is, is depleted.  To go forward, I don't know what's gonna face me, you know, from there on in.  But I got these guys down there.  I'm worried about them.  And the more important thing, the people that need the supplies, the supplies are not there.  I'm still out there on the road fooling around.  So that's a, an example of how we fought the war.  That's why you hear [HM] Colin Powell and all the people who, who fought in, in Vietnam say we're never going to, never try to fight a war like that again.  And now for people who, who, who don't appreciate the fact that you need to be brutal in war, they say that's inhumane; you're not gonna win the minds and win the people and so forth.  But sometimes you have to make a decision.  What's the most important, America: Is it the, the, the minds and, and, and, and, and, of the people, or the lives of the American soldier?  And sometimes commanders have to, have to, have to play with that issue in the terms of their decisions, so.  So I saw--I had a difference experience, obviously, than say a friend that you might have had that would have come back who would have been, you know, more like in the trenches without having to make those kind of decisions.  But they saw things on a lot more personal the level.  I mean most of the time I, I really very rarely ever had to fire my own weapon.  I did, a couple of times, but it, it--but to the guy that you came--that would meet you coming back.  As a private or as a corporal, he probably had to fire his weapon a whole lot of times, so it's a difference.  But you, but you carry with it all the lost lives, all the decisions that you made; all that you still carrying with you, so it's a kind of a trade off.
Story_ID: 178674
Speaker 1: So, how did you feel with--were you still in--were you in Vietnam when the [Vietnam] war ended?
Speaker 2: No, I was--I had, I come back, I had, had gone to [U.S. Army] Ranger school, had gone back over there, and come back, and I was, I was at [the United States] Command and General Staff College, which is, if you're--I don't how many military people you've interviewed, but the Command and General Staff College is out at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  And it is the senior tactical school for Army officers.  Only about fifteen, twenty percent, if that, maybe less, gets selected to go to that.  It's, it, it--you cannot get advanced beyond major without having gone to that.  And, and that's where I was.  I was in school there when that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At Leavenworth [Kansas].  And then I sub--that's when I married Sandra [Ford Johnson], my sweetie, and then I became--I, I taught at Command and General Staff [College].  I taught tactics, Soviet Tactics, believe it or not, at, at Leavenworth.
Speaker 1: Soviet Tactics?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had an [U.S.] Army still even in spite of the Vietnam experiences.  We still felt that the army, the enemy that we were gonna face, was going to be massive type engagement, like in the Second, Second World War [WWII], or even Korea for that matter.  The Army, in fact, even to, to now, has been slow to come around to, to, to the, to the realization.  Those kind of battles may be over.  What we're facing now is probably a lot more realistic for the future.  But that's what we were teaching our young troopers coming along.
Story_ID: 178675
Speaker 1: Now how did you feel about-- did you hear the critique of the [Vietnam] war when you're over there?  Did you hear what people were saying about it and politically and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  Terrible experiences when you got home.  Actually, between the first time when I went over in summer of '66 [1966]; I came back summer of '67 [1967].  In that year was when, when it really became quite prominent.  Of course it exploded after Tet [Offensive], in '68 [1968].  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's when--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --[Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] became--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I give you an example.  I landed, yeah, I landed in San Francisco [sic, Fairfield, California] in a [U.S.] military aircraft, Travis [U.S. Air Force Base, Fairfield, California] I think it's called, I think.  Coming from the plane on a bus, the military bus that they pick you up--you're still on base--we had to come by a film--I mean a fence.  And I, I remember it like yesterday.  I'm sitting there looking out, and I see these, these people who are, have come up to the border, to the, to the end of the, of the, of the base.  And they have signs up, how many women and kids did you kill, you know, calling us pigs and, and that sort of thing.  Now, when I left going to Vietnam in '66 [1966], there was pretty, pretty strong support for it, at least through my family, 'cause remember, I'm, I'm--my family never lost the support.  I mean, right to this day, if, if, if you ask almost any of them in my family, they--we did the right thing, and it's our--you know.  So, you know, when you're, when you're a male you gotta, you gotta pay your dues; you gotta do this, 'cause they all did, and I think all the kids.  Almost all of my cousins are all Marines.  All the males, and, and a not a male in my family that didn't serve in the military, so.  But the country--(unclear)--so this is what, what--and that, and that, that cause you some pause, you know.  And so we certainly didn't get any welcoming, I didn't, and I don't know anybody that did, other than your immediate family, if you were lucky, and that didn't last long before the questions start coming.  What'd you do?  Why are you acting so strange?  (Laughter) Because you do act strange when you come back from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now in the black community, it wasn't really a tremendously organized antiwar effort going on.  It was--but only amongst a few--there, there were some--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Some of the former SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people and, and stuff like that were involved in that, but not for--it wasn't very much of an organized antiwar effort (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's one of the things, reason why I think [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], when he, he came out against it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --early part of '68 [1968], just before he died.  And it's almost like signing his death warrant when he did that.
Story_ID: 178676
Speaker 1: --Tell you an interesting side effect of this whole thing with, with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I, you know, I, I was--had started to be, to work in security.  And I, I learned subsequent to this that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had a program to try and influence African Americans in key positions, not just in the military, but in the government, in private industry, and other places, who may have some influence within a community.  They had a program that was designed to discredit Martin Luther King.  And I, I'm not comfortable with saying what that program was, but I can say that I was made privy to what information that had.  And the way that it was presented to me is that, you know, you're, you know--at first all they, they became buddies with me.  I had a responsible position.  I was the deputy chief of police at Fort Gordon, Georgia.  So they basically said they had something they wanted me to hear, thought I would like, wanna know that.  And what I heard really infuriated me, and I did not challenge its authen--authenticity at all.  I didn't challenge whether it was right.  I just believed--
Speaker 2: Now, what was it?
Speaker 1: --it was--
Speaker 2: What, what was it that, that you heard?
Speaker 1: Well, it was, you know, him, private conversation.  Theoretically it was supposed to be him and private conversations, speaking in ways that I wouldn't have expected, and two people in a way that I wouldn't have expected Martin Luther King to do, okay.
Speaker 2: Is this--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Now, what you're talking about, is this the same, same tape that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, basically.
Speaker 2: --that I think Carl Rowan wrote--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --about in his book--
Speaker 1: Oh, that--yes, that, yes, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's also the same thing that's referred to, you know, when they say Martin Luther King had a private audience with J. Edgar Hoover.  And he'd said in a press conference before going to see J. Edgar Hoover that he's a vile man.  He's doing all these terrible things, and he's spying on people and so forth and so on.  I'm gonna go down and tell him what I think.  He went down, and he came out and said J. Edgar Hoover is a nice man.  He's doing a great job for the country, and he looked kind of, you know, shook and all.  Well, that's what he, he had--apparently that's what he did.  He, he, he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: --he let him hear that tape.  Now there's some concern as to whether or not that was--you can do so many things to tapes.  But at that time, I had no--I did not challenge whether or not it was true.  So I had negative thoughts about this great man, and that he was a great.  I did not really have--but I'll tell you what, I never said anything negative about Martin Luther King, never, except that when I never joined in and said anything good about him.  Now, because I knew the love, I mean pure love and--that my, my family and, and, and every African American that I knew had for him, you know, the churches and all, I just didn't wanna try and burst their bubble or anything.  I just didn't personally--it was a personal thing with me.  I just didn't think much of him.  However, I was sitting downstairs here many, many years later, and I saw the program, the movie on Martin Luther King.  And, and that's when I realized what a great guy he was.  Now I don't know--
Speaker 2: Did they discuss that--
Speaker 1: --about his indiscretions.
Speaker 2: Did they discuss that tape in the movie?
Speaker 1: They did not, no.
Speaker 2: It was interesting, 'cause in books--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --they do, and they, they--it seems as though when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was informed was about this tape, they sent one to his house, he--Ralph Abernathy was really concerned about it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --told him that he oughta--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --meet with J. Edgar Hoover.  And I don't think King ever met with Hoover.  It was Ralph Abernathy.
Speaker 1: No. King did.
Speaker 2: 'Cause--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, went and met with him, and came out and made those statements.  That's on TV.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You'll see that from time to time.  He met with him, and he saw or heard whatever it is that the FBI had on him.
Story_ID: 178677
Speaker 1: But you know, [Reverend] Ralph Abernathy--was--I've read some wonderful things about him.  And my personal feelings, I had the opportunity to see him and, to, to see him operate, and I was not impressed, not at all.  Some of the things that he said about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and about how they womanized, and all--they did all these things, you know, in book and all this kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I read the book.  He--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't think he said that he did it, but he said he strongly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --suspected that [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had several--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: --girlfriends and--
Speaker 1: --well--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: He was, he was not of the ilk that Martin Luther King was.  And I mean I just didn't have the--he did things, said things that I observed.  You know, when I was at--in Augusta, Georgia, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] brought him in there to help--this was before the Augusta [Georgia] riots, just before the Augusta riots.  Things were really bad in Augusta in the late 19--in late '69 [1969], late, late '69 [1969].  And they brought him in, and I happened to go to a meeting with him.  And at the time I was dating a girl that was one of the sponsors, and she was so excited about this.  And so we took this--they went to the--afterwards, and basically all he, he--his whole thrust was, you know, he thought he was gonna go to a hotel so we could do some detailed planning and everything, but he just wanted to party at that point, you know, at that point, you know.  Now, you know, we're talking about a much older guy, guy who's been subjected to all sorts of pressures, and, and Martin Luther King had been dead, you know, maybe five or six months by then.  People are looking at him as the next savior, and so it was a lot of pressure on him.  And so I wouldn't like to judge him totally.  I've read some wonderful things about how he helped the NAACP.  But my personal experiences, what I'm telling you, wasn't all that great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when he came out not long before he died with all of the negative comments about Martin Luther King, didn't surprise me at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm sad to see it, but didn't surprise me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 178678
Speaker 1: Now this [U.S. Army] Ranger training, I mean this, this is like hands-on training--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about, you know--
Speaker 2: It's intense.
Speaker 1: --combat and so forth.
Speaker 2: Right, it's very intense.  And only a very few--I, I give you an example.  To take the test and pass the test, you have to be in pretty, pretty extraordinary condition.  And so it's six-hundred people started that class, and out of that, sixty-something got to tab.  You know, so you're not talking about sixty-some--six-hundred-some guys, you know, just off the street.  You're talking about guys who have planned for this, and trained for this.  And still, when we got our tabs at the end of all of this, it was only sixty-some, so.
Speaker 1: So only ten percent made it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about ten percent.
Speaker 1: One out of ten.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: And then we took--
Speaker 1: --that's a high--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --special training in, in the, in the desert.  I mean not the desert.  They do now.  At the time I went through, we didn't have the desert phase 'cause there wasn't, it wasn't really in, you know--
Speaker 1: Necessary I guess.
Speaker 2: --wasn't necessary then, but the swamps in the Okefenokee Swamps up in Dahlonega, up in the mountains of North Georgia, and then the training and, and the swimming, and all of that at, at, at Fort Benning in Georgia, and each of those had a phase.  You had to pass each phase, and it was, it was, it was very difficult.  But I had decided that--and it was all volunteer, and I had decided that, you know, I wanted to, to, to be a Ranger.  And we wore black berets and now, of course, everybody wears black berets.  And that was, was a bit of a heart, heart bearing for some of those people who, who earned it a different way.  But that was the chief of staff's decision, and he made it, so.  Not happy about it, but--'cause we used to be, when you saw the black beret, you know, on a, on a soldier, you knew that guy was a Ranger and that he had at least gone through, through that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah, I--but it, but it was good for me, having finished it.  I mean I--it was the kind of training in which I said--I've been in difficult situations before, and maybe you have too, in which I've just said you know what, I'm dead all ready.  So the only way I'm gonna come alive is to get through this, 'cause I'm dead.  I mean (laughter), I mean that's a strange way at looking, and everybody has their own way to motivate themselves, but that's how I felt down there; I mean it was that intense.  And, and I was old.  I was an old man.  I was twenty-eight years old--twenty-seven years old.  That's old for that.
Speaker 1: For that kind of training?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  I mean that's what they called me, the old man.  The thing I had going from that was a lot of--well, first of all, having already been in the combat, and most of them had not--they were all young kids getting ready to one day go into combat--I had a, a maturity.  I also had trained people, so I knew when those sergeants and people were calling you names and giving you a hard time, I knew they didn't mean it, where these, some of these kids too it personal, and so the mental aspect of it.  They put you under this pressure mentally, is, is, is probably eighty percent of it, and, and I was much more mature than that.  I mean they couldn't--and eventually the sergeants that were giving the, the training in my cadre, they on the side; we get a break, they come over and talk to me.  They were interested in what I knew (laughter), what I had to say.  But in the front of everybody else they, you know, was giving me just as hard a time as anybody.  But also I was very physical.  I mean I've always been just in great physical condition.  And I was a college athlete, you know, and I was still playing ball and, and everything, running just for fun ten or fifteen miles, and so I wasn't challenged physically as, as much as some of the other kids had, so.  But it's good training, and I mean I wish that everybody could, because one of the things it, it, it did for me is it taught me things about my body that I didn't know, and you have to be pushed to the extremes to find that out.  For an example, you can sleep walking.  You can get some rest walking.  It's all a whole bunch of things is mental.  And you don't have to have eight hours of sleep every night, for short periods of time.  Now studies are showing that people like the Rangers, and you think they're in great shape, but then as they get older, they pay for that.  They get diabetes, like I have, all course of disorders and things that comes from putting your body through those kinds of strains.  But if in, in a combat scenario, if you have to do that, you know you can.  So that's the difference, and plus a lot of, lot of hand to hand type combat and stuff like that, which you, you never forget as long as you live.  It gives you a certain degree of confidence anyway.
Story_ID: 178679
Speaker 1: So, well after that tour of duty in Vietnam [Vietnam War], the second tour, what, I mean what, what was, what characterized the second tour?  Anything special or--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it's just that I was with a small group of guys, and we had what was secret then at the time, which is a cell phone (laughter); that's what it adds up to.  It's a long story associated with how important that cell phone was to, Tet, to, to warfare.  Because before we had a, a what we called a two-niner-two antenna, long thing that you had to, to, to crank up, and it was of World War II [WWII] vintage and Korean War vintage.  And the VC [Viet Cong] had, they could cross para--part, part of--you know how if you--they get one signal going this way, one of the other, they zero in, you know, and know where you are.  We would operate, to operate behind the lines and send messages in on intelligence and so forth and so on, and, and plus in this case, it was the B-52s.  If they left and, and, and was going to one spot, and you wanted to change that spot because a new target of opportunity came up, you had to put that antenna up and, and transmit it.  And then you had to run like hell because, you know, they'd be on you or dropping something in.  Well, this little thing gave you an opportunity.  It wasn't as small now.  No, it just--well, I say that's basically is what is a cell phone, but it was still pretty good size piece of equipment.  So, that made a difference, made a big difference in the technology.  But that wasn't for that long a period.  That--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it--and it, the only impact that it had on me was that it should me that all volunteers are, even though you may have a more difficult, a, a more, much more difficult mission, and that's certainly a lot more personable in terms of your own personal fight.  And like as a company commander, if I have to fight, we're in trouble, okay.  You, you know, if I have to fight were in tra--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --but as a [U.S. Army] Ranger, as a company commander, you're expected to fight, and so it's a difference, you know.  So I had a cross, cross-reference to that.
Story_ID: 178680
Speaker 1: But I think--one of the points I might just add, and it's not exactly on [the] Vietnam [War].  But it is, as a result of the various experiences and jobs and things that I had, my last assignment in the Army was an assignment that dreams are made of.  I was the, what they called the Special Assignment Officer for Joint and Special Activities, the White House, Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department of Defense, Secretary of the Army, and all those positions were positions that I had to, that I had to find full colonels, which was a--or senior managers to go and work in those positions.  So I was--I could go in and out of the White House and sit down and talk to, to the, to the guys you see on TV all the, all the time.  And the Secretary of the Army was--I wasn't on first name basis with him, but he, he was, you know, he called me.  I had tremendous amount of, of influence.  You know, how I did that and--so I'd sit down beside the Secretary of the Army, and we'd sit and look.  I'd had this big book, and we'd talk about these guys.  And he'd say okay, what you think, and then on and so forth and so on.  And I'd pick this one, and I'd say well, I think this is the best guy.  Then I would have to go get that guy released from wherever he was, you know.  And then I'd have to see to it that that person got replaced and all that sort of thing.  So it was a heck of a job.  And almost every--it was called an accepted unit.  Everybody that was there in that unit with me made general, and I made full colonel, and--but I got, what they say, I got an offer you can't refuse.  And it was a duff--tough--decision for me, but I had a chance to work at the World Bank [Washington, D.C.], and so I, I got out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, but my last assignment was, was really a wonderful assignment.  I stayed--you're, you're only supposed to have that job for two years, 'cause you know, if you stay there much longer, you can influence a person's career more than you should be able to.  Like if I got you a job in the White House, you stayed there for two years, then I could get you a job in, in the Pentagon or somewhere else, you know.  And that gives a kind of an unfair advantage, you know, so they try to keep you from having to assign a guy two or three times.  So, it was eighteen months, and I, I pulled that 18 months, and they asked me to stay.  I stayed two more years, so, and then I finished up.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what, what year is this?
Speaker 1: Sixty-- '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: '83 [1983], okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 178681
Speaker 1: So, the World Bank [Washington, D.C.], tell us about that now.
Speaker 2: Well, I found that I wanted to go to the World Bank--I really wanted to be an entrepreneur after the military.  I really didn't want any more responsibility, you know, having the responsibilities like I had had.  I, I was looking to, to be responsible for myself.  But I had this job opportunity over there, and I had a daughter that was getting ready to go to college, and I didn't want to have--to be depending upon entrepreneurial type funds.  I wanted solid funds to be able to pay her way through college.  So I took the job what I thought would be for two years--four years, while she was in college.  I went in as chief of security operation.  The World Bank has, at that time they had twenty-two buildings in downtown Washington [D.C] within five or six blocks of the White House.  Now--
Speaker 1: Now, before--go any further, what is the World Bank?
Speaker 2: All right, I think I can tell you in, in, in very simple terms.  After the Second World War [WW2], there needed to be an instrument to help the developing nations, mostly the European nations at the time, who had been destroyed by the war.  Now we had the Marshall Plan, but a lot of international community felt that the Marshall Plan was like a lot of--I mean any nation, they have strings attached to the money that they send to you.  I mean, you know, America would be stupid to give money to anybody without having some benefit as a result of it, so they try to put strings on it.  And it was felt that we need an impartial organization that could make these kinds of loans and help these nations without the typical strings.  The only strings attached would be, you know, how much interest that you paid and how long you had to pay it back.  So there were, the World Bank came up, and it's also two or three banks in one.  One of 'em is distru--a bank to handle international disputes that you see.  They have professional mediators dealing with boundary problems, all sorts of problems all the time that's going on.  But basically, if you would take the World Bank, put it in simplest terms, it is a, a group of have nations, people who are developed and, and, and are progressing well, they donate their money, and then they do projects for developing nations.  And those developing nations pay them back with very, very low interest rate.  Now how it works is this: the World Bank will say, put together a team.  They'll put the two of you all together and me.  And we'll go to Thailand, and we'll look at Thai--We'll live there for a while, and we'll say okay, what can we do to improve Thailand?  And let's say we decide, well, you know what, if they had a damn right here, it would increase their productivity.  It would do all these great things.  So then we come back and we write up a plan, and we say to the, to the board of directors at the World Bank: we need to build a damn, and it costs ten million dollars.  And so then the World Bank contacts Thailand and say look here, we'll, we'll, we'll build that damn for you.  We'll give you the ten million dollars.  We'll provide you with the, the legal experts, the, you know, so forth.  We'll use most of your people, so the money will be going to you.  When we finish the damn, you pay us back our ten million dollars over a twenty-year period at one percent interest, okay.  Now, the World Bank takes that one percent, and they work the stock markets.  They have the largest stock market trading center--second largest in the United States is in that building over there.  It's, it's a, it's a massive operation.  But anyway, that's how it works.  Now the IMF, which is International Monetary Fund, is an organization that will work with private banks.  We, the World Bank works with, basically with governments.  I mean it got certain aspects of it that works with private banks, but for the most part, the projects go through the government; the government representative come and sign the contract; and then we do it.  The International Monetary Fund, which is usually co-located, they monitor the, the, you know, how different currencies relate against each other.  And they work with, with banks and private industry to develop projects and so forth, trying to keep the various currencies stable.  On a--in terms of, of, of hatred, I think the International Monetary Fund is hated more than the World Bank because of that, because they can come in and say, you know, we're not gonna allow the World Bank or anybody else to give you any more money unless you devalue your currency by X amount or something, you know, or something of that nature, which is--has more immediate direct bearing.  Now the problem now is these, these--a lot of countries say that the debt over these fifty or sixty years has now--we've made so many loans, and they can't pay us back.  They can't make progress because everything that they can generate they're giving back to the World Bank.  And so they want us to--and I still say us (laughter)--they want the World Bank to, to forgive all these debts and start anew or something.  But I've always said, when I went to the World Bank I saw a lot of corruption.  And, and I was in security, I saw a lot of waste.  But I realized that within a short period of time, if you did away with the Bank, all total, just say okay, no more World Bank, no more IMF, within five years, there'd be somebody doing the identical, same thing, except it'd be called a different name.  There is a need for it, but what there is a need for, is to have it cleaned up and done less political, in the way that it was intended to do, but then such as most things, really.
Story_ID: 178682
Speaker 1: Now your job was to coordinate security for the World Bank [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes. I was, initially, I went in as not a senior manager, but to be in charge of the security for the twenty-two buildings downtown.  And while I was there, I--that was, it was--it wasn't a senior manager, but it was a high enough position where, I mean I had access to the president and you know, the vice pres--but as I went to these various meetings to discuss policies and procedures and everything, I never saw an African American, very few Africans.  I said--you know, I kept saying, you know, where are these guys?  And it took me almost two years to realize, 'cause they don't keep any figures, you know, this is not an organization that has affirmative action.  It's not, it's not a part of the U.S. laws.  It's, each one of those buildings is a separate embassy, so you know, we don't--you know, we use the police force and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and other people for help us with an investigation 'cause we need their labs.  We got our own police force.  We got everything down there.  And so, I, I finally realized there are none.  And I, I decided that you know what, I want to change that.  I thought, I think I'm qualified, you know, to do that.  So I'm gonna, I'm going to go for that, and so I did.  And when it was time, when, when the job came available and I applied, it was very interesting.  The [World] Bank came out with a new policy.  It said that in the future, all senior managers are gonna have to be boarded.  In other words, they're gonna have to get a group of people, senior managers at the Bank, to come together to evaluate the candidates, and pick, pick the right one, because they had been disappointed with some of the people and so forth and so on.  So I went through a six-month period.  I, I had to write an essay on why I thought I could do this job.  I had to go before a board.  I had to have desk-side interviews, they called 'em, where I had to go into the--and sat down and talked to these people and all this kind of stuff.  I went through all of that, and then they just drug it on, and drug it on, and drug it on.  When I got it, two weeks afterwards I'm in my office and a message comes out we've done away the, with the, with the board.  So it was just an effort to try to discourage me, to try to make it that much harder.  And so, you know, so, I, I had--I, I, got the job, and I had it for, for quite a while.  And I, I, I think I did, I did well.  When I left the Bank, had a big ceremony for me.  And I made (laughter), I--you know, a lot of people in my position, when they leave the Bank, if they decide to do any consulting they can, you know, go back to the Bank and you know, get lucrative contracts?  And I knew that, and I--but I knew that those things had to be approved by the vice presidents.  The vice president was there.  And when I left I told him, and, and the news media was there (laughter).  And I said, you know, "It's a shame that after today, when the president of the World Bank makes a policy or discusses a policy that pertains to African Americans or people of color, there's not a single solitary person in that room that can relate and give any personal perspectives on the situation."  And I said, "That's sad," and I said, "you know, if we were in Kansas or Wichita [Kansas]," or someplace, I said, "I could understand it and accept the fact that you couldn't find that talent.  But in Washington, D.C.?  I mean it's the Mecca of talent."  And you, you really--if I have a message left for the Bank it's two-fold: one, thank you; number two, get your act together, you know.  (Laughter) So--(unclear)--(laughter) he got a little pissed off about that.  But anyway, I felt good about it.  It needed to be said.  Now they've got--oh, about three years after I left, and I don't think it had anything to do with me, but about three years after I left, now they, they, they had a, an active program, because I think finally some of the African nations just started to, just really get adamant about this is ridiculous, you know.  And so finally, now they have some, some, some senior, senior managers that are African Americans and more Africans as well down there.  In fact I was at a luncheon--a dinner--a couple of nights ago and met one of them, so there things are, are shaping up a little bit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of visibility.  But I don't know in terms of influence I don't know.  But I ended up getting promoted.  And before it was over, I had, in addition to the security, I had the printing operation, which is--employs about one hundred and eighty people.  It's, it covers a whole block.  It's the basement of the World Bank building.  It's a whole block of, of printing ma--material.  We do all our printing--well, we don't do it all; we farm a lot of it out now.  But I had that, and I had a, a whole bunch of different functions, including food service.  We have, there are a lot of restaurants in there--
Story_ID: 178683
Speaker 1: The World Bank [Washington, D.C] is, is quite a place.  And I can give you a tour of it, and it's amazing.  It is really an amazing institution.  So I felt good about that.  But one of the things I thought was, was, was fascinating, when I go to Africa I had a distinct advantage that I hadn't even thought myself out.  I hadn't thought it out myself.  If--when I go to Africa, I could go to the official places, like the World Bank reps should.  I went to see all of the embassies that I wanted to see.  I got afforded the right status, protocol and so forth.  But at night I could go downtown or wherever, and I could mingle around with everybody and hear what the people are saying, you know, taxi cab drivers, people who related to me because of my color, totally different than they would had I been doing the same job and was white.  I gave a different dimension.  And, and, and then when I--once I saw that, and was able to relate that in my re--you know, and, and not in a, in a, in a--but I was able to relate that in a perspectives so forth that I brought to the, to the [World] Bank.  Then I got the confidence to say to the Bank, you know, to the president: sir, you know, you're missing an opportunity here.  You really are, you're missing an opportunity, you know, and, and I, and I said that to him.  I said it also to the American executive director.  America has, has a representative there, you know, and it was woman.  It was [President Bill] Clinton that sent her over.  And I always thought--I can't remember her name--but I thought she had the right attitude, everything, but I don't think it was high on her agenda.  It just wasn't one of the biggies, so I don't think she got anything done on it.  But do you understand what I mean about the difference in perspective?  I mean, you know, people will tell you one thing that you all wanna hear, and then you go back and you, you get another feel.  And like, for example, one of the things that the security division had to do was give their opinion on those--a lot of these loans: Is this government gonna be there?  Or, is it gonna be secure for my people to go and visit and stuff like that?  And I just could, you know, I could tell from listening to other people, you know, how they really felt about the government, if anything was gonna happen, 'cause they'll tell you.  I find the same, same is true right now.  You go to the Bahamas, you go to, you go to a lot of the places in South Africa, or you go to places in Africa, as a person of color, they'll tell you things that's a little bit different.  I've been in taxis with people, and they'll say whites and, and they'd get out, and then, and then when the white get out, the driver say, you know, I just said such and such, but that's not true; over here, such and such, and so forth and so on, you know, a different perspective, that's all.  And the Bank needed to have that.  And so, I'm hoping--it's the same thing with the United States government in their state department and their ambassadors and so forth.  They need to take advantage of that a little bit more.  (Unclear)--the world is a world of color, so.  So and, and that gave me an opportunity to sit.  You know, actually I tasted the finest wines.  I stayed in the finest places.  I had a ticket to ride; I could travel all over the world, and I did.  I saw different cultures.  It was a great experience.  And while I, I missed the military, I never have looked back and said I made a bad decision, not staying in to see if I was gonna make general or anything like that.  I, I made the right decision for my wife [HM Sandra Ford Johnson] and I, and it gave me an opportunity for her to, to, to have her own career.  You know, she's following me around, it wasn't it wasn't the best thing for her own career.  But she had a chance to do it, and she's done it, as you'll see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 178684
Speaker 1: Well, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my feeling is education is the key to it.  You gotta be qualified.  One of the things that bothers me the most in, in Washington [D.C] and other places as I travel, is the fact that I don't think African Americans are taking advantage of even the limited educational opportunities that they have.  And that could be a breakdown in families, you know, support systems, but if we are not prepared to, to take the jobs, we're not gonna get 'em.  And that's my thing, somewhere between the school system and the time they're supposed to get out to get to college.  If you could get 'em to college, they'll be fine.  But they develop attitudes.  They're hostile.  It kind of reminded me of how I was when I was twelve.  It was not a good environment here to learn, you know, because you've got things blocking your, your vision, anger, you're pissed off, no hope, you know.  I read over and over, and I saw over and over with these young kids out there in the street, they don't respect their own life and property, you know, they're not gonna respect yours--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --you know.  They don't feel like this their system.  They feel like it's, it's, it's somebody else's system.  And, and unless they have the proper education, a balanced education--and it can't be all as whites have seen it; and it can't all be as your uncle, or your grandfather has seen it; it has to be balanced.  That comes from education.  It's just association.  You know, this, this city [Washington, D.C.], and most of America, is very segregated.  I mean you go at five o'clock at night, you watch the buses downtown, if you're ever on one, during say four o'clock, just black and white.  And somewhere around five-thirty it's all white or all black, depending upon where you're going.  The whole Metro, you can see it on the Metro stations.  If it's after five o'clock--and I, you know, I can go to the Metro station.  As I'm going down the steps, I can tell which train was last to come.  If all the people standing on the rail--on the track are black, I know my station is next (laughter)--I mean my train is next.  If they're all white, I know I just missed one, you see.  So, but the key is education.  And I don't know how--I don't have any answers, except you asked me my dream.  My dream is somehow we learn the value of education and we get something in place so that our kids can get a good education. If they do, everything else will take care of itself I think.
Story_ID: 178685
Speaker 1: When you look back on the things you've done, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: That's a, that's a very good question.  No, I really, I think well, there are some personal things.  I, I mean things like personal relationships.  I had friends that meant a lot to me that I didn't maintain contact with that I'm sorry for.  And some of them are dead now.  I mean people who extended themselves to me, opened themselves up to me, and, and I accepted that, their good graces, and I didn't reciprocate.  So if I had any--you know, in terms of what I did in my life, the things that I, that I put my time and effort to, you know, like athletics, or the military, the World Bank, things of that nature, I wouldn't do that any differently 'cause it was a wonderful life, a fabulous life.  But in terms of the interpersonal relationships, I'd do that a lot differently.  I'd value my friendships a little bit more.  I'd look a little bit closer at the people who are in my life.  I mean I'd look beyond the name and the relationship to the heart, heart of the person, and try to make a difference in their life.  I always seem to want to make a different in the life of people I don't know.  And then I've had people that I do know that I've not given the proper attention to.  So that's, that's one thing I definitely would do differently.
Story_ID: 178686
Speaker 1: When you look back on what you have done, what would you consider at this juncture as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think it's, I have two, if you don't mind.  One is how other people think of me.  I think that most people still think of me as a jock.  I'm still--again, that could be some of my stereotypic, stereotypic way of looking at, at things.  You remember the self value thing, how I hated when I was in college I was very popular, and we'd have, have--parents would come down to see their kids.  Their kids would all want me to meet their parents.  And then here's what they'd say, mom, mom and dad, look here, want you meet Harry Johnson.  He's captain of the basketball team.  That would piss me off on the inside, and say how about just Harry Johnson, you know; just, just that would be fine.  I think peoples have always seen me more as a jock because who I seem to be hanging out with.  When actually on the inside I like to think of myself as far more intellectual than, than, than that, a, a lot more substance than just being a jock.  While I put a lot into being a jock, I, at the same time, I put a lot into the other side of life as well.
Speaker 1: Well, the thing about that though is--and then you probably thought about this on some level, that nowadays, most people don't know you as a basketball player--
Speaker 2: No, that's true.
Speaker 1: --you know, and--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --there's very few--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --would, would, would think that.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: But it's interesting that you see yourself as before--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I still myself--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --as a jock.  It was--it, it tell you--I tell you what the reason for it is I guess it took, it took that to get me--you know, I'm, I'm, I'm one of the more successful, in fact, I am the second most successful cousin, you know, coming out of the family.  And that was because of, I thought, because of jocks.  Yeah, but now, at the World Bank [Washington, D.C.] for example, no one ever knew that I was a ballplayer or anything.  And I'm not sure how they'd relate to me.  I know I was a good manager.  Because the way I got promoted was that every time the [World] Bank had a function, an organization within itself that was not performing, that they had a lot of problems with, they gave it to me, and that's how I would get promoted.  I nev--I didn't get promoted the traditional way.  Okay, you have had this job, and the next job for you is this job, and let's put some people together for you.  No, suddenly, I had this responsibility, but brought into here was this, and brought into here was that, and finally say hey, look, you're giving me all this respon--how about some more rank?  So they give me a title, if, if you follow me; that's the way it worked.  'Cause I had good management skills, coming from the military, and I worked with people, and I, I think my legacy is sincerity with the people.  And I think people see that in me, and they work for me.  I mean I've had people to die for me, believing in me.  And, and people worked for me.  I had a lot less personnel problems 'cause I'm honest.  I tell people--I try to be--tell 'em what, what the real world is, and don't make promises I can't keep, and I, I try to show concern, try to listen.  So, I think that's what I've done.  In fact, as a consultant that's what I do mostly, is help people who have problems and personnel side of, of the security business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178687
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now you've, you've done quite a bit of travel and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you've, you've been to Africa--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on safari--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) hiking and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --some of--we didn't talk about some of the extracurricular stuff--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that you do, but you, you lead a hiking expedi--you, your--or you did it one time.
Speaker 1: Right, I--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I like to still think I do.  A year ago, I came out of the mountains early because my knees swelled up, but I wanna go back next month.  I, I've hiked in the back trail, the Appalachian Trail from Georgia, now basically all the way through most--some portions of Virginia, but all of Tennessee, North Carolina, and up in Pennsylvania, Maryland, up in that area.  So, you know, I backpack.  I love it.  I love, I love the outdoors.  And I had my daughter went with me on, on one of my trips in the Smokies [Smoky Mountains].  She walked the Smokies with me, which is about ninety miles.  And I tell you, you're out there, nothing much, actually just a great--
Speaker 2: How long does it take to do ninety miles on--
Speaker 1: Well, you can do, you can do about ten or fifteen miles a day.  And that's, that's if you're in great shape.  If you, you know, you know, if, if I--if, you're knees hold out on you, and you have a sixty, seventy-pound backpack, which was all your food, and your, your bedding, and all this other type stuff, you know, if you could do ten miles and climbing mountains and everything, you're in pretty good shape if you can do that.  And so it would take you about ten days to do the Smokies, I would say.  Now you'll get some of the young people out there that's in a little bit better shape, they might do it in seven or eight.  But you're not having any fun.  And so my whole point is I wanna have fun.  If I see a nice vista I wanna enjoy, I wanna enjoy.  I wanna sit down and put my backpack off and take a little nap, take a little nap, you know, that type of thing.  And I wanna quit in time to let--get a nice camp before it gets dark.  And I'm not trying to, to, to be able to come back and say hey, I did fifteen miles and you only did ten, you know, that type of thing.  I don't want that competitiveness out there.  I just wanna go out and enjoy it, and I do.
Story_ID: 178688
Speaker 1: Now you make presentations in African American history--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from time to time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And who are your--what, what are your stories?  Who did the--
Speaker 2: Well, I actually I--
Speaker 1: --what, what, what do you talk about?
Speaker 2: --I started off, was asked to--well, first of all, I've always done that.  You know, one of the things I didn't mention, I was always one of very, very few African Americans in whatever community that I was ever in, in the military, you know, as an officer, you know, like colonels and majors and stuff.  It was never a whole lot around, so I get invitations to speak a lot.  And before that, even when I was in college, again, you know, all CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association], some kids go to high school, foot--basketball games, see me play.  The coach say who do you want to come down and give you your letter, and they said we want Harry Johnson from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] to come down.  So I had a chance to go out and give those kinds of talks, inspirational talks to the jocks.  And so, and then I started getting invitations to go into the schools around here [Washington, D.C.], mostly in, in, in Black History Month, you know.  And I did career development type things, and I'd go in, in, in Black History Month and then talk to them.  Well, as I said, you know, I'm not a black scholar, because to me that would be degrading the great black scholars that I know to me to even suggest that I was in that league, and I'm not.  I would love to be.  And if I stay healthy and can continue to spend time doing it, I may one day approach that.  But I have written, published, and you know, and all of that.  So I, I--but, but I have tremendous amount of experience, personal experience in these issues.  I lived through the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] '70s [1970s], and so forth, and saw Jim Crow laws and all of this.  And so I mix that in with the local history of what, what I'm dealing with wherever I am.  And that's what I do, and it's--I, I love it.  In fact, if I could only do one thing in my life it would be to lecture on black history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I mean what I do is I take a subject, for example, the Emancipation Proclamation that, that I'm gonna be giving this presentation up in, in Ohio, Southern Ohio, this coming Sunday.  I'll take that subject and I'll just research the heck out of it.  I'll just research the heck out of every little small thing I can find if I have the time, and then I talk on it.  I talked on the, the various aspects of leadership in Syracuse [New York] last year.  So I'm, I'm getting good opportunities to get out, and I really love it, to talk, so.  I'm not gonna try--you know, I don't how long I wanna do that.  But see, that's something that I would do, you know, actually for no money.  I just enjoy doing it, important knowledge and stuff.
Story_ID: 178689
Speaker 1: So that's what I do. (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Now you have one, one daughter, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And did your mother get a chance to--I mean not, not your mother, but your aunt [Attie M. Hairston], basically who served as your mother--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --did she get a chance, chance to see you become successful in the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 1: Yes, she did.  She did, and she, in fact, she had a chance to meet Sandy [Ford Johnson], and she loved Sandy, and so her husband, my uncle [James Hairston], did too.  They just were crazy about--matter of fact, they live about--they lived in Bluefields [West Virginia] about three hundred and fifty miles from here, about a five-hour drive.  And I'd go home to check on them, and my, my uncle told me one time don't come home anymore without Sandy (laughter).  They loved her.  But yeah, they--she did.  She was, she, she--I'll tell you, it took probably a couple of years off her life when I was in Vietnam, you know, 'cause she, she was scared to death all the time--
Speaker 2: Worrying--
Speaker 1: --worried about it, but--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: --yeah, she did see it, my father [Joseph Johnson] too.  And like I said, before my father passed he and I were okay with each other, very much.
Story_ID: 178690
Speaker 1: Sir, one final question--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it's kind of funny.  I'd like to give you a direct answer, maybe for once during the interview, but I have never given any thought to that.  And I think there is, is--it, it ties into the fact that there was nobody that's ever said to me that, you know, you're part of a legacy like the Johnson on the Johnson side, just on the Revels' side. I don't give much thought to that.  And I've seen so much death that I'm not afraid of it at all.  I certainly and not welcoming it, and if you try to take my life I'd fight you with everything I have, but I understand its cycle, its importance.  I've seen it in, in, in so many ways that I just I want, I want to leave my wife [HM Sandra Ford Johnson] and my daughter in a way that they will have a good life for whatever time they have left.  And that's the only thing that matters to me, really.  I know that's strange, isn't it?  But I don't, I don't care anything about a legacy at all, not at all, just be remembered as a person that loved his wife and his daughter.  He tried to make a difference, and I have tried to make a difference.  I mean I could tell you about the things in the--when I was a manager or military police and full colonels and so forth, that I was able to make generals, you know, put people in position to help them to get general.  But for myself, I don't want any credit for that, and I never asked for any.  I'll just be happy if I can leave them right, that's all.
Story_ID: 178691
Speaker 1: This is 1996 at my party, not my official bank retirement party, but a party that my organization gave me.  The fellow on the left is Bob Townsend.  He's a retired [U.S.] Army colonel and the man that hired me to come to the World Bank [Washington, D.C.].  And that's his wife Linda, they now live in Charleston, South Carolina.  That's my wife, Sandra [HM Sandra Ford Johnson].  And this was pictures taken after the ceremony, as we were about to, to wrap it up and, and leave.
Speaker 2: This is a--this was taken I would think it was probably around 1999.  That's the Fontana Dam, you know, the dam that was so famous for the Tennessee Valley Authority, which brought electricity to the Tennessee Valley.  Behind that chain of mountains there is the Smokies [Smoky Mountains].  And this was a party that I was taking into the Smokies, which was a ninety miles east and west, and forty miles north and south track.  And that first tall person there on the left of me is my daughter that went with me.
Speaker 1: And that is one of my all-time dreams come true.  That's me and my boat, the Icing.  I'm in Annapolis [Maryland], driving down in the harbor there, and I'm at peace with the world.
Speaker 2: The icing on the cake.
Speaker 1: The icing on the cake.  It's a thirty-six-footer.  Actually, the Chris Craft don't use the plat, swim platform as a measurement, but it's actually a thirty-nine-footer, and it's pretty fast, twin engines, sleeps six.
Speaker 2: This another, select this picture because it's another of one of my dreams, and that's to go on safari.  And this is, this is me sitting in the back of the truck on safari.  And it was quite an interesting experience.  I could talk for days on that subject.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 2: That was 1969--'99, 1999, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Now I talked earlier about retirement from the World Bank.  This is my retirement from the Army.  And there I am very proud to re--be in receiving the Legion of Merit, a very, that's very prestigious.  That was 1983, and that's my wife standing beside me, 1983.
Speaker 2: This is basically what is some of the survivors of the, the ones that didn't have to be shipped back to the states, of a battle that was conducted in Phan Rang, in which one of my platoons in Vietnam was, was, was attacked.  It was a battle that we won, 'cause they're still here.  But it was a battle that we paid a heavy price for.  The person on the right is, is my battalion who came down for the service.  Most of those people are getting Purple Hearts.  This was in 1966, in the fall of 1966.
Speaker 1: Well, this--her name is Attie Hairston, by and low--by and far the, the, the, the greatest woman, besides my wife, that's ever lived.  She's actually my aunt, and she took me, as a problematic child, and she got me through high school and became my mother.  I just made myself her son and started calling her mother.  I owe her everything.  She was just a wonderful world--wonderful lady rather.
Speaker 2: Okay, about what year is this shot?
Speaker 1: That shot was probably taken about 1965.
Speaker 2: This is 1970 here.
Speaker 1: Right, this was taken 1970 when I was receiving the award for having been the commander of the best company at Fort Gordon, Georgia.  And that's, that's a great deal of pride to me because I took command of that company when it was, failed ever test that it had had.  And they relieved the commander, and they put me in charge.  I'd just come out of, of, of the Ranger outfit.  They said they needed a, a guy like me.  They put me in the there, and one year later, we, we were first in the whole of Fort Gordon, Georgia, 1970.
Story_ID: 178692
Speaker 1: Well, this is my father [Joseph Johnson].  As I've indicated, I did not get to really know him.  But he's the far right-hand side.  He was in the [U.S.] Navy in World War II [WW2], and those are just some of his shipmates, I guess.  I, I, I don't really know them.  I would think that would be '43 [1943], '44 [1944], 1943 or 1944 I would imagine.
Speaker 2: And your father's right here?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's him right there.
Speaker 2: And that's me, and I am giving a talk to my family at a family reunion.  And I picked that one because my family had disbursed around the nation, and I was instrumental in getting them together and having a reunion.  That was in 19--the first one we did was 1997, and we've done one every year since.  And it gets bigger and better every year.  And it's a wonderful, wonderful thing.
Speaker 1: That's me in Vietnam, a hot day.  That was my driver that was over here to the left, and his name was Shelton.  And it was a day that we had been sent out to pick up North Vietnamese prisoners and escort them to an interrogation center.  And so we were, had just finished getting them in at that point.
Speaker 2: That's 1958, my graduation from high school.  It's significant to me because three to four years before that period of time I would have had serious doubts as to whether or not I would have, would have made that.  So I'm very happy there, finished high school in 1958, on my way to Morgan State College [sic, University, Baltimore, Maryland] to play basketball for them.
Speaker 1: This is not a good picture because it's faded and everything, but it shows a bunch of my cousins, but it also features my grandfather [James W. Revels] and my grandmother [Mattie Revels], who were my first two heroes.  I lived with them for the first five years of my life.  And I picked up most of my values from him.  He died when I was twenty years old and a soph--and a sophomore at Morgan State.  And that's my grandmother.  She was the one that was the daughter of, of a slave.  And he was never, his family, no one in, in the Revels family was ever slaves.  They were all, always free in North Carolina--
Speaker 2: What, what's his name again--
Speaker 1: Revels.  His name is James W. Revels.
Speaker 2: And her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Mattie Revels.  Her, her maiden name was Saunders.  And that's me right there (laughter), hard to believe.  And all the rest of those people are my aunts and uncles, right there.  All the rest of those people are--and, and every one of these males that you see in here served in the [U.S.] Marine Corps in Vietnam (laughter), every one, and that's not all of them.  We're all military.
Speaker 2: But this is my wife.  She's from Chicago [Illinois]; she's a doctor, got her, her Ph.D. from the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]; she's an inspiration, a hard worker, and my pride and joy.
