Story_ID: 48142
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Marshall Gordon Jones.  Marshall is spelled M-A-R-S-H-A-L-L, Gordon is spelled G-O-R-D-O-N, Jones is J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 1st, 1941 and I was born in Southampton, Long Island, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation is mechanical engineer and my title is principal engineer.
Speaker 1: Principal engineer, this is for General Electric?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is for GE or General Electric Global Research.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 4th, 2012.
Speaker 1: Right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Where are we here, the location?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: This is 15 Nott Terrace Heights and this is the Schenectady Museum [Schenectady, New York].
Story_ID: 48143
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that are sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably my most favorite food is fried apples.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Locations where family reunions take place and that could be anywhere in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably my favorite phrase is "Go Blue" from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Story_ID: 48144
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well okay I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side separate from your father's side but then we'll put them both together.  So if, can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mildred Juanita, maiden name is Green.  Mildred is M-I-L-D-E-R-D, Juanita, I'm not able to spell Juanita.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it spelled the regular way--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --J-U-A-N--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I-T-A?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Green, it's G-R-E-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is December 4th, 1923, Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: In--?
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh Richmond, okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: My, first of all, my mother's mother or my grandmother died in childbirth.  And her father--and her name was Ollie Jackson and her father's name is William Green and I know very, very--I can say I don't know anything about him.  My mother was raised by one of her aunts, her mother's sister, Hattie Jackson there in Richmond and also Mary Miller was also her aunt, played a role in raising my mother.  But she was on Long Island [New York].  And on my you know grandmother's side as I indicated you know they were Jacksons and I do know that their father's name was Marshall Jackson and actually that's where I got my name from.  I don't know anything about my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather's name was Marshall Jackson.
Speaker 2: Great grandfather, yes.
Speaker 1: Great grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, great grandfather, right.  That would have been my grandmother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was, it's your grandfather that you don't know that much--William Green?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about him.  He apparently had very little to do in raising my, you know my mother.  She was essentially raised by her mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother's people do for a living?
Speaker 2: They--her aunt actually owned a, you know a small restaurant in Richmond.  There were other aunts and uncles who actually did farming outside of Richmond up in an area called Beaver Dam.  It's sort of north of Richmond.  And you know my great aunt, my grandmother's sister who was on Long Island actually, you know actually worked on a--bought a duck ranch.  She worked at a, in the processing plant of a duck ranch and so they were farmers and so restaurant owner and like I said my great aunt you know worked on a duck ranch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is your great, your grandmother's sister--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --yeah okay, great aunt.
Speaker 2: That was my grandmother's sister.
Speaker 1: What was her name, the great aunt?
Speaker 2: Mary Miller, her married name and so she was Mary Jackson before she got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did she--so she worked on the duck ranch but she didn't own it?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And all right, now this is the aunt that was married to your uncle that was so--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --pivotal in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She's actually the one that raised me.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes.  So well you know just tell us as much about her too as you do your mother cause it's, you know she, since she raised you and her husband was very, was really instrumental in your growth and development.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So what was his name?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Miller.  Do you know where he was from?
Speaker 1: He was from Virginia.  He grew up not in the city of Richmond but you know I think it was northern part of, north of Richmond, maybe near Ashland [Virginia], someplace between Ashland and yeah between Ashland and Richmond.  And they were both, they grew up mostly during you know farm labor for the most part.  But when he was a young man he was involved with you know the lumber business you know as far as you know cutting down trees and so forth.  In fact I think you know I was told he was a short order cook actually you know for a team of folks that would be you know going out and cutting trees in a forest.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And now they met in Virginia and married there?
Speaker 1: Yes, and I don't know exactly when that was.  But they moved to Long Island you know shortly after they were married.
Story_ID: 48145
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story about how they [Jones' maternal great-aunt, Mary Jackson, and her husband, Lawrence Miller] got involved in the duck business?
Speaker 2: When they moved to Long Island [New York], he [Lawrence Miller] had a younger brother that was actually on Long Island before he was and he worked at this duck ranch.  And so he was able to work out a means for my uncle to get a job there.  And so his whole life that's where he worked on the duck ranch.  And like any livestock type of ranch you know, there's a lot of things that has to take place.  You know the livestock has to be fed and they you know they have to take care of the equipment and ducks get sick they have to be inoculated, a number of different things.  And he was sort of known as the person that was involved with having the ducks fed and the duck season tended to run like the baseball season.  You'd have ducks on the ranch that would grow to be processed anywhere from maybe March time frame to October.  And then during the winter they didn't know how to keep the ducks alive essentially you know with low temperatures and so forth.  They were able to keep the breeders, you know they would keep you know a thousand breeders on site through the winter so that they would be able to be laying eggs come the spring time.  But at the height of the year there would be some 80,000 ducks on that place and you know and you would have--and it would only take like eight weeks from the time they would hatch till the time they would be processed.  So that was sort of the cycle.
Speaker 1: Gee, 80,000 ducks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they couldn't fly.  The, you know the way they were bred, they couldn't fly.  They were all white in color and they were--you'd have maybe like 5,000 that would hatch which would be moved from one location to another in buildings and so forth.  So--
Speaker 1: Hmm, so yeah that, so how many--now was he the only resident on the ranch?  Did other people live on the ranch that worked there too?
Speaker 2: We were the only family that lived on the ranch.  All the folks that worked on the ranch lived you know with, in their own homes that they had or where they've been at or whatever.  But we, cause like his brother did not live on the ranch, they had their own home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a name for the ranch?  I mean what was the name of it, the--?
Speaker 2: Corin's Duck Ranch.
Speaker 1: Cohen's?
Speaker 2: Cohen, yeah.
Speaker 1: C-O-H-E-N-S?  C-O-H-E-N--?
Speaker 2: C-O, C-O-R-I-N, I think.
Speaker 1: C-O-R-I-N?
Speaker 2: C-O-R-I-N, Cor, Corin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought you meant Cohen like the Jewish name Cohen but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's another, okay that's another and Corin's Duck Ranch, okay.  All right, this is all new info--I never really knew how a duck ranch operated but that's amazing.  So you have a thousand core ducks and then out of that thousand you, by the end of the season it's 80,000 ducks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They would, yeah they would hatch eggs and those eggs would go into an incub--you know into an incubator and after a certain period of time they would hatch.  And when they would hatch you would have you know in the order of four or five thousand ducks in that hatch and then that group would be moved along over eight weeks from one location to another and so you have a number of different hatches coming, each one a little bit younger until the time that they're ready for processing.  And it was a number of duck ranches on Long Island.  Long Island duckling in general was a very you know it was known around the country as a delicacy almost and the--but where we were it was the one location that was able to process ducks you know so there were other use of the name I just wonder if--well I don't know.  So there were other duck ranches that would bring their ducks to our location just to have them processed because they wouldn't have the resources to do it.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea what they were selling the ducks for in those days?
Speaker 2: You know they would go into the supermarket just like you know just like they would do with chickens you know.  So people could go into a supermarket and buy ducks just like you buy--and they would typically be bought as a whole duck, not you know not cut up but as a whole duck.
Speaker 1: I was wondering what the wholesale price of a duck was.
Speaker 2: Oh, what the cost?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know what the cost would have been.
Speaker 1: In those days too.
Speaker 2: I mean, I want--
Speaker 1: It would have been fairly cheaper in those days too from what it is now.
Speaker 2: Whatever the cost of chicken was in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], ducks would be more expensive because they were considered a delicacy.  But I don't know what that cost would have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wonder you said about 80,000 ducks, if you could get two dollars a piece for them or something you, what do you think of something like that or did--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would think somewhere between back in the '50s [1950s], I would think you could get a duck for somewhere around three dollars.
Speaker 1: Three dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I can see that, you know I'm starting to see the numbers you know in a way here.  But, so your Uncle Lawrence learned how to do that you know on a job.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, and became I guess a--well was he the most trusted employee on the duck ranch?
Speaker 2: In many ways he was I mean because see you know the owner thought the absolute world of him I mean to the point--this is a story now.  But when I did go away to college I--you know we had family dogs on the ranch that wouldn't bother the ducks and they knew when other, they knew that when other dogs coming on the ranch you know they would do whatever they could to get rid of them including shooting them.  And so for some reason a fairly new employer on the ranch for some reason shot my dog and nobody would tell me when I was in college because they knew I would probably you know start failing my courses or whatever.  But anyhow the owner fired this person.  So--
Speaker 1: Now your--that's Frisky, right your--?
Speaker 2: No, that was Queenie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a later one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 48146
Speaker 1: Okay, now I was interested in the--now what was, now did your [great] aunt [Mary Jackson; Jones' maternal grandmother's sister] or your uncle [Lawrence Miller; Mary Jackson's husband] have a chance to finish school or anything?
Speaker 2: No, neither one of them went past I would say the second grade or third grade.
Speaker 1: Did they have any kind of special training or--?  No.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I think like when I said that my great uncle was like a short order cook you know I suspect someone might have taught him some things about that.  But you know I think like anybody in those days you know they would be shown how to do something and then they would tend to improve upon it on themselves.  My great uncle was also very good as a carpenter even though you know he probably couldn't make a living like that at least in those days.  But like our kitchen table was you know he actually built that you know so I mean he did have you know sort of craft type skills in that regard but I think they were sort of self-taught.
Speaker 1: Now did you know very much about his family history?  Does he have any stories about growing up or anything that he shared?
Speaker 2: I, you know the most I know about is, you know is the aspect of him working in the you know the lumber business and he was doing that as a very young man.  I don't know very much about you know their life.  I mean like I said his brother came up to Long Island [New York].  I used to hear about a sister that they you know they had.  They had a half-brother that was also on Long Island and I was close to all of them.  In fact you know his brother used to bring us to Sunday school all the time and stuff like that.  So we were very all, you know we were very close from that perspective.  But as far as their you know, as far as they were concerned relative to growing up and so forth, I knew--I didn't know very much about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now let me--now what about your aunt, did she have any special abilities or anything or any training?
Speaker 2: You know she was a good cook but you know I guess everybody says that young women from Virginia could always cook.  But it was interesting because my great uncle being a short order cook, there were certain things that when it came to you know what was going to be fixed for dinner and so forth you know something especially like steak or whatever, he would be the one that would cook that.  But you know my great aunt was a, I mean she could make hot rolls you know from yeast and all that stuff and she was a good baker and you know she ended up actually teaching my mom [Mildred Green] how to do much of that okay, and--but you know she could sew.  I mean she wasn't an avid sew, you know an avid sewer [seamstress].  She's probably sore that I said my mom was a--ended up being a seamstress but you know she didn't have--you know they all, you know they both could read you know quite well so you know whether that was self-taught or whatever.  But you know as a child growing up in the home you know there weren't books there you know population of books around.  You know it was a Bible and maybe a hymnal or whatever but other than that there was no--but they would get the new--you know my uncle would get the newspaper and so forth and so, but other than that there was no you know real special skills.
Story_ID: 48147
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I take it your mother like followed her sister [aunt] up to New York, is that how she ended up in New York?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mom actually went to fifth grade in New York, kind of weird because we ended up with the same fifth grade teacher.  But, so she spent a year up in New York with my great aunt or her [maternal] aunt [Mary Jackson], then she went back to Richmond [Virginia] and she finished high school there.  My mom was extremely bright.  She was, I always tell people if anybody should have went to college it should have been her because she was you know valedictorian of her graduating class in high school and she wanted to go to college but she couldn't go where she wanted to go.  So she decided not to.
Speaker 1: So where did she want to go?
Speaker 2: She wanted to go to Virginia State [University, St. Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Why couldn't she go to Virginia State?
Speaker 2: Money, lack of money.  You know and she, you know she knew my dad from the time that she was probably four or five years old because they went to the same church and in fact, he used to walk her to church to Sunday school.  And so in any case as they got older, you know they got married when she was very young and you know 'cause he was like four years older and he ended up you know going into the [U.S.] Navy and so forth.  And so when they got married, you know she became pregnant with me you know soon after that and he was in the Navy and it was at that time that my mom moved to New York to live with my--her aunt and my great aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well not--so your mother wanted to go to Virginia State.  Did she have a career aspiration that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: I don't think that she had any specific thing that she wanted to study.  You know she had some friends who you know--that went there and so she wanted to follow suit and--but she never really had a, that I was aware of that that was something that she wanted to become.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She probably could have become anything she want because she was so bright.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did she, what kind of things would she do that indicated how bright she was?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: What things that she did that--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah what I mean what did she do that gave the evidence to you I mean that made you aware of how smart she was?
Speaker 2: Well I mean part of it just you know I may not have known you know personally in some regard but you know the fact that she did perform that well in school and she finished school a year early and still ended up being valedictorian of her class.  She went to a Catholic School in Richmond okay so it wasn't just a standard public school.  You know so I was made aware of that.  Things that she put her mind to you know to do even though she was a seamstress you know she had a strong interest in becoming a beautician and she you know and she did it.  And she you know she was good at that too.  I mean she, if she had had the resources she could have had a beautician business you know very, very easily you know.  So it appears as if things that she wanted to do or that she made up her mind about doing and if she wasn't restricted from it due to finances or whatever she could make it happen.  So--and I guess the other thing as a child that went into science and technology, she was the only one in the family that I could at least attempt to explain what I did and to some level she understood and it was some other people in the family you know knew that.  You know that was sort of a connection that we had.  And maybe that might be the thing that gave me additional evidence of how bright she was.
Story_ID: 48148
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Dallas Armstead Jones, and Dallas is D-A-L-L-A-S, Armstead is A-R-M-S-T-E-A-D, Jones, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Kent County or New Kent, Virginia and oh, you asked his date of birth.  Oh boy--
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Mildred Green]?
Speaker 2: Yes, four years, between four and five years older than my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1918 I guess or--?
Speaker 2: 1919.
Speaker 1: 1919?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was born in 1919.
Speaker 2: April 7th I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you--
Speaker 2: Like I remember my grandfather's birthday more so than my dad because my grandfather's birthday was on groundhog's day [February 2nd].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Okay, my father had one brother named Howard Jones and his father or their father was named James Gordon Jones.  And they were in general you know farm, at least my grandfather when he grew up you know grew up on a farm.  They had their own land and home out in New Kent.  My grandfather's father which would be my great grandfather was named Preston Jones and his mother was named Mary Jones.  Not Mary--well she's a Jones after they were married.
Speaker 1: So this would be your great, great grandmother?
Speaker 2: It would be my grandfather's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's who I'm talking about right there?
Speaker 1: Great grandmother.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I was told that she was a slave.  Or not--well okay how should I say this?  She, I guess it's her mother was a slave and she was--so okay, so that would be my great, great grandfather and her father was an Englishman and mom was a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there stories that they, did they tell any stories about slavery or the emancipation of--?
Speaker 2: My dad used to tell me about that lineage going back that far and he actually had a picture of his you know grandmother and I got to see, you know I got to see that picture and so forth.  And he would tell that story and so I could tell on his side of the family I could see that connection going back to slavery.  On my mother's side I never could make that connection other than my great aunt [Mary Jackson] used to tell me that you know there was Native American blood on that side of the family you know on my mom's side.  And you could tell it when you saw you know when you saw my great aunt because you could see features in her face that that was like you know, that had that connection.  My granddad you know moved into the city as a, you know as an adult into Richmond [Virginia] and that's you know that--you know so my father essentially grew up in the city of Richmond and that's how you know he ended up meeting my mom because they ended up going to the same church.  And my, you know my granddad was also like the, he was a deacon in the church that he was, that he attended.  And he was also a chauffer.  You know he drove for a family there in Richmond.
Speaker 1: A white family?
Speaker 2: A white family, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the church?  Do you know if it was Baptist or Methodist?
Speaker 2: It was Baptist for sure.  I want to say it was Ball Baptist Church but--I've been to the church but it's been many years ago so I can't think of the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And it's still you know the church still exists and there is other you know, there are other members of the Jones family that you know still attend that church.  I mean one of the things that occurred on my father's side is that they, you know for a number of years mainly because of him, they used to have family reunions.  And so it's a large you know there's a large continuances of Joneses there in you know in Virginia and I guess even on my, you know even on my mom's side you know there are still, you know there are a lot of relatives on that side of the family too.  But the two families for the most part you know there was really no, there is really no connection other than you know my mom and my dad.  That was the connection and so--
Speaker 1: But they went to church together, they knew each other.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 48149
Speaker 1: So did your dad [Dallas Jones], did he have any stories about growing up that he talked about, about what race relations were there or where--in Richmond [Virginia] or what he wanted to do when he grew up or--?
Speaker 2: As a young person I think that he always--and this tended to happen for him but he was always interested in photography.  And you know he actually became a photographer as--it was a vocation for him.  And you know he, neither my mom [Mildred Green] nor my dad talked very much about you know race relations and so forth.  I think that you know he had a very you know full life as you know as a teenager.  I mean he was into things that he wanted to be in.  I never heard him talk about him wanting to go you know to college.  It seemed like he really wanted to go into the [U.S.] Navy and I don't know why but you know that was a dream of his you know and he did do that.
Speaker 1: Now did he join during World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, he was on a submarine chaser and--
Speaker 1: Well that was probably no choice at some point.  I mean but you did have a choice in terms of the Navy but you were going to be drafted anyway if you were able-bodied.  So--
Speaker 2: Right, well that's the thing and you know I mean at least I was thinking that you know a young, Afro American teenager you know why would they want to go in the Navy?  You know what did they know about the Navy?  They would know about the [U.S.] Army and so forth perhaps but not the Navy.  And even though obviously you know through the you know the Tuskegee group you know there were Afro Americans that did go into the [U.S.] Air Force, you know.  So, but yeah that was his you know that was his choice and I don't know what his specialty was you know in the Navy.  He had to have some kind of skills because you wouldn't be on a submarine chaser unless you had some.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I've heard that in those days they tried to restrict black sailors to the galley to cook.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And you know--
Speaker 2: Especially on the big ships.
Speaker 1: Yeah, even Dorie Miller [Doris "Dorie" Miller] the hero was a cook.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And if it wasn't for the fact that the gunners all got shot he wouldn't have been on a gun.  But he was trained to use a gun but he spent his time cooking.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they all complained about that everyone I've interviewed you know pretty much they--so did your father have to serve in some kind of capacity like that on a submarine?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he have any stories about his service in war (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really and you know that's probably partly because I didn't grow up with him you know.  I--you know he really didn't play that much of a role in my life as I grew up as a teenager.  I really got to know him after I started college and that's when I really got to really, really know him.  And the thing of it was is that my great aunt [Mary Jackson] never used to say anything bad about him you know so anything I used to hear about him was never negative you know.  So as a kid knowing about my father I didn't have any feeling of hatred or anything of that nature.  And you know and I did see him you knew probably I could probably count the number of times on my hand that I seen him over that period of you know--
Story_ID: 48150
Speaker 1: Well what happened with your--your parents [Mildred Green and Dallas Jones] met in church, they knew each other growing up.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they fell in love and--?
Speaker 2: Well the--you know my dad was you know somewhat of a ladies' man and had you know a number of--you know he was the type of young man that you know all the young ladies were sort of--not all but many of them was drawn to and including my mom.  And he sort of you know sort of picked her at this point where you know I don't know if it was down select type of situation before he went into the [U.S.] Navy but knowing each other as being you know when they were very young and so forth.  You know there's always stories about how individuals grow apart and that's essentially what happened you know to them.  And I'm sure it didn't help with him going you know going into the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: Now did they get married before he went into the Navy?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was she pregnant when she, when he went in?
Speaker 2: No, I, from what I can gather that might have happened you know with him you know when he came on leave or whatever.  You know because I was born you know maybe a year after, a year and a half after you know they were married.  She was still, not obviously but she was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they kind of drifted apart.  So when he came back did they ever you know live together as man and wife when he came back or did they--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They were split.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  When he came out of the Navy he you know he moved to New York City and you know and my mom was living you know on the duck ranch you know with my great aunt and uncle [Lawrence Miller].  In fact she actually worked in the processing plant, the duck processing plant with you know with her aunt okay.  And you know so when my dad came out of the [U.S.] Army--I mean I'm sorry out of the Navy, he moved you know into the city.  I think soon after he moved there he, you know he got a job you know with the post office and that was essentially his career, he worked for the post office you know for some thirty years in New York City.
Speaker 1: Now did he ever go to college or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --on the GI bill or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Never--okay.  But being a--was he a letter carrier or--?
Speaker 2: No, he worked as a, I guess you would say like a clerk you know.  No he didn't walk the beat.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a clerk for the post, the U.S. Postal Service.  Now this is, I know in those days and especially it's not a bad job now.  It's considered a decent job, could get--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --benefits and you know security.
Speaker 2: It was good it was definitely a good job for him without a doubt.  He lived in Harlem, Sugar Hill, very, very close to where the polar grounds used to be.
Story_ID: 48151
Speaker 1: You know and he, you know he [Jones' father, Dallas Jones] remarried and you know had a family.  I you know I got a half-brother you know with him, him and his--my stepmother [Lee Jones].  But they had a very you know very good life from that perspective.  And then you know he was always driving down to Richmond [Virginia] to see his dad you know 'cause his--my granddad [James Gordon Jones] lived till he was ninety so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you say but you saw him maybe about five or six times growing up?
Speaker 1: Growing up and then when I went away to college I mean I went upstate New York to community college and you know so I used to stop in the city and visit him.  I could do whatever I wanted to so I was you know and that's how I really got to know him.  And I really think, when I think back I, it was--you know 'cause my uncle, my great uncle [Lawrence Miller] died when I was in, when I was still in high school and I believe my dad came out to that, to his funeral and so I, that's one of the five times I saw him.  So I was, you know I was in my junior year in high school at that time.  And so, but you know it was another time you know and that was probably ten or eleven, twelve years old or something like that and he came out and he, you know he brought his you know his little boy and so I got to meet my half-brother and all that.  So, but I always made it a point to stop to see him when I could in New York when I was going upstate you know to college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So did his wife work too?
Speaker 1: Did his wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah his wife did work.  Yeah, I mean I think she was like a, oh she might have been like a clerk or cashier in a department store or something of that type, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was thinking like Sugar Hill is a pretty nice neighborhood--
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: --in those days.  That's a--
Speaker 1: It was, yeah, yeah, yeah.  It was you know they had a very nice apartment there and they didn't really own a car because you didn't really need a car in New York City cause you could just you know use the subway and so forth.  And, but whenever he wanted to go some place you know he had the connection with friends that always had cars and he could always get a car to drive.  Like when he came out to the island [Long Island] to see us I mean that's like eighty miles out on the island you know out there in the country.  And so that's how you know he would, one of his friends would loan him a car and he'd just drive on out to see you know to make that trip.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 48152
Speaker 1: Now I'm thinking like when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their mannerisms, their habits, their talents, their looks you know how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My dad [Dallas Jones].
Speaker 1: Okay, even after (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I'm a--in fact my great aunt [Mary Jackson] who raised me, even though I didn't know him very much and had very little connections with him, she would tell me from, at different times of things I would do or say you know, you're just like your dad.  And that's probably the other reason I couldn't you know--I could always still like him even though I didn't know him.  But I'm a, you know it's no doubt about anybody you know that would see us together that I was his son big time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was a spitting image of him.
Story_ID: 48153
Speaker 1: Now did he [Jones' father, Dallas Jones] contribute anything to the household that you know of in terms of your upbringing?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I, I shouldn't say that.  I mean I'm sure he might have sent something once in a while maybe but for instance well that may not have happened when I was at the time but I told--you know he was truly heavily into photography even though he was working for the post office [U.S. Postal Service] and so there is a picture of me out of--in fact it's in the book with, for when I was in the, when I was in first grade--
Story_ID: 48154
Speaker 1: That picture we sent to him [Dallas Jones] and he blew that picture up and airbrushed it okay and it's probably one of the most you know beautiful pictures of me as a youngster.  So you know he did do things like you know he did things like that but you know from a monetary standpoint I don't think it was that much.  Because from the time I was you know four or five up until I was a teenager and my mom [Mildred Green] was gone, okay.  My mom continuously sent money back to my aunt [Jones' great-aunt, Mary Jackson] and uncle [great-uncle, Lawrence Miller], okay.  I mean we were, as my brother and I as youngsters, we were always very well dressed and all that stuff and it was--a lot of that was you know my mom was still contributing from that perspective.
Speaker 2: Okay, let me point out too for anybody watching this in those days there was no, or very little court-ordered you know child support.
Speaker 1: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 2: And so a father, he was not the only father that you know may not have made a you know a regular financial contribution because it was pretty much standard you know a lot of times so a woman if she lost her man or some--or they divorced, she was left with the burden--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --of trying to raise a child, so yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah well you know that's why the role that my great aunt and uncle played in my life from that perspective was huge you know and they obviously you know, they essentially raised my mom's kids you know so it was a blessing for her you know 'cause if it was just her and her kids you know it would have been extremely hard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I just wanted to make sure that the burden of that is--was on those days legally was even, was on the woman.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And a lot of, the fellow that--she could take him to court, maybe she could try but there wasn't the same kind of a systematic you know legal requirement--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --as it is today.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: So let me ask you this now, do you have an--now you've got a brother--did your--?
Speaker 1: I got, I have a brother that's a year younger than myself, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and by your same biological father [Dallas Jones]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the two of you and then--okay, I just wanted to--yeah, all right so it's two of you all in, you know in the same household growing up?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Story_ID: 48155
Speaker 1: So, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  Earliest?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?  Well probably you know the earliest, the things cause you don't remember too much before four or five.  But I remember we had, you know we had chickens on the duck ranch and I remember getting spurred by a rooster when I was like, I had to have been somewhere between three and four.  And this rooster was always being teased by my brother and so he was always you know he wasn't a happy camper as the rooster was concerned.  And so I got in his path one day and he, you know he got me.  It wasn't long after that that we had chicken and dumplings (laughter).
Speaker 1: So there was some revenge huh?  I see, I see.
Story_ID: 48156
Speaker 1: But most everything else that I know is you know you think you remember but you don't remember but it's what they tell, you know it's what they tell you and all.  And like I don't remember that I you know that I had braids in my--and I think the picture is in the book where I (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw it in the book.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now you've got a book about your upbringing and there are some pictures of you in there with--as a toddler with braids.  Your mother [Mildred Green] liked to braid your hair, right?
Speaker 1: Right, I was--see I, it says in the book there that you know my mom wanted me to be a girl and I was supposed to be Sarah Antoinette and I ended up having my name being Marshall Jones because they didn't--you know they weren't very creative because you know they hadn't thought about the fact if I was a boy what would I be, you know how I would be named.  And so they just went back into the family and that's--you know the Marshall came from my [maternal] great grandfather and the Gordon came from my [paternal] grandfather and--but she kept me in braids until I was you know two and a half or something like that because--actually had me in dresses and stuff apparently cause she want, you know cause I was her little girl.  And--
Speaker 2: That's not an uncommon story though.  I've heard that story a few times--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --you know in these 1,000 interviews.  I heard that a few times and--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So at least she stopped at a certain point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she did.  I got my first haircut and I still have that hair.  I still, I, you know she didn't just throw the, she didn't just throw those away and so they ended up in something that was given to me.  So, but I think the other thing that you know the stories that they told me was that--in fact I think that's in the book.  But you know I was tongue-tied when I was a baby and couldn't--it was difficult for anybody to understand what I was saying other than the dog I had which was Frisky.  That was Frisky.  And the, and even my little brother knew a little bit, seemed like he knew a little bit what I was saying but nobody else did.  And so then when my tongue was clipped, I had to learn how to talk all over again.
Story_ID: 48157
Speaker 1: Yes, can you explain what being tongue tied really means technically?
Speaker 2: The, being tongue tied for a baby or an adult is that you have a webbing that's at the bottom of your mouth that, that's connected to the bottom of your tongue.  And depending on the individual, that webbing could go all the way out to the tip of your tongue or maybe not as far.  And when-an infant is born, a doctor would technically supposed to run his finger under the tongue because if the webbing does come out to the top he will dislodge that and then there won't be any issues.  If not, you don't have as much control over your tongue if the webbing is there.  Or you don't have as much flexibility so when you learn to speak and so forth the tongue is very important when you're speaking and if it's not able to move sufficiently your speech will be impaired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can the doctor actually solve that problem with his finger or does he have to operate with a certain--?
Speaker 2: Typically if it's done at birth there's no, there's really no operation because it's so thin and if it's done later which was the case with me, I was you know approaching two years old, then they had to essentially use some type of tool to clip it.  And so you would, it's minor from that perspective but still it's a, it would be considered an operation, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember any part of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cause I was like two and so I was just told that I was, I had to learn to talk all over again because I--whatever control I had of my tongue I had totally lost it when the webbing was cut and so I had to--and some folks say that that's the reason that I was, early on I was considered very shy because I was apparently aware of something that was going on there that changed and it affected me from that perspective.  So--
Story_ID: 48158
Speaker 1: Now can you describe the place you grew up and I guess the duck ranch and talk about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Where I grew up on a duck ranch, it's located some eighty miles from New York City out on Long Island [New York].  It's essentially at the fork of the island.  Long Island has a north fork and a south fork and the--you'd have to say it's a rural town because it only has essentially one light.  The school I went to, elementary school at that time actually went from first grade to eighth grade.  We had a butcher shop, we had a post office and we had like a delicatessen that was the extent of that you know what was in the town.  It was very close to the bay so folks with means would have a boat and so they could go out in the bay.  Obviously you know we didn't have those kinds of means so we couldn't you know we couldn't go out and you know to go to do things that people would do in boats.  Being on a duck ranch like almost any other area that has livestock, you will have the odors that you would have associated with any livestock that would be present.  With ducks, you have to--they spend some period of time in buildings.  The buildings have to be cleaned because of the waste.  They're actually bedded with straw and in fact I used to do that as a teenager but then that has to be removed.  And it's you know that in itself has a very strong odor.  Just the straw or bedding that's removed is actually, was actually used by other farmers.  At that time you know in the '50s [1950s] you know there was a lot of farms on the end of the island.  I always told people that New York City was, is essentially was being fed from the west by New Jersey and that's why it's called the garden state and it was being fed from the east from Long Island.  And so there was a lot of what we refer to as truck farms out there and those truck farms were essentially vegetable farms.  And so many of those farms, farmers would want to actually, they would actually buy the bedding or the manure or whatever to use as fertilizer on you know for their crops, okay.  And so in the middle of a rainy summer day out there on the duck ranch it could become, you could have quite a bit of odor there that you might not want to be around.  But it wasn't, I mean if it, if everything was done right you know there was some control you know some reasonable control you know over that.  You know being out in that part of the Island you do have to--Long Island sound to the north I mentioned the bay so some of the other typical smells that you would see would be related to the sea, okay.  So you would have you know the kinds of smells that you would have if you were on a beach and again this was all salt water, the sound is salt water, the bay is salt water.  So that smell is different than if you were on a lake some place that was fresh water.  A little bit further inland was a fresh water lake.  We, you know in those days we referred to it as sweet water and so as a kid I used to--my great uncle [Lawrence Miller] used to take us fishing all the time and you know so I used to fish in the fresh water lake, I used to fish in the bay and so forth.  And so you would you know those kind of sea water related smells it's certainly around like around there on the island.  So even if you're on or off the duck ranch you would have those you know those kind of smells.  When you had a very big thunderstorm that night and so forth in the summer time, you know that sort of sea smell sort of amplified.  And the things that, that's associated with farming in general, I mean some of the truck farms, there were a lot of potato farms out there at that time too.  The folks didn't--that followed baseball, Carl Ruskimski [Carl Michael "Yaz" Yastrzemski, former baseball left fielder and first baseman] grew up maybe fifteen miles from me and his folks were potato, you know potato farmers.  And so you know all these type of farms had to be fertilized, they had to be watered and all those types of things and what's associated with that is typical of any farm that you would see and those kinds of smells is sort of generic to the you know to farming in general.  Not livestock based but just farming in general.  So when I, even today when going out on the island you can still--it's not as prevalent because there's very little duck ranches any--or there's only two left actually, potato farms are almost all gone.  They're growing--they have vineyards now so you can get Long Island wine now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that goes, that you know going back maybe twenty years it didn't exist when I was growing up.  They actually grow sod now which they truck all over the country so it's sort of you know it's sort of changed in that respective.  So--but I guess this is sort of the generic farm odor/sea odor that's out there.  That you, you know when you go home you knew you were home.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the bay and what was the name of the town that you, was nearest you?
Speaker 2: The bay is called Peconic Bay.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that, P--P--Peconic?
Speaker 2: P-E-C-O-N-I-C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the sound is called Long Island Sound.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: The sound is called Long Island Sound.
Speaker 1: Oh Long Island Sound.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what about the town?
Speaker 2: The town, the actual town I grew up is called Aquebogue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--and it's an Indian name and Aquebogue is in the, is in Suffolk County and the county seat of Suffolk County is Riverhead.  And Riverhead is where I went to high school and Riverhead also had an Indian name and it was changed to an English name meaning head of a river.  I mean the Indian name was, and I don't know what the Indian name was but it meant the head of the river because there's a river that dumped into the bay and Riverhead is basically at the base of that river.
Story_ID: 48159
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well tell us about grade school.  Where did you start grade school, elementary school?
Speaker 2: I actually start, I started elementary school when I was five years old and I went essentially three weeks and I was not a happy camper.  In fact I was afraid to ask the teacher could I go to the bathroom and so it just wasn't my time to go and the teacher said that I should go back home and that was the best thing that she could have said because then I could go back to the duck ranch and just play and play with my dogs and just have fun.  But I wasn't really ready at five to go to the first grade.  I was shy and upset and so forth.  So--
Speaker 1: Now you said that before so you were a very shy kid I guess then?
Speaker 2: I, yeah I was and I mean I attributed that to what happened which I was, I didn't remember but I attributed it to you know whatever I went through when I had that tongue tied procedure and so forth.  And so one year later I went you know went back to the, the Aquebogue Elementary School and you know things weren't so bad.  I was, seemed like I was ready you know and I was a young five at that time because I was you know had just turned five August 1st and I was you know starting the school in, you know that September.  So a year later I started the first you know the first grade and you know I seemed to you know enjoy school.  There were certain things that I really liked to do.  I mean I, I mean as far as the things that we were being taught I did like to you know wrote--writing, I was you know I was fairly good at that.  And you know that's where I found out that I was above average in math.  I sort of enjoyed art a little bit and you know my teacher Ms. Atkins you know she was--I still remember her you know so she was a good teacher.  And I don't know if you want me to continue on as I went through elementary school--?
Speaker 1: Ms. Atkins now she was at Aquebogue [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now what was the racial population of your school?
Speaker 2: I would say maybe fifteen percent Afro-American.  It wasn't, I don't think it was twenty percent but if I, you know if you saw a class picture you know with thirty kids in the class, you know there might have been you know six to eight, you know five to seven Afro-American kids.  And that would be somewhat typical of the school.
Story_ID: 48160
Speaker 1: Now you were interested in math primarily you said, right, you were good at math.
Speaker 2: Well I was finding out that you know that it came kind of you know easy to me.  And it was also in that same time frame, this is probably in the book too but you know my great uncle [Lawrence Miller] used to play this game with me when we were in the--when we'd go grocery shopping.  And the game was that, we would add up the, you know the costs of items that we were putting in the grocery basket or cart.  And he was very good at that.  I might have been, I wasn't in second grade, it might have been like third grade by then.  But--and I found that I was very good at that so when they would ring up the final total at the cash register, a lot of times I would have figured out exactly how much--I would have got the same number that they got in my head.  And so--
Speaker 1: Would you round them off or go to the penny?
Speaker 2: I guess close to the penny.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would actually do a lot of calculations in your head?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was doing a lot of calculating in my head, yeah.  And my, you know my great uncle could do that you know too.  I mean you know we would be like competing and so he never knew this but you know in some way he was inspiring me at that time without knowing.  I didn't know it either at the time but you know what he was doing helped me to know that I had a certain skill or talent and along with the fact of being able to hone it some and it's all because of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you spent a lot of time with your uncle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot.  Yeah, I was very close to him because I--like in the summer you know we used to go and you know I mentioned the fishing and so forth and so I, you know that was with him okay.  And you know so we had a, a wood/coal furnace you know so he you know he taught me to cut wood.  I knew, you know so as he was out there cutting wood, I was out there cutting wood with him you know.  So you know I'm typically left handed.  I play, you know I played baseball right handed with a hammer, I always used my left hand but you know I spent a lot of time you know cutting wood.  I mean one of my chores was when I would come home from elementary school would be you know we had a hot water heater where you could have hot water if you would burn you know something you know in the hot water furnace and we used to do that with wood.  So I used to chop wood and so forth and bring it there in the house you know down in the cellar and build the fire and everything.  I mean he taught me all that stuff so--
Speaker 1: Now was your little brother as close to your great uncle?  Did he spend as--?
Speaker 2: He was probably closer to my [great] aunt [Mary Jackson] you know from the perspective that you know he preferred to do things that were in the house.  I was the one that always wanted to be outside.  And I mean he probably cut some wood but nowhere near as much as I did, okay.  And you could see a little bit about you know how that you know going forward how that influenced him because he you know he actually went into things related to foods.  I mean the two year school he went to was hotel management food administration you know as a high school student.  You know as a summer job you know he worked at Howard Johnson [hotel] you know as a, you know working in the kitchen portion of it.  So as a summer job I worked on the duck ranch.  You know that was me being outside doing stuff.  So from that way he would have been influenced you know I would say more from my aunt you know whereas my uncle probably had a bigger influence on me.
Story_ID: 48161
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you in grade school you had to repeat the fourth grade because of lack of progress in the language arts, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  In New York state when you're in fourth grade in New York state you end up having to take social studies.  And social studies you had to be able to read questions and you know write out answers and so forth.  And my problem was I could read but I couldn't read very fast.  If I had all day I could probably pass the test in flying colors so with a time test, I wouldn't--I wasn't able to do that and so my fourth grade teacher--so what happened, I essentially was failing social studies, okay.  And even though I was doing, this--I'm in the fourth grade now and I was doing like seventh grade math okay and so my fourth grade teacher, Ms. Defries (ph.) decided that I should repeat the fourth grade.  And there were some kids in my class that was older you know for whatever reason and they were being passed on you know to the next grade.  But my great aunt [Mary Jackson] said well if the teacher says you should repeat the fourth grade she must know what she's talking about and so that's what occurred.  And I was, here I'm in the fourth grade okay and I was extremely popular because I was--you know even though I was sort of semi moving out of the shy stage a little bit, not much but I was you know I was probably one of the best athletes in my class.  And so, at that grade level if you're good everybody likes you okay just because of that.  And so they didn't understand you know how come I had to repeat the fourth grade and they almost had a riot so to speak because they saw that there was a couple of kids in the class that was you know being moved on to the fifth grade.  But that was a, as far as things that happened to me that was probably the most important decision that any teacher had ever made at that stage in my educational career.
Speaker 1: So it also meant that you had to be in the fourth grade with your little brother right?
Speaker 2: Very good (laughter).  And I didn't want that either.
Speaker 1: And that was probably the worst part.
Speaker 2: That's right he caught me.  He caught me, that's right.  And so it end up him being in the same grade with me, that wasn't cool.
Speaker 1: Now how was it?  I mean were you able to out do him in math and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, I was much better math student than he was and I was a better athlete than he was too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it ended up not as bad as--?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean you know from that perspective, no.  Yeah, the--you know and I, you know after you know a few months or whatever a few weeks back in the same grade it didn't--you know all that goes away.  You don't, it's--you see that as not as bad as you, you know think it is and--
Speaker 1: All right.  So when you look back on it now you say it was better for you right?  You actually caught up.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah it was no--without a doubt I mean--well it's in the book.  Well there was a, I guess in the book there's--
Speaker 1: But we can't like, I don't want to just depend on the book but you know cause we're doing an interview live.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But the, but yeah you caught up though, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean with you know the grades that I had and you know the grades that I had my first year in fourth grade they all improved you know so I mean you know when I took social studies again I had you know Bs instead of Fs and Ds, you know in that subject.  And you know the other reading related type of classes I was taking all improved.  You know and I contributed that to the fact that when I look back at it that all students learn at a different rate, okay.  And things were just going a little bit too fast for me when the first time I was in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now did you all have middle school in there?
Speaker 2: No, no.  So I was--the school went from first grade to eighth grade okay, so which would you know which would have included you know whatever the middle school and that was because of the size of the town.  I mean you know the town was too small to have an elementary school as well as a middle school.  So it didn't have a kindergarten in those days and so when I finished eighth grade there I went from there to high school.
Story_ID: 48162
Speaker 1: Now what--one thing that we didn't mention I don't think here I mean it's in the book but your mother [Mildred Green] really moved away from the duck ranch and she was living in for most of your grade school days she was actually living in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She lived in the city for a number of years.
Speaker 1: The city, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah and in fact initially she actually commuted from out where we were all the way into New York City.  And I do remember, that was probably before I started elementary school, I couldn't understand why she would you know she had to go into the, you know go into the city.  And in fact there was a period apparently where she would go and stay in the city for some period of time and then she come out.  And I didn't understand why she had to do that and I wasn't very happy when she you know.  And then later on she actually spent, you know--I, obviously we got older and she was spending predominant amount of her time you know in the city and then she met up with my step-dad [Harold Bartlett] and they you know they got married and they then moved to you know up to Springfield, Mass [Massachusetts].  And so you know that was sort of in the time of when I was from you know from ten, from ten years old on and so she was even further away then, we would never--you know would be coming home even less frequently.
Story_ID: 48163
Speaker 1: When you were thirteen, what did you want to be when you grew up?  Did you have an aspiration?
Speaker 2: When I was thirteen?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When I was thirteen, I actually wanted to be a pilot and where I grew up I was probably ten miles from an [U.S.] Air Force base.  Maybe I shouldn't say Air Force base.  It's actually Grumman Aircraft location where they do, where they did their test flights for their new engines and so forth.  And you know and that was only, like I said it was a place called Calverton [hamlet in Suffolk County, New York] which was only maybe you know ten miles west from where I lived.  And so I was totally fascinated by you know by planes in general and I spent much of my time you know as a late pre-teen or into thirteen, fourteen years old just drawing pictures of planes.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you have the model plane kits?
Speaker 2: I did not.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the kinds of planes--didn't they make the X-15 or something or the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was later on but it would be the planes that they would you know that they would perhaps in the Korean War, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 1954 I guess when you're thirteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you know you're talking about it hadn't been long since they had broken the sound barrier and so I mean to me that was the coolest thing this, cause we could hear this you know when these jets would go and you could hear them breaking the sound barrier.  And I used to you know, know a little bit about that you know maybe from reading or whatever and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it makes a boom, a sonic boom, right, sonic boom.
Speaker 2: A big boom yeah, exactly.  And there was a, you know there was a TV show at that time that was war related and there was always planes flying and so forth.  So in any case you know I thought that you know that's what I wanted to do cause I thought that was very--I mean I don't know why.  I was never had, I never had the opportunity to be up close and personal to a plane you know to go up and touch one or whatever and so when I went to high school--
Speaker 1: Well I (unclear) okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you started high school in '55 [1955] in Riverhead [town in Suffolk County, New York], right?
Speaker 2: '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: '56 [1956], now this is Riverhead High School?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the county seat [Suffolk County]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm just going to, I just want to jump there just a little bit because you know that's when I found out that I was nearsighted just from where I was sitting in the class and it never--whatever happened when I was in Aquebogue [Elementary School, Aquebogue, New York] it never showed up.  And so when that happened then I knew that because you know you couldn't become a pilot in those days with corrective vision.  And so that sort of aspiration went out the window when I found out that I had you know eyesight issues.  So that's the only reason I wanted to jump to the high school just briefly.  But, and you know so that was a, you know that definitely was an aspiration for me you know.  Not even, not having a clue what it took to become a pilot or whatever but it was something that I always wanted to you know to become.
Story_ID: 48164
Speaker 1: When were you first consciously exposed to science in the classroom?
Speaker 2: There was a limited amount of science that was that I saw when I was in Aquebogue [Elementary School, Aquebogue, New York] but it wasn't really that much when I think back.  But on the other hand I was exposed to math in high school--in elementary school.  I mean in other words I was exposed to algebra when I was in seventh grade which hadn't been done at that school before.  But there was a new teacher, his name was Mr. Ross and so when I went into seventh grade he was my seventh grade teacher and he introduced algebra to us and it was, I just thought it was fascinating.  And so when we went to eighth grade he ended up being our eighth grade teacher also.  Mainly what happened was the principal of the Aquebogue Elementary School had passed away and Mr. Ross became the principal and in becoming the principal he also became the eighth grade teacher.  And so he continued to teach us more algebra in the eighth grade and if I look back, if Mr. Ross had never come to Aquebogue School I would have never been introduced to algebra at that early age in my education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So having algebra in grade school kind of gave you a jump on high school I guess, right?
Speaker 2: It was very helpful.  You know I ended up taking algebra in high school as a, you know in my freshman year and I ended up getting a 100 on the regent's exam and I would have to tribute that, attribute that to Mr. Ross.
Story_ID: 48165
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Riverhead High School [Riverhead, New York], what was the ratio of black students at Riverhead?
Speaker 2: It was close to Aquebogue [Elementary School, Aquebogue New York].  It might have been a few, you know it might have been a little higher.  I mean--
Speaker 1: About the same then?
Speaker 2: About the same as it was in Aquebogue, you know--
Speaker 1: About 15 percent.
Speaker 2: --it's 10 or 15 percent.  More than 10 percent for sure but--
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic composition of the students?  Were they mostly Irish or Hungarian or what or Catholic or--?
Speaker 2: I would say it was a large number of Catholic students even though during that time there was even a Catholic High School in River-, in Riverhead.  There were students that were you know that actually were Catholics but it was a lot of Polish students there.  In fact, in Riverhead itself there's a portion of Riverhead that's called Polish Town right up there next to where the high school was.  And in fact the high school was, the address to the high school was Pulaski Street, so that was vintage Polish.
Story_ID: 48166
Speaker 1: So you're still thinking about becoming a pilot as you enter high school [Riverhead High School, Riverhead, New York].  Now you were also involved in athletics too, you were involved with football, basketball, baseball, wrestling, I don't know a lot of different sports.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well that was another thing that Mr. Ross brought to the elementary school [Aquebogue Elementary School, Aquebogue, New York].  He--okay, everybody played baseball okay.  So and I never had the opportunity to play organized little league even though some of the kids I grew up with did do so, mainly because you had to be able to get to Riverhead because that's where the little league was and so you had to have you know transportation to get there and all.  And so--but my aunt didn't drive.  My great aunt [Mary Jackson] didn't drive so you know if my [great] uncle [Lawrence Miller] didn't take me you know nobody was going to take me, okay.  So I couldn't get there especially in the summer time.  But the other thing that occurred was at least during school year the different elementary schools out where I was used to play each other, okay.  So, and Mr. Ross was very much involved in that.  So we would play the next town down, Alcona, North Folk, South Hole, we'd go out to Mattituck [New York].  We'd go out to, there's an island in between the forks that's called Shelter Island [New York] so we actually, we'd go over there to Shelter Island playing.  That, and that was just you know it was just awesome actually you know to be able to do that in, you know in elementary school cause my whole life centered around the duck ranch and church, that was it.  So I got to see a few things by going around to these other little towns and so forth playing you know playing baseball.  But also he, you know he introduced some basketball to us because everything that we did was pick up basketball.  But he brought in organized basketball.  But also he taught us about wrestling which I knew nothing about okay or what I saw on TV which wasn't really wrestling.  And when I was in elementary school when I was in eighth grade he actually took the kids that were interested in wrestling up to the high school you know to see the high school wrestling team practice and that was such a huge deal you know, first of all just to go to the high school was a huge deal but then to go to there to see these guys doing their stuff that you just didn't believe that they did.  So he introduced me to wrestling, okay and he was the one that even talked to the coach, baseball coach said that you know you should watch this kid.  He should be playing you know baseball cause you know he thought I was you know pretty good.  The thing about at Riverhead, all the sports had JV [Junior Varsity] sports.  Other than baseball they didn't have a JV, you know junior/varsity baseball team and so when I went to high school the first year I did play football which again I didn't know anything about but I, you know everybody played football so you know I did play football.  And in our freshman year, freshman year I played basketball and then in the spring I did play baseball.  When I played basketball I had just been introduced to organized basketball and so the kids that I was playing with, the kids that grew up in Riverhead they did have a junior high.  They had a junior high basketball team so there I was competing with those kids that had been playing organized ball in their junior high okay.  And then, and I saw myself as a person that was going to be the sixth man on this team, probably never start because you know you had this group of five that had been playing together since they were in junior high.  Athletically I was probably as good as most of them but I just didn't have the know-how.  And so, and that's when I decided after going into my sophomore year I'm going to go in you know go out for wrestling instead of basketball because I said I might be the sixth man all the way up through my senior year.  And--
Story_ID: 48167
Speaker 1: And so as far as baseball was concerned it was two people ahead of me.  I played first base and you know there was a, at least as a freshman I had a, you know I had a junior and a senior ahead of me and I said I'm going to be a junior before I probably will be starting because they didn't have the JV you know so I wasn't playing at all hardly, okay.  And so that spring after baseball season, they had this [U.S.] Marine test at the school where we had to do you know push ups and pull ups and one of the things that we had to do, we had to run a half mile, okay.  And I was the second fastest in the half mile when I did this and I ended up pushing this kid that had ran track this freshman year, was the top half miler on the JV team, and I pushed him such that he, made him run his PR [public relations] at that point and so when the coach saw me he says, "Marshall you need to come up for track," and so that's what I did, I switched to track in my sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Now do you think that working on the duck farm kept you in shape?
Speaker 1: I don't--
Speaker 2: Or did you do a lot (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I think it helped.  I don't you know, I think everybody in those days the kids, the majority of the kids played different things.
Speaker 2: All the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean you--it was all pick up you know like as far as baseball was concerned you know we would always--you know many of us would go up to Aquebogue's playground and we would just pick sides you know in, like in the summer and we'd just play baseball you know until it got dark you know.  So you know we did things like that and I think when you do that you know you tend to be you know you tend to be in some reasonable good condition because you're out there doing something all the time.  But when you get into organized sports you have to work, I mean you have--no matter I mean because there used to be a couple of guys on the, on some of the sports teams I played on were, that might have been more gifted than I was, but I could do as much as they did because I worked so hard at it.  And, but any how that's how I, you know that's how I switched to those you know to the--ended up switching to you know both track and to wrestling you know and I ended up being the co-captain of the track team and the, anyway and the wrestling team.
Speaker 2: Now, but something happened to you, you hurt your knee at some point, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah, it was like a double injury because that fall I had, I had got clipped in football--
Speaker 2: Now what does that mean?  Explain what that means to people who don't know.
Speaker 1: When somebody blocks you, they have to block you from, you know from the front and maybe partially to the side of your body but they can't you know from the back.  And typically you can't see the person if he blocks you from the back.  And this is what occurred to me.  I was, I had my weight on one leg and I got blocked from the back and it partially injured my knee.  But I was able to you know play but it weakened it and I didn't really know it until I started wrestling season and I got that same leg or foot actually caught in a mat and I really you know really injured it such that I lost my whole junior year or well, you know maybe all--50 percent of my junior year was lost you know because of that injury.  And it was at that time that I was actually you know thinking about what I was going to do as far as you know college was concerned.  My whole plan was in those--at that stage in high school was you know I was going--I mean I worked so hard in sports that that's what I was looking to is to get a sports scholarship.  And I was really looking to do that in wrestling.  And when I had that injury it really curtailed what I was going to and my chances of that occurring.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now I just realized, I was thinking here that you were in high school maybe about the same time as, or near the same time as the Greater Ernie Davis [Ernest "Ernie" Davis, first African American Heisman Trophy recipient in 1961] of Elmira [New York].  Did you remember ever seeing him play in high school?
Speaker 1: He's up in Syracuse right or--?
Speaker 2: Elmira, yeah.
Speaker 1: Elmira, okay.  But he played for Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, some college ball but I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I, I--
Speaker 2: I think he would have been in high school at the same as you were in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't know--when it came to football you know there wasn't state wise you know you didn't see teams playing each other relative to different conferences and so forth. And wrestling you did I mean you had folks that you know went to state competition and it also occurred in track.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in football you know you sort of played within your conference but you know you didn't have these inter-conference type competitions.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not like in basketball or some of the--?
Speaker 1: No, not--right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause in football the expense is so great I guess to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause even today I don't--you don't tend to--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you don't tend to see it I mean based on your record you know you will get a rating and so forth but--
Speaker 2: Occasionally you'll see them visit.  You know you'll have a school like go to another city and play--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --one game, one or two games so I just wondered (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --you'd ever heard of him at that point.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Story_ID: 48168
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you began to focus on, you found out what an engineer was and started to focus on engineering at a certain point when you found out that you couldn't--you needed glasses right?
Speaker 2: Well okay, I mean what occurred I mean I had this plan if you will, you know to--okay, number one the only way I thought I was going to get to college was through you know through academic, I mean through a sports scholarship you know cause see my aunt and uncle [Jones' maternal great-aunt, May Jackson, and great-uncle, Lawrence Miller] didn't have you know the wherewithal in order to pay for me to go to college, okay.  And when I was in high school [Riverhead High School, Riverhead, New York] you know I continued to do well in math and I took all the math that they had at the high school and I did well in everything that they had.  That's when I did get introduced to the science that you asked before.  I didn't take biology but I took chemistry and I guess it was health at that time and I took physics.  And I did well in all those courses and I liked all those courses.  And I was also taking mechanical drawing and I was very good at that.  I took architectural drawing.  I was very good at that.  I took the shop courses, I was good at that.  I still wasn't, I was just about average, a little bit below average in the English courses.  I had to take you know the history courses and so forth.  I did not end up with a regent's diploma from you know from Riverhead High so I had a high school--
Speaker 1: Now what is that a regent's diploma?
Speaker 2: In New York State, you're tested in certain courses that, you're tested at a certain level such that if you pass these selective courses that you will get a regent's diploma which is considered a higher diploma that it would be the high school diploma.  And so if a college was looking at you, you know high-level college was looking at you, and if you were coming out of New York State, you know the first thing they're going to want to know cause they're aware of that.  They're going to want to know if you had had a, if you received a regent's diploma.
Speaker 1: So that's like an accelerated diploma?
Speaker 2: It's sort of accelerated but it is and it isn't.  You may say that it was at that time I mean it's a, you know today in New York State, you know they're looking for everybody to have a regent's diploma.  Obviously not everybody gets it but I, you know I passed all the regent's exam--and I mean I passed all the regent's exam except for English, okay, all my math, all my science, everything.  And so the English was one of the ones that you really have to pass if you were going to get that regent's diploma.  But I didn't--but I well like I said in all the other you know math and science areas in fact my algebra teacher, only reason--that's how I never knew the word physics you know and then he was the same person who taught physics.  So when you become a senior you got to make sure you take physics and so indeed I did.  And I had a, my geometry and trig [trigonometry] teacher, he was actually a Greek, you know he was from Athens [Greece] and they were all great teachers.  I mean the one thing I can say about Riverhead High School is that all the teachers were very, very good.  And in those days I would say you know like I had a, my graduating class was 150 and I would say that fifty of the kids in that class out of the 150 had a ninety or above average and they went on to different colleges and so forth.  And I, my road was non-traditional from that perspective but you know, but I had to change my plan in mid-stream after the injury, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So one of your instructors told you about engineering right?  Didn't you find out about engineering at some point?
Speaker 2: Once I knew I wasn't going to get the sports scholarship there was a counselor at the school that I went to, to find out what I could do with, relative to what I, you know with what I had taken, okay.  And what I was good at which he knew you know which I was good at.  And he was the one that you know told me that I should you know look at going to a two-year school where they would have an instrument technology program.  And he was the one that you know based on the things that I was good at, that you know to take the program that's dealing with mechanical engineering technology you know that I might like that, okay.  And I didn't know if I would or not but he, based on you know what I had taken and how I had performed in certain areas that's what he thought would be good.  And so it was then that I started looking at you know schools in New York, two-year schools because they would be affordable and I chose to go to Mohawk Valley Community College [two-year college of the State University of New York].  I knew I didn't want to stay home even though they had a school out on the island [Long Island, New York], Suffolk County Community College [Selden, New York] and a couple of others.  I knew enough that I knew I needed to be focused on being in an environment where I would be able to be really concentrating on my studies.  And--cause when I was in high school you know being so sports focused, I mean I was this kid that used to go to bed at eight o'clock at night.  My brother a year younger than me was the one that was staying up and having a good time and all this, but I was all into making sure I was the fittest I could possibly be.  I knew enough that I, you know to accomplish something in athletics that you have to be focused.  I mean I was one who got you know the homework that was done, was done before I you know I utilized my study halls and my lunch time.  I--they were not wasted, that's when I used to do all my work cause I didn't do very much homework when I went home because I was this kid that went to bed at like eight o'clock because I focused on sports from that perspective.  But anyhow it was the guidance counselor who said that you know he thought that would be a good option.  He was right.
Story_ID: 48169
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're talking about Mohawk Valley Community College.  Now where is that in relationship to Aquebogue [Suffolk County, New York]?
Speaker 2: Mohawk Valley Community College is in Utica, New York so it's some 300 miles from where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, but wait a minute.  There's one thing we have to talk about before we get you to Mohawk, your senior year, your great uncle [Lawrence Miller] passed away, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.  In my junior year my great uncle passed unexpectedly.  He had a heart attack and at the time how everything had come around was that my brother and I was actually living with my mother [Mildred Green] and my step-dad [Harold Bartlett].  And we were living in a trailer on property that was owned by my great uncle's brother, okay.  And- This is near Aquebogue--
Speaker 1: This is still in Aquebogue but not on the, you know it wasn't on the duck ranch, okay.  And you know this is something that you know my mother wanted you know we thought it would be something nice to do.  But in some ways I, you know I wasn't totally happy because as you mentioned before I was really pretty close to my uncle.  And even the, you know even the night that he passed, him and my [great] aunt [Mary Jackson] stopped by and visited us for a short period of time at the trailer.  And you know then they went on home, you know this was in the winter time.  And you know, then you know we got a call that he had you know that he had passed and I was, when I look back at that not too long afterwards, I often thought that things were sort of planned in a way cause I, I mean I don't think you know people didn't really know how close we were you know, my uncle and I.  And you know but I did know that he was you know relatively older.  It's not considered old today but then you know he was--he was only fifty-nine but he was, you know he was up there.  And I always, you know I never shared that very much but I always had a fear that he was going to you know something was going to happen to him you know because actually he was an older person and then, you know.  And I think the fact that we were you know, we had been living in a trailer you know since school started you know in September and it was almost as if I was to be living away from him, not being in the same house with him when this happened that, and that was going to like make it maybe a little bit easier for me and I would look back at that, was that was maybe the reason you know that that happened, that we ended up you know moving with my mom and everything.  And then when after that happened you know we were always you know talking about what should happen next.  And what really happened was everybody went back and lived in the house on the duck ranch.  My mom, my step-dad and my brother and I all went back and stayed with my aunt.  The house that we had on the duck ranch was a pretty, you know it was a two story, pretty big house for those days and so they could really be there.  In fact that's where they were staying before they moved into the trailer, my mom and my--
Speaker 2: Now did your step-dad take over the duties that your uncle, that your great uncle--?
Speaker 1: No, I mean you know he had his own--I mean when you say duties you mean--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the duck ranch?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no, no.  He didn't--he had his own job you know.  I think he might have been working at a potato chip factory or something at that time but you know he had no connection with what, you know what hap--you know the workings of the duck ranch.  He never, you know he had no connection with that at all, you know.  And so they you know, I mentioned Springfield [Massachusetts] before.  They had lived in Springfield you know from the time I was ten to fifteen or so and then they moved from Springfield back to Long Island [New York].  And when they moved back to Long Island they basically moved in with us okay.  And so at one point all in that house was my mom, my step-dad, my brother and myself and my great aunt and uncle were all in the same house and then we were like that for maybe you know two years or less and that's when they moved into the trailer you know with us and then my uncle passed and then we you know moved back.
Story_ID: 48170
Speaker 1: So I read in the book that you kind of felt kind of alone you know when your step, when your great uncle [Lawrence Miller] passed.  But you said that in terms of your career aspirations your mother [Mildred Green] was really the only one that really under--had any understanding of you becoming an engineer.
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean she was the only one that I could talk to in that regard.  I mean when I, once I started college and one of the things being in mechanical engineering is that you know you do designs, you write, you draw things out on design paper and so forth and so on.  And I actually got my first internship because of how good I was at that.  But I could bring that drawing, I would bring a drawing home and just begin to you know show my mom to sort of point out you know what I was doing even though she didn't totally understand it.  Maybe part of the connection also when you think about it was that she was a seamstress and a seamstress works with drawings I mean cause they have to cut out patterns and stuff like that.  So it was sort of that you know minor connection.  Even when I was in high school [Riverhead High School] I remember you know taking the state [New York State] exam you know using, doing ink drawings you know and I had to, and I did that on the, you know the living room table or whatever you know and had my little T-square and I was, you know and they, you know they saw that, I don't think they totally understood what I was doing but I was you know--so they were getting a little bit exposed to what I was trying to do but I could actually try to explain it to my mother.  If nothing else you know maybe cause I'm her son, she would you know she would at least appear to be able to listen to what I was saying.  So-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 48171
Speaker 1: Now Mohawk Valley Community College [Utica, New York], you experienced sort of overt racism for one of the first times I believe from what I understand in the book.
Speaker 2: When I went to Mohawk [Valley Community College], they did not have dorms at that school and so you had to stay with a family and so you know my mother [Mildred Green] and my step-dad [Harold Bartlett] took me up to Utica and you had a, you would have had arranged for where you were going to stay prior to that.  And so when we arrived and went to the home that I was to be staying and when I--when we got there and knocked on the door and the lady saw that I was Afro American, she basically said I couldn't stay there.  And so we went to, went straight up to the school to let them know what had occurred and there was an Afro American lady that was a dietician from--at a hospital there in Utica that had students and others staying at her home.  And so they called her, the school did to see if she had room for another student and she did and that's where I ended up staying.  And you know you were asking me what was the ratio of Afro American students to others when I went to high school, at Mohawk Valley when I first went there, there was only three of us.
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: And then I was the only one that was in a technology program.
Speaker 1: About how many you think were in the school total?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: I mean all together, all students.  I'm talking about what were the--?
Speaker 2: In the whole school.
Speaker 1: No, I mean the total population of the school?
Speaker 2: Oh, what was the total population--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: --of the school?  Oh, goodness.
Speaker 1: They have a couple thousand?
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah at least a couple of thousand, 1,500 or 2--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, three, okay.  So this is 1950--
Speaker 2: 1960.
Speaker 1: 1960, right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 48172
Speaker 1: Can I digress just a bit back to high school [Riverhead High School, Riverhead, New York]?   The first exposure to prejudice that I came across was when I graduated from high school and we were going around, being invited to different you know sort of celebrations from high school.  And so a fellow that I wrestled with and played football with invited us to a celebration that took place at a town just east of Riverhead--of Aquebogue in Mattituck [towns in New York].  And so we went there and my brother, both my brother and I went and this was like in an establishment or something that we went to.  It wasn't somebody's home we went to and they weren't very happy that we were there and you know essentially you know wanted us to leave.  And this fellow that I played football and basketball, not basketball but I played football and wrestled with you know he was Caucasian and he you know he got all upset and basically told this you know these people the, gave them a piece of his mind and so forth and then you know, it was sort of apologetic from the fact that how they were treating us and so forth.  But that, you know that was the real first exposure I had because we were very sheltered out there on the island [Long Island] you know just how things were cause it didn't, nothing like that occurred in the school itself mainly.  And again it might be because of sports but it didn't, you know but it happened then and then when I went up to Utica [New York] in my home state as I say.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 48173
Speaker 1: All right.  So Mohawk Valley [Community College, Utica, New York], now were there any special teachers or mentors there that you encountered that helped you?
Speaker 2: My--the teacher that I had in the design courses like machine design and tool designs, this teacher was, his name was Mr. Dyser (ph.) and he was, you know I just thought he was the greatest thing since sliced bread.  I mean he was so good you know.  And I obviously did very good in his classes.  I--you know we had machine tool classes there where you learned how to operate milling machines and blades and all that stuff and so he was actually involved with that.  He was involved with so many things and you know he was the type of guy that you know he had his own Model T Ford that he had you know rebuilt and everything and he had, you know he knew all about rifles and how they were made and you know all the tolerances and everything dealing with him.  But he was just an awesome teacher.  And you know he's the one that I you know remember the most and probably had the biggest influence on me when I was there even though all the teachers were you know quite good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there for a couple of years right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And you got your associate degree.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 48174
Speaker 1: And so what was the next step?
Speaker 2: Okay.  When I--I had a roommate there [at Mohawk Valley Community College, Utica, New York] at you know where we stayed at, Ms. Warfield's there and it was interesting.  Okay, so I couldn't stay at this other house and Ms. Warfield had a, you know she had a mixed house okay, you know it was probably three Afro Americans and you know three whites.  And so my roommate was a white student and he was in electrical technology and he was a little bit older than I was because he had spent three or four years in the [U.S.] Navy.  And not just because he was my roommate, you know we really became you know really close friends.  I mean he's my friend till this day okay and he's from upstate in Saranac Lake [New York], Lake Placid area, that's where he grew up.
Speaker 1: His name is Jack--
Speaker 2: Jack Fogarty.
Speaker 1: Jack Fogarty, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so when we finished you know he was the one who talked about you know transferring to a four-year school and at that time in my career I was apparently so naive that I didn't know that you could transfer.  I mean I just didn't know.  I just thought I was going to go home and get a job or whatever and I had already, I had co-op'd down at Brookhaven National Labs on Long Island [New York], twenty miles from where I grew up.  I actually took those drawings from Mr. Dyser's class and they were so good that I, you know they--Mohawk Valley [Community College] had influence within about sixty, seventy miles, eighty miles of the school where they could you know arrange for co-op jobs and the school was designed that way.  It was a quarter system that you know you go to school for three quarters and then you did the co-op.  You go for another couple of quarters and then you do another co-op.  And so my last co-op was at Brookhaven [National Laboratory] and I did that on my own just because of how well I did you know and I ended up you know being second in my class in that program.  And so anyhow Jack was saying well you know we should transfer, you know go on and try to get our bachelors degree.  And so here we are from New York state and at that time there was no school in New York state--there was no state school that had engineering at the time.  Buffalo didn't have it, Binghamton didn't have it, Stony Brook [SUNY, State University of New York system].  So if you were going to go in New York state to engineering you'd have to go to a private school.  You'd have to go to you know Columbia [University, New York] you know or Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] or Clarkson [University, Potsdam, New York] or some place.  So you go to a private school you know they're going to be super expensive okay.  And so we started looking at the Big Ten schools and [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor] was first on our list but you know we were looking at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] and a couple of other Big Ten schools.  Both of us got accepted to all of these different schools that we were you know looking at and at least in mechanical engineering [University of] Michigan was rated number fourth in the nation on mechanical engineering and I said okay well that's the place to go.  I mean that's the best school.  I mean only MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you know Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] or whatever was ahead of it.  And so it's because of him that I ended up you know at least transfer, looking at transferring and then we--and he was the one who suggested the schools that we looked at and that's how we ended up, both of us ended up there in--
Speaker 1: So you went to University of Michigan in what, '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: I went in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't--you know graduation from the two-year school [Mohawk Valley Community College, Utica, New York] was in August and it turns out like that because of the co-op program.  And so I didn't have any money in order to start in September.  And you know Jack did because he you know he had, you know his family had money and everything.  So, and so what I did is, I worked at Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York] that semester and I went to you know--and I actually took a couple of college classes down on the island [Long Island, New York].
Story_ID: 48175
Speaker 1: Let me digress just a bit back to Mohawk [Mohawk Valley Community College, Utica, New York] because the other experience that I experienced relative to prejudice was when I was there when I had--I was in a Circle K organization which is similar to Key Club at, in high school and I was, I had been selected as a delegate for the national convention which was, which took place in Florida.  And so it turned out that--and that was--it took place in the summer time and so that was the summer of '61 [1961].  And when I realized that I was going to be going to Florida they said gee whiz, oh Marshall is going to Florida and he's going to be in St. Petersburg [Florida] and you know he's going to be staying at this particular hotel and oops, he's Afro American.  And so I had NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Urban League up there upstate New York interviewing me wanted to know what I was going to do when I got down there and everything and I didn't know what I was going to do.  I was just so happy, I had never been anywhere in my life so, and so going down--there was another fellow at the school that was also a selected delegate that was white so we went down on the bus.  And when we got to Jacksonville, Florida I wasn't able to go into the restaurant to eat.  And so my friend that was with me you know he says well if you can't go to eat I'm not going to go in there to eat either. So he went in there and got food for both of us.  We ate on the bus and then when we got to St. Petersburg, we--the hotel that we were staying at was, I don't know if it was called the Colonial or whatever but it was the same hotel where the New York Mets [professional baseball team] stayed for spring training some ten years later, okay.  And so when I got there I wasn't able, you know they said well you can't stay here, you know.  You--and so the whole eastern block you know cause there were representatives from all over the country there and I was the only Afro American at this convention, okay.  And the whole eastern block was going to leave the convention if I wasn't able to stay there.  And so they compromised that I was able to stay but I couldn't register (laughter).  And so I was able to attend this convention.  The only other thing that happened that was not, you know it wasn't any--nobody's fault but somehow my luggage got displaced or whatever on the way down.  And that wasn't contributed to anybody, it just happened.  And so I had to get some you know some other clothes when I was there and they wanted me to run for an office and all that stuff.  And I said I'm just happy that I'm here.  And so--
Speaker 2: This was 1962?
Speaker 1: '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: '61 [1961], okay.
Speaker 1: Summer, and I you know I said this is quite amazing you know.  And so, and coming back I decided that I wasn't going to go on the bus and so this is the first time that I had ever flown in my life and I flew from Orlando [Florida] or St. Petersburg or wherever on a Super Consolation to LaGuardia [airport, New York] and my mom [Mildred Green] and my step-dad [Harold Bartlett] picked me up there.  But I chose to do that because I didn't want to get on a bus anymore and run into any kind of issues.  So that was a little experience that happened to me from a prejudice standpoint that you know just didn't know that it was going to occur.  So I just wanted to share that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 48176
Speaker 1: All right so University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Now who were some of the, your advisors at the University of Michigan?  This is 1963.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '63 [1963], I was there two and a half years.  You know the teacher that had the biggest influence on me was a teacher by the name of Ward Winer, W-I-N-E-R.  And even though he was within mechanical engineering, I was very much interested in the you know the stress analysis aspect of it and the design aspect but I wasn't that interested in what would be considered energetics which would be like fluid dynamics and thermodynamics and heat transfer.  Well he was a fluids teacher and he was just an extremely good teacher.  All my teachers at Michigan were very good.  The other thing I noticed which was interesting was that over half of my professors at Michigan were left handed you know and I'm left handed.  So I says well that's interesting and Ward Winer was left handed and so forth.
Speaker 1: Have you noticed that going forward that a lot of engineers are left handed?
Speaker 2: There's quite a few that's left handed, yes.  Yes, I mean more so than you think, than one would think, yes.
Speaker 1: Well are there more than right handed?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no.  No, but--
Speaker 1: But you think on average (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --for the you know for the general population.  And that might have been more so maybe twenty years ago and back.  You know today you see more left handed people because parents don't, I mean you go twenty years ago and further back you know parents made a big deal of if their child was looking like they were going to be left-handed they would do whatever they could to force them not to do things with their left hand and they don't do that anymore.  You know so the percentage of lefthanders are you know it's way, way, way less than 50 percent but it's a lot more than it used to be.  And, but going back forty years, you look at that population and that observation was--I mean cause even in you know, even in the classroom you know they had left handed desks you know so they were arranged different so that when you, so it was easier for you to write and so forth.  So--but Ward Winer, he, one of the things that he did which I never forgot was when I was a senior--okay, first of all when I was a senior I chose to do my senior project under him.  So here's a fluids guy which isn't really totally my cup of tea but I felt that he was so good that I would love to do that.  And in fact, I think he might have even asked me or whatever and I--so I took my senior project under him and then one thing that he did that he didn't have to do, he asked me to come in cause one part of the senior project is that you have to give a presentation on your project at the end of the course.  And so yeah you know he asked me did I want--would like to come in and practice my speech prior to having to deliver it in the class and so forth.  And I did and it helped and he didn't have to, you know he didn't have to do that so he made a big impression.
Story_ID: 48177
Speaker 1: Yes, what about--you mentioned off campus that the Unabomber was there with you at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] right?  Ted Kaczynski [Theodore John "Ted" Kaczynski] I think?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  He was a graduate student there.  He was in physics and apparently he lived in the same quadrangle that we lived in.  The quadrangle is designed such you have maybe four dorms in a quadrangle, okay.  And the quadrangle that I was in, the east quad, one of the dorms was a graduate dorm.  And in fact, my friend [Jack Fogarty] lived in the graduate dorm mainly because of his age.  He was like, I mentioned he was like you know he had been in the [U.S.] Navy before so he actually lived there.  And so what occurred was some years later after all this went down with the Unabomber we were actually called by a newspaper out of Chicago [Illinois] wanting to know if we knew this person when we were in school.  I didn't know him but my friend Jack thought that he might have known him.  I mean the thing that we, the connection would have been him being a graduate student.  Maybe he was a teaching assistant in physics when we took physics classes there.  And--but that, you know there was a, you know there was that connection.  The other little tidbit there is that the--Howard Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald] wife actually was at [University of] Michigan after--
Speaker 1: Oh Marina Oswald?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after the assassination [of President John F. Kennedy in 1963] she actually was a computer science student there.  And I don't think I ever met her but I remember everybody talking about her at that, during that time.
Speaker 1: Hmm, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 48178
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you graduated in '65 [1965] with your bachelors degree, you went back to Brookhaven National Laboratory [Upton, New York], right, as a developmental--as a development engineer?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you stayed there for, you there about four years?
Speaker 2: For four years, yes.
Speaker 1: Four years, okay.  What kind of projects were you working on?
Speaker 2: At Brookhaven I was in their high energy physics department and that department is the same group that I was in when I was a co-op student there.  And what we did, the engineering group essentially designed and operated bubble chambers as well as accelerators for the high energy physics group.  And we had the largest bubble chamber in the world there--
Speaker 1: Now what is a bubble chamber?
Speaker 2: A bubble chamber is a device that's used for experiments that are used to try to identify subatomic particles.  And what occurs, it's a cryogenic device where you're using liquid hydrogen.  It's sort of the same kinds of cryogenic fluids that the shuttle uses so, when it's launched.  So--
Speaker 1: Frozen--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You're dealing with both liquid hydrogen, liquid nitrogen and also liquid helium.  But within the bubble chamber is actual hydrogen that's at a temperature so low I mean if it was room temperature it would be gas.  The temperature is so low that it's actually liquid and that's why when they make reference to cryogenic, that's what they're making reference to.  And so what they do is they have an accelerator that's actually accelerating some particle at a tremendous speed that enters this liquid hydrogen and it essentially collides with the liquid hydrogen molecule.  And what they are looking for, if it hits the nucleus of the hydrogen molecule, there will be subatomic particles that will come off of that you know at that collision and just based on the track that it takes when it you know when it comes off of the nucleus and this isn't what the engineers do but this is what the physicists do, they're able to analyze that and determine what you know--they have theories to predict what type of particle it might be.  And so they have the theory and the experiment is to see if they can actually see, when I say see, only thing you do is you see the track of what's going through in this liquid and they can identify you know more than one different types of subatomic particles.  And so the engineers were involved with like you know building this bubble chamber and operating it.  At one point I was operational engineer on that bubble chamber because these things operate, when they start operating you know they'll operate for two or three weeks at a time because you--because it has to be brought down to temperature and it takes a long time to do that and it's operated over a period of time doing all these experiments.  And later in my tenure there we actually built the largest superconducting magnet you know to be used with the bubble chamber and I was also an operational engineer on that.  It was just all this technology and with cryogenics was things that I never learned in school but it was just extremely--you know we, from an engineering standpoint we were right out on the edge because we were dealing with things that would only happen at a national lab like that.  You know this type of work didn't go on at--you know it might go on at some place like at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or whatever.  In fact when I was at Brookhaven there was actually an accident at MIT where someone actually lost their life unfortunately because--
Speaker 1: With the cryogenic, I mean with the liquid nitrogen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the hydrogen.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Something happened with the, yeah something happened with the--there was a leak in the chamber and it blew and somebody lost their life at MIT.
Speaker 1: So you were designing the chambers to contain this material (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the team was--myself personally I was involved with you know--in order to capture that data of those tracks that go, that are taking place, they did all that with cameras of some sort, special cameras and so I was involved with the mechanisms and so forth for this, for the film transport for the cameras.  And I think back I said gee, there's a connection back to my dad [Dallas Jones]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because he was interested in photography, there.
Story_ID: 48179
Speaker 1: Now in--you were there [at Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York] for four years.  And you met your wife [Annie Jones] there too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) now this is in Mississippi or--?
Speaker 2: No.  Okay, Brookhaven [National Lab] is on Long Island [New York] and my wife was a like an, I guess you would say almost like an exchange student.  They had a program at Brookhaven where they reached out to black institutions.  My wife was from Tougaloo [College, Jackson, Mississippi] in Mississippi and they brought in say a half a dozen students where they would, they actually spent like a semester at Brookhaven where they were able to take you know a couple of college courses as well as doing some form of research there for that semester.  And my wife was a math major and so she was in a group that was doing some mathematical analysis and all and so I, that's how I met her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got married in 1969.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 48180
Speaker 1: So in '72 [1972] you went on to University of Massachusetts in Amherst [Massachusetts] to--oh, where you got your masters degree in '72 [1972] but you went there in when in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: '69 [1969] okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, September of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you like most scientists I suppose, now tell me if I'm wrong you didn't stop to celebrate your master's [degree] you went straight on for the Ph.D.?  You didn't, you just went one continuous you know--?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well when I left Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York] the idea--the reason that, I mean it was two reasons.  First of all both my wife [Annie Jones] and I had gotten accepted there so we had the choice of me staying at Brookhaven and her going on to UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] and we said that wasn't going to work.  So we both had been accepted and so we went, we both were blessed in receiving fellowships and in her case, she actually started out in the computer science program there.  I went straight into the engineering program.  And, but when I left Brookhaven in general, my idea was that I thought that I wanted to become a professor and I knew that I would have to at least get a Ph.D. if I was going to do that, okay.  So I had that in my mind from the beginning you know that I wouldn't be stopping with my master's degree.  But that was sort of the game plan.  I had taken the-- wow, I don't know close to thirty credit hours of graduate courses at night when I was at Brookhaven.  I was taking it at Brooklyn Poly [The Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York], I was commuting all the way up the island [Long Island, New York] to do that so I did have a number of graduate courses under my belt you know before, even before I met my wife, okay.  So I--because when I finished [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] it wasn't in my mind that I was going to be going to graduate school but when I started to work I started saying well maybe I should be doing that.  So I--and then the opportunity presented itself to become a full-time student.  That was, and that was really key because if you're really going to learn stuff especially in technology to be doing it full time where you're focused just on your studies and not have to be involved with work it's very important.  I mean I was taking, I was passing these courses and everything, the graduate courses I was taking at night but the depth of my knowledge or how well I was, how well I had command over what I was learning wasn't as deep as it should be because I had too much going on with work and everything.
Story_ID: 48181
Speaker 1: So at University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Massachusetts], now who was your Ph.D. advisor and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My advisor was Dr. Carl Nelson and that was an interesting choice too because you know he was a material scientist and for me to go there and says I'm going to have an advisor that was a material scientist as opposed to someone that was in hard core mechanical engineering I was--you know because materials wasn't my, you know wasn't my favorite course in, when I was in undergrad school [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. But he had this idea that I was going to be sort of like a hybrid.  I was going to be this mechanical engineer that knew perhaps more about materials than most mechanical engineers once they graduated.  And his plan was, worked out wonderful you know.  I took all these you know material courses.  I took a lot of physics courses to augment the materials science side and the various tests that I had to take to qualify and test the prelims [preliminaries] and all so I was always tested in solid mechanics on the engineering side, the pure engineering and also tested on the materials side.  So I was in some cases I was sort of double-tested and--but the other thing that occurred that, it was this fellow by the name of Gabriel Harvey that was on my committee and he was a retired researcher from GE [General Electric] Global Research and that's how I actually truly found out about GE Global Research.  I didn't know anything about them prior to that because GE didn't publicize their research like AT&T or you know Xerox [Corporation] at the time they had a big--you know even Polaroid had a big research industrial lab.  And so if it wasn't for Gabriel Harvey on my committee I wouldn't have never known truly about GE Global Research.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, you asked me about--
Speaker 1: Yeah, about your dissertation.
Speaker 2: --my dissertation.  My dissertation dealt with damping of composite materials and these were metal-metal composites.  And the idea that my advisor had was that of, if you look at a standard machine tool like a lathe or a miller, the cutting tool is vibrating when it's cutting metal okay. And so it, in its operation it's going to actually wear probably due to this very fine vibration which you can't really see, okay.  And his idea is you know what could you do in order to be able to hold this tool with a material that had very good damping characteristics, okay?  And it's typically held in a material that's cast iron that inherently has a certain degree of inherent damping that's good.  And so we were looking to come up with putting different materials together that would have a better damping characteristic than say cast iron was.  And so--
Speaker 1: What do you mean by damping?
Speaker 2: Something that will decrease the amount of vibration that would occur in the tool okay so either by decreasing the amplitude you know that it's vibrating through or how long it would vibrate.  So typically how long it will because what it will do, it will dampen or reduce those oscillations so the length of vibration will be decreased and that in itself is what's referred to as damping okay.  And we were looking at material combinations to provide that.  And so we had models.  I'm probably considered more of an experimentalist than a modeling person but I did do modeling to you know to help to predict what was going to occur.  But then we actually put some of these material combinations together and measured what would take place and so forth and that was the, you know the basis of my dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you finished in 1975 right--'74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: '74 [1974], yeah.
Speaker 1: '74 [1974], okay.
Story_ID: 48182
Speaker 1: Did you go right to work for GE [General Electric; after earning his Ph.D. degree at the University of Massachusetts in 1974]?
Speaker 2: That I did.  I would have probably finished a little bit sooner but it was during this time, it was you know it was '72 [1972] that my mother [Mildred Green] died and you know she died in an automobile accident.  And there was about a semester there that I, you know after that occurred that I was, I just didn't have the--I wasn't very productive I guess to say the least.  And you know but then you know again you know that, you know the link that I had from the standpoint of her understanding what I did to whatever level I saw that like disappear.  And it was interesting because I just didn't know it at the point but you know her sister-in-law somehow was aware of that and she shared with me after this occurred that you know says that's the thing that you're going to miss about your mother more than anything else.  And she was, somehow she knew about that link, you know.  And, but you know that happened in '72 [1972] in the spring of '72 [1972], so came out of nowhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your relatives that are left I mean your great aunt [Mary Jackson] was in Aquebogue [New York] and then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Aquebogue and your dad [Dallas Jones] was still in--?
Speaker 2: My step-dad [Harold Bartlett] was there and I had a kid brother you know that--in fact he was ten years old at the time.  You know he was born when I was at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] you know and in fact I used to be teased because when I used to come home from school in Michigan I'd be driving around in my little car and then I'd have him in the car and everybody wanted to know what did Marshall do when he went away to college with this little guy (laughter).  But it wasn't mine, it was my little brother.  So, and yeah and so he--but they had their own home then at that point.  You know my grand--my step-dad and my mom had their own home and everything.  And then, and my great aunt was staying with them at the time when she, you know when she died.
Story_ID: 48183
Speaker 1: So you're working at General Electric [GE Global Research, Schenectady, New York] and you're also teaching part time at Schenectady Community College [Schenectady, New York] right, as an adjunct professor in--?
Speaker 2: Right.  When I joined GE in '74 [1974] okay, the first year I didn't do anything other than go to work.  I had two babies and a wife [Annie Jones], I needed to go to work.  The only other thing I did is I actually studied for my professional engineering [PE] exam and that was something that I--there's two parts to that where you do what they call AIT.  Usually someone would do that when they're in undergrad [undergraduate; bachelor's degree] school and then after four years of experience then you can set for the actual PE.  And so I basically studied for both exams and so that's the only extra thing I did in that first year when I was at GE.  And I sat for that.  I did pass it.  I said if I didn't pass it I wasn't going to take it again because it's just extremely hard to do.  And so then the following year in '75 [1975] that's when I started doing some teaching at the two year school at Schenectady Community College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 48184
Speaker 1: Now in--at GE [General Electric; Global Research Center, Schenectady, New York] I guess you were working on a laser welding aluminum to copper.  Now this is something that you received a patent for in 1978 along with--I guess, now how does this work?  When you get a patent for something when you work for GE, did GE hold the patent--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or you were like a sub-patenter on it or how does it work (unclear)?
Speaker 2: If you got a copy of the patent okay, I may be able to show you that over here later but the patent is in your name or you know if it's a co-inventor it's in your name and the co-inventor's name.  If you're working for a company typically what happens is that you have to sign your rights over to the company that the patent will be assigned to the company, okay.  So if you go and get a copy of the patent, the inventor's names and everything is shown to be to you okay, and below that there's an assignment and the assignment and all my patents is to GE.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they have the legal right to use the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --invention?  And does it ever revert I mean the rights, I mean the profits revert back to you at some point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean the only way that that would happen and say if you left the company and there's a patent that you, you know that you're very interested in, you could work out something with the company where you might be able to get license for that patent to be able to practice it.
Speaker 1: For a fee?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--okay.  All right--but you're allowed to claim these and I guess you, if you, you know claim the patent that you invented so it is known that you invented whatever it was or--?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  Oh without a doubt, yeah.  The, and the, you know and the company expects you to do that, yeah.  That first patent there the copper to aluminum that was a big deal at the time from the standpoint when I joined the company [General Electric] you know the country was in the middle of the energy crisis at that time.  This was in the early you know early to mid-70s [1970s] and GE was looking at how they might be able to wind motors with aluminum conductors as opposed to cooper because aluminum at the time was cheaper than copper.  And I was looking at using a laser and that's what happened.  My manager that I had because when I came out of graduate school [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts] I had never done anything in lasers.  You know in ten years of education I hadn't done anything with lasers.  And so my manager with the group I joined had a laser there that didn't work and I was the new kid on the block that you know fresh graduate student just joined the group.  So there was two things.  I understood how lasers worked only because of all the physics courses I took and then I had this, I knew materials okay.  And so my manager wanted to know how you know, number one, did I think I could get this laser to work; number two, you know what could I do with it if I could get it to work?  And one of the things they were looking at was this thing about joining copper to aluminum which is a materials challenge and I knew a little bit about materials.  And so that's what, number one, I got the laser to work and number two, I looked at this combination, number three, there was a senior researcher there at the research center that had written, was co-author on two books which I had to study for my prelim [Ph.D. preliminary/qualifying] exams and he was physically there.  I was so excited that I was going to meet this guy because he was looking at another way of welding copper to aluminum, had another way of looking at measuring the resistance of that joint okay.  I didn't know how to, how I would want to do that so I got to meet him to be able to look--to be able to assess and evaluate how good my joints were that I made so I got to meet this guy, Bill Moffett who I was using his book when I was there at UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst].  So it was sort of like you know full circle--
Story_ID: 48185
Speaker 1: Just summarize for those who don't know, what is a laser anyway and what--?
Speaker 2: A laser is a device that's able to generate light in a form that essentially has one color.  And it could be essentially a color that you can see or it could be a color that you can't see.  What you can see is from blue to red, the colors in a rainbow.  And if you look at, if you put numbers on those colors okay and we'll use microns as numbers, and if you go from .4 to say .8 microns, that's going from blue which is .4 to red which is .8.  If you go below .4 you're in a region that's referred to as ultraviolet and that's sort of the color that you can't see and this is the color that everyone is concerned about you know dealing with ultraviolet coming from the sun that can cause skin cancer.  If you go above .8 say to 1 and larger that's into the infrared.  Lasers operate from the ultraviolet through what you can see all the way into the infrared.  The uniqueness of the laser in addition to the fact that it's very, it's only of one color you know the, sort of the, the word that best describes that it's a fairly large word but it's called, it's monochromatic and that means one color.  The other feature of the laser is that it's the most collimated light source known to man.  If you take a flashlight and shine the flashlight over some distance, the light beam from a flashlight essentially diverges as it leaves the flashlight source.
Speaker 1: It gets wider and wider.
Speaker 2: It gets wider and wider.
Speaker 1: Disperses.
Speaker 2: And it's the same for your headlamp on your car you know, the light coming from that headlight divide, diverges out okay.  The light from a laser stays very collimated.  If I took a laser in this room and shined it on the wall over here and shined it on another wall the spot on the wall is almost the same size as the beam leaving the source.  If you shine a laser beam from the earth to the moon, the moon is 250,000 miles away.  When the laser beam gets to the moon it's going to cover an area maybe the size of this museum.  And you say well that's not so good but you have to think how far did the laser travel?  It traveled 250,000 miles and when it got to the moon it only illuminated a region that's the size of this museum.  That's a pretty collimated light source.  Being that collimated, that means that if you put this light source through a lens you're able to focus it down to a very, very small spot okay.  I usually tell kids in the classroom I always ask the question, how many you know how many students have taken a magnifying glass and either ignited paper or tried to pop an ant and most of them was--raised their hand.  But you're able to do that, you're able to walk around in the sun and for the most part it doesn't bother you unless you're out there too long.  But if you focus the rays from the sun you know through a magnifying class it's able to focus down to a very, very small spot such that the intensity is so high that you can ignite the paper and the kids that were able to pop the ants always ask the question, why did you know why did the ant stand still?  So I says--but it probably temporarily blinded it.  That's what you're able to do with a laser.  I've spent the last thirty-five years taking the laser beam such that if the laser beam is the size of a quarter, you know I could put something in front of the beam very quickly and it will do nothing to it.  When it goes through a lens and it's focused down I can do things like what we just talked about.  I can weld copper to aluminum, I can cut with it, I can heat treat with it, I can do so many different things totally non-contact which is the most exciting thing of all that you don't have to touch the part, the component, the material and you're able to impart this energy which is nothing other than light on a material in order to energize it and do some useful things.
Story_ID: 48186
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 1981, you became the manager of the laser technology program at GE [General Electric] and you received a patent for pulse laser, a pulse laser, for a pulse laser pre-treated machining.  I believe--that's what it has here.  It doesn't sound--I don't--is that how we phrase this or what?  How do you--?
Speaker 2: That particular patent dealt with laser assisted machining where if you're--the whole concept involved the aspect of being able to either remove material off of a work piece, on a work piece in front of the cutting tool or either heat the work piece in front of the cutting tool such that you're reducing the force that occurs on the cutting tool when your machine that's part--and that does two things.  It will allow you to machine faster and it also will decrease the wear on your cutting tool.  As a side bar when I mentioned IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], IIT was part of this high speed machining program that we had in the late 70s [1970s] going into the very early 80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: IIT in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Illinois Institute of Technology.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '82 [1982] you started research on high power laser beam transmission through optical fibers, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was probably one of my most exciting and rewarding piece of work that I was involved with.  If you take a laser system to be doing some type of work you usually have to have the laser physically at a work station and with hard optics, bring that beam to the work piece.  And the idea that I was looking at was if you could transmit the laser energy via fiber optics just like you do with communication and what the medical arena was doing and that was going on at the time but it was at very low power.  And I came up with a way of making that coupling between the beam and the fiber to occur very efficient such that I could transmit,  couple in and transmit through over 90 percent of the laser energy coming out of the laser going through the fiber.  And at one time there I had transmitted more power through a fiber optic cable than anybody else in the world.  Everybody in the world is doing it today but at that time what we had done at GE had exceeded what anybody else had done.  And in fact I had actually put in a system into our lighting, GE lighting plant in North Carolina using this technology with hardware of this sort that you couldn't buy on the outside at that time.  Specifically I was looking at how you could not only put energy through a fiber but how could you split the beam and put it through two fibers and to be able to do a welding operation where you would have two beams where the source was just putting out one laser--you know one laser source being split and doing so.  And that, we put that in production down in North Carolina and at that time it was just nowhere, no place in the world that you could go and buy it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now in 1984, you received three patents focused on lasers including high power, a high power laser energy delivery system.  Is this--?
Speaker 2: That patent would have been involved with GE--GE had a laser that was in, you know it was invented at GE and it was being used in the defense arena and I was involved in looking at how that same laser could be used to help the company in the manufacturing arena.  And so I was involved with helping to make that transition from a military device to an industrial device, even to the point of having a joint venture with another company in order to industrialize the system.  So that was, that's what that was all about.  Nobody had you know thought to do that prior to the time that I did.
Speaker 1: Hmm, okay.
Speaker 2: That laser was called either a slab laser or some people refer to it as a face pump laser.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now '85 [1985], you research in 1985 on a laser fiber optic robot systems.  Laser fiber optic robot systems was voted one of the nation's top 100 innovations of the year by 'Science Digest' magazine'.  So--
Speaker 2: That you know that actually stemmed from the initial work of coupling the energy into a fiber.  What we did after being successful in doing that we actually made an output coupler and this is a set of optics for which the beam coming out of the fiber would go into.  And that output coupler, we actually interfaced that with a single arm robot you know to demonstrate that we could move that energy around to anywhere we want to essentially do specific types of operations.  This today everybody in the world is doing it.  In 1985 no one was doing it.  So it was very, very you know innovative at that point.  Nobody ever thought that you, you know at least you know with a fiber that you could actually you know make that connection, have your robot in one room, have your laser in another room and be able to be  performing a laser based function in this room where the robot is, even though the laser source is someplace else.  It was just you know sort of mind boggling at the time.  It's very well known now but at that time you know when you think about it, it's you know thirty five, thirty, twenty five years ago so it's a long time.
Story_ID: 48187
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '86 [1986] you receive the 1986 distinguished engineering alumni award from the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Massachusetts].  So I would think this is a big deal too you know out of the all the people that came out of the University of Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: You know they obviously nominate individuals based on their, you know their accomplishments in their, you know in their field.  And they were very you know--I don't even know actually who nominated me but you know they--you know their committee thought that I was worthy of that recognition at the time.  I felt very honored that they you know that they chose, you know that they selected me for that particular recognition.  It was much appreciated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now they keep on coming cause in '88 [1988], you're chosen as one of 125 alumni who were honored from over 75,000 graduates from the University of Massachusetts over the last twenty years for their 125 Alumni to Watch Program and you received an Honorary Doctorate of Science degree from the State University of New York [SUNY system] which it didn't even offer a degree in engineering when you started going to school.  So--
Speaker 2: When I started (laughter).
Speaker 1: So at least they--
Speaker 2: It was very interesting with the Honorary Doctor of Science because it actually took place at--the ceremony actually took place back at Mohawk Valley Community College [Utica, New York] which is part of the system, you know it's part SUNY [State University of New York] system.  And there was a senator there from New York, boy I can't think of his name.  Manahan, Menehan--. He's passed away now.
Speaker 1: Monahan, Daniel Patrick Monahan.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was there on the stage when I received that so it was very--and Mr. Dyser [Jones' design professor at Mohawk Valley Community College] was there to witness it too so I mean you know some--you know I mean that was twenty years plus as I had left the two-year school and so he was still around and was able to witness this, you know that recognition so that was just tremendous.  And some time regarding the, you know the other recognition from UMass [University of Massachusetts] you know sometimes you begin to wonder how they, you know why you receive such recognitions.  But I just know that you know what I had accomplished up until that time you know was making a difference in the field and it was also helping the company so I can understand why they thought that I was you know deserved of that recognition.
Story_ID: 48188
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '87 [1987], you patented an apparatus and method for performing laser material processing through a fiber optic.  And this is a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is quite similar.  Some of those are, it's quite similar to the initial one.  I mean we were getting to the point where we are you know really looking at multiple fibers at that time too.  And seeing how more robust that we could make these you know type of hardware and so forth.  And you know and then like I said before, some of these things were becoming more commercial and you know looking at how innovatively you can maybe utilize you know what might be available to you for the kinds of needs that the company you know might have.  One of the challenges at that time is that the beam quality of the laser coming out of the fiber would you know would get compromised and so we were beginning to look at how you can preserve that beam quality also.  It was some of the other things that we were looking at that time.
Story_ID: 48189
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '89 [1989], you were selected as a member of the National Science Foundation [NSF] advisory committee panel for the division of design manufacturing and computer integrated engineering.  For design manufacturing and computer integrated engineering, yeah.
Speaker 2: You heard me mention Professor [Ward] Winer [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] before.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: He was one that actually recommended me for that, you know for that board and I, you know even though I'm in an industry you know to be connected with NSF, with the National Science Foundation which is you know is a really benefactor for you know for universities for researchers, it was important for me to be involved, I had the opportunity to be involved with such a board because however you can influence those types of boards and how you know how they look at, how they're funding what's going on at the universities is really important from the industrial standpoint.  You want to be sure that you know they're keeping that in mind so that you know there's a, a level of pertinence relative to how they are distributing their money.  So I, whatever influence you know that I could have relative that I thought was very important and it was very you know I thought it was very beneficial to be involved with such a board.
Story_ID: 48190
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '93 [1993] you published a paper called 'Direct Laser Centering of Metals in Solid Freeform Fabrication Proceedings'.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was somewhat of a very forward-looking effort.  What's going on in industry right now is there's a lot going on in what's referred to as additive manufacturing which is laser based and it's a very hot topic you know at this time.  And even Steven Chu [American physicist; appointed as U.S. Secretary of Energy in 2009] you know visited the [General Electric Global] Research Center [Schenectady, New York] a couple of months ago and he was you know really you know felt it was just amazing you know with the type of stuff that's going on in that area.  That paper involved us doing stuff in that area that now you know that was going on you know almost twenty years ago really centered around this whole aspect of you know how you can start off with powder and consolidate it with a laser in a fashion to come up with something that's you know that's solid and useful and has the properties of material that was cast or whatever.  And so we were--in fact when people around the center some time talk about what they're doing now it says, myself and this other fellow Bill Carter was doing, we were trying to get the company interested in that area back twenty years ago and so that's what that paper was all about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were ahead of our times, you know couldn't get very much money to actually you know pursue that but you know we made some headway.
Story_ID: 48191
Speaker 1: There are a lot of awards peppered through here but I was going to go back to those.  But just talk about the re--I mean the patents, '97 [1997] you received another patent for 'Underwater Cladding with Laser Beam and Plasma Arc' in the 'Welding Journal'.  Now explain what that's about.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We got funding from an agency in Japan for you know for that particular work and it, it's involved with the idea of how you can repair certain surfaces in a reactor which would allow you to do this without having a human being going into that environment in order to repair a surface.  Cladding in general means that you have a surface and you're basically putting a metal coating on that metal surface.  It could be a different material okay.  And so it's sort of like welding but you're just sort of melting a different kind of material on this.  The novelty here was that we were able to do that essentially under water from the standpoint that we had a water tank that was pressurized to simulate that you were twenty-five feet under water.  And with the use of fiber optics, we were able to deliver the laser beam to the surface.  We were able to feed a wire to that surface and it's, and basically--and we had a means that's sort of the basis of the patent was we were able to locally exclude the water where the cladding was taking place, because if the water was really there in the presence touching the cladding it would compromise the integrity of that cladding okay.  So if you're able to exclude it meaning that in the local vicinity of what was occurring, that was occurring there was no water actually physically touching that cladding when it was you know right at the reaction point of the laser.  And that was you know that was sort of the novelty and trick of what we were doing and we were able to demonstrate that you could do this under you know like I said equivalent to twenty feet under water which would be the case where you have, you would be if you were in a reaction--a reactor.  We were able to simulate that whole thing there at the [GE Global] Research Center [Schenectady, New York] so it was impressive.  And we were--and the plasma arc, plasma transfer arc process, we were sort of competing to see which one was the most effective.  The laser approach showed that you could not only get the cladding there but you could get a stress condition that was favorable after the weld took place.  So that you like to have a stress condition that's referred to being in compression because if it's in compression then if there are cracks that occur they won't propagate which is always the issue with reactors.
Story_ID: 48192
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 2004, you published 'Laser Hotwire Welding for Minimizing Defects' during the international congress on applications of lasers and electro optics proceedings.  Right, that's (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  This hotwire laser approach you know just prior to that you know we had a patent issued in this area also and the idea, some of the materials that they use for you know building certain components for gas turbines as well as for jet engines, these materials are super-alloys.  Typically when they are welded the material aspects is such that you know they will literally crack.  And so we came up with this technique of this hotwire laser welding where we would essentially--it would be used to join two materials that are very difficult to weld, okay, number one.  Number two, we would be able to reduce the amount of heat that would go into the welding process because we've used another means of heating the wire that we would be feeding into the joint.  And we were able to demonstrate that we could weld some of these materials without cracking them okay, and without the part actually having distortion which is another issue that occurs with certain welding techniques, even with lasers.  And even in the same time frame you know there was like a ten-year period where we were doing research for Lockheed Martin [American defense, technology, aerospace, advanced technology company] and when we came up with this technique the folks at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Agency] was interested, became interested in the technique relative to the space shuttle.  And the space shuttle, all the welding on the space shuttle because it's aluminum is done with another process that's called friction stir welding.  And they wanted to go to, away from aluminum to some of the nickel-based alloys but they didn't have a good way at that time cause friction stir welding would not work with these nickel based alloys.  And we were showing that we could use this hotwire laser process to weld the materials that they had of interest without having distortion and still maintaining the properties that they want.  And I had actually visited the location where they make the fuel tanks for the shuttle down in Michoud [NASA Michoud Assembly Facility, New Orleans, Louisiana] in Louisiana and presented this technology and so forth.  And we were in the process of moving forward with that and on my way home when I was in the Atlanta [Georgia] airport, that's when the Challenger [space shuttle Challenger] went down.  And so I was really obviously taken back because I was, I mean I was just there where they actually made these you know fuel tanks and we were look--because where they were going was you know they wanted to--you know because the fuel tank is discarded you know with the shuttle the way it works now and they were heading in the direction of having the system to be able to come back to earth and be able to be re-used.  And that was the reason for going to the new material but after that accident that approach went out, you know they just went down a different track.  But that's where that, that was the potential use for that technology and it's still an area that you know we're still doing work in.
Story_ID: 48193
Speaker 1: In 2010, you received a patent for portable plenum laser forming with W. Zang and B. Ferrell.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah that particular patent had to do with, we had a program that was sponsored by the government from this [U.S.] Department of Commerce where we were looking at using lasers for forming.  And what I mean is that you could take a laser beam and you could heat a plate and you could cause that plate to deform in a way that you'd like it to deform.  You could take a tube, you could heat the tube in a fashion such that you could cause the tube deform, all non-contact.  You don't have to use any mechanical techniques to do this.  We had our aviation business would--had the interest of taking a compressor blade that goes into the engine.  When that is made, it is extruded and so it may not come out to the exact shape when it comes out of the extruding machine.  They wanted to see if we could come up with a way of heating that blade such that we could cause that blade to come back into specification shape wise, okay without changing any of the material properties of that blade and not cause any marks on the blade because if an inspector saw the blade, that there were any marks on it at all he would just throw it away.  And so this plenum was a means of being able to hold that blade and we had it on a robot and we would be able to you know move this such that we'd be able to you know heat the blade in a fashion and in an environment because within this plenum we were able to have an inert gas environment such that you wouldn't get any oxidation or anything of that nature.  And that was the purpose of that plenum it was to protect the blade, allow you to position it any way you want, be able to heat this with the laser so that you can cause this to come back into specification shape.
Story_ID: 48194
Speaker 1: In 2011, you received the Laser Innovation Award at the Symposium for Advanced Laser Applications and was selected to deliver the Corey Balski (ph) Lecture for the mechanical engineering department of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And there are lots of awards I did not read that have come over the years and you know the National Academy of Engineering Award in 2001, the Black Engineer of the Year Award in 1994 for outstanding technical contributions to the industry.  There are many others.  And what would you say today is your greatest contribution to laser technology and science?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I would have to say my biggest contribution would have to be involved with the, you know the early work on you know dealing with you know with fiber optics and lasers and material processing because I was I mean I was doing that when nobody else was.  I think the second area which may or may not surface as much is that much of what I've done in material processing from a joining standpoint has centered around that of joining you know just similar materials.  Obviously the copper to aluminum is one of them.  And that's, that in general is a challenge when you come to you know trying to join these materials and I've had more than my share of success in addressing those types of challenges.  Even though I was using lasers for some of these lighting activities those materials that I were joining weren't similar materials.  They were all dissimilar materials, refractory materials.  I'm working on a program as we speak you know for a healthcare business that's centered around the same thing.  So I would say it would be those you know those two areas.  And maybe I have to say three because the other is this you know is this thick section welding.  I haven't published that much in that area but that's probably the reason I'm not retired today is because you know four or five--three or four years ago you know there was a see change in laser technology with the introduction of what's referred to as fiber laser technology.  When I say fiber laser technology, that means that the laser energy is generated within the fiber okay and we--I you know I convinced the powers that be at the [General Electric] Research Center [Schenectady, New York] to purchase a twenty kilowatt fiber laser that we have in our facility and it's the highest power fiber laser in the Americas as we speak.  And I spent some time in Europe working with this laser and I convinced the folks that they really need to have that type of laser here at the Research Center.  And since it's been here we've had three type of installations like this with that laser you know within a healthcare business, our locomotive business and also our nuclear fuel business down in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 48195
Speaker 1: How has it been working at the General Electric [GE] Research Center [Schenectady, New York]?  I mean what, how--have things been good from the start or have they evolved from okay to better or how do you--I mean do you see, you know you came in at a time in the late 70s [1970s] when things weren't always you know all right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for black employees in big business.  So--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --big industry.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You know throughout my career, including college okay, when I was at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and it's not like that now for sure, but when I was the only Afro American student in engineering, okay.  When I was at UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts], it was only two of us, okay.  When I joined [GE] Global Research there was a couple of folks that was there out of you know it was 1,500 people okay.  The interesting thing is that it was another fellow that was at Michigan when I was there, his name is Stan Canada.  He--I didn't know him when I was at Michigan very well because undergraduate students don't mingle with graduate students, okay.  But he was you know he was a mechanical engineer.  He left, he got his master's [degree] there.  He went in, he served in Vietnam [War], came out of Vietnam, got his doctorate from Penn State [the Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania].  So we were together at Michigan in '65 [1965].  We did have one class together.  It was a senior graduate course okay and in stress, strain and strength, a graduate course.  When I saw him next was in '74 [1974] when we were both within two months of each other, had been hired by GE Global Research.  I was told at that time there was only eleven Afro American Ph.D. graduates in mechanical engineering in the country and GE got two of them.  It was me and Stan Canada, okay.  The thing that I noticed when I joined GE that on the professional level everything, they were looking at what you could do for them, okay.  When I would go--and this wasn't cross [across] the board but there was you know, I bumped into a couple of folks you know like maybe in shipping or in the shop or whatever.  Maybe not so much the shop but it was as couple of places you know that I would, you know you had to go to get something done and they--you know I would get a second look.  You know who are you?  You know are you really a Ph.D., and all this you know type thing.  And, but on a professional level it was, there was never anything throughout my career--in fact my manager that I had, I couldn't have picked a better manager because he was, you know he was a religious based--I mean he was a lay minister okay.  And managers in those days they may do it a little bit more now or they have formal, semi-formal mentoring.  You know he did his little share of mentoring to me even though he was my manager and he says you know you should do this and you should do that and the things that he didn't have to, you know these are the unwritten things that he would you know would share.  So I was you know I was fortunate in that respect.  Technically you know maybe ten years into my career I mean I took a high risk of trying to get funding to do a certain thing and it had to do with this industrialization of the slab laser and I couldn't get internal funding.  And I got funding from another company outside of GE and I had gotten more--this was an industrial contract.  It was the largest industrial contract that the Research Center had ever gotten okay and the problem that occurred was that I ended up being on a critical path for that company.  And we ran into some technical problems dealing with what we were trying to do that nobody had anticipated.  You know the physicists that were involved with you know with inventing the laser and you know and the whole team you know it just, nobody knew, you know.  And so, you know and I got my hand slapped a couple of times from a technical standpoint or whatever but low and behold what occurred was that they realized well gee this is important.  And so they did go and they actually put money into it okay, and it really ended up you know--I told you about the JV, you know JV didn't work.  They actually licensed some of that to Fanuc [Corporation] out in Japan you know so they got money out of that and all you know.  So on a technical, from a technical standpoint you know that might have been a little down along with the ups and so forth. I had a manager in the 90s [1990s], late 90s [1990s].  I had always forever been involved with the schools, going into the schools and you know giving presentations.  I have this little, this laser show--
Speaker 1: Now that was my next question actually about volunteering and that sort of thing in Richmond [Virginia], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, so what occurred was I mean I've always had good managers okay.  But this guy came along and you know I knew him before he was my manager you know or whatever.  But he was sort of like a micromanager type and he was managing this group where he didn't really know that much about the technology.  So he couldn't tell me anything about lasers okay.  But the other thing was you know he was always you know questioning why I did this and why I did that outside you know.  And whatever I did, I you know never had an effect for what I did within the company.  And so when some, when leadership heard about this two or three levels up they basically told him leave me alone, let me do what I do.  So from a management standpoint that was the only time I ever had any you know, I mean--he had issues with a lot of people.  It wasn't just me.  He had issues with a lot of people because he--they actually had him go through some special training you know because he just didn't know how to--you know he wasn't the best peoples' person you know from a managing standpoint.  And you know so he ultimately ended up retiring early and becoming the mayor of the local village or whatever but it wasn't sort of my--the person I looked up technically to the most when I joined the company as I, you know as I moved along the person I--you know I just thought he was the best mechanical engineer in the world, you know.  I saw how--cause we ended up, we were in the same group at this time and this manager you know the way he treated this fellow I couldn't believe it.  I mean and it was--nobody--but anyhow he was gone.  But it shows you that the road isn't totally smooth all the time.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is on the level that you operated on pretty much has been fair and you've been able to do your work (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 48196
Speaker 1: But I guess the problem I guess that we have as a people in science is that it's not enough of us.
Speaker 2: Amen and that's what I spend most of my time outside to--you know that's why I wrote the book.  Part of the reason that I wrote the book because when I, in going to the schools and you know and I share you know the aspect of how you know where I came from you know and what I'm doing and trying to employ that you know, I mean if I can do it, it's no reason that you, you know you can't do it.  I mean I, you know and I let them know that I'm not a nerd you know, I mean cause I ran track for GE [General Electric].  When I was forty, I you know I made the national team, I won a gold medal.  I mean this is an event that's sponsored by 'Runners World' [magazine] where all the companies compete and I had made the national team and I ran out at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and won a gold medal.
Speaker 1: Now what event did you run?
Speaker 2: I ran on a relay.  I ran my 400 meters but I ran in high school at--
Speaker 1: 4x400 on a relay team, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the first thing I did, it was a medley relay cause it was mixed, okay and the first thing I did, I called up my track coach from high school [Riverhead High School, Riverhead, New York] and I told him that you know what had happened and he said Marshall, I, you know --he's not surprised.  He said it's two things, he if, he said if you had kept fit number one, and if you hadn't had any injuries you know he said he wasn't surprised.  I mean I obviously trained for this.  I mean I stopped playing tennis.  I stopped playing softball.  I did everything you know to go out there and do those intervals on the track and all that stuff and I, you know and I ran the 400 meters within two seconds of my high school time and he you know and he wasn't surprised.  So I would go into, like I would go to an enrichment program at, say at a college where they would have high school kids there and the first thing I would do in the last--at least that year when I came back the first thing I did is I showed them my gold medal, let them know that see I run track too, you know for GE.  So, but no you're absolutely right.  It's a, you know I--all the boards and thing you know with the academy and everything, with ASME, the American Society of Mechanical Engineering.  I mean one of the things I did for them for these four or five years, they have a middle school program okay for the national convention and it would happen anywhere in the country.  It could be in New Orleans [Louisiana], Chicago [Illinois], LA [Los Angeles, California], whatever.  And what they would do is that they would bring in students from the middle school or the day, great for the kids because they don't have to be in the classroom.  And, but so wonderful for them because like I remember being in Chicago and some of the little kids had never been you know in a big hotel before you know.  And so a couple of these times I've done my laser show you know for them there you know.  And so yeah they bring in a couple hundred kids you know and so there's different things like that, that's you know you try to do things that's going to you know just light a little spark, you know a little flame to let them know that they're, you know that they can do this.  And it's, I know our people you know are not, you know they--I mean it's an awareness thing cause they don't even know--I mean I think the reason that I do what I do is because I just want them to be aware so they'll have a choice.  And you know a couple little stories like I remember going back you know to Massachusetts and giving a talk to you know families and their kids that were like in eighth grade getting ready to go to high school.  And then you know eight years later I gave a talk at Union College right there in, you know right here in Schenectady [New York] and this little, this girl came up to me, this student and she was an electrical engineering student her senior year and she remembered when I gave this talk over in Massachusetts that she said something that I said made her think that she wanted to be a, you know become an engineer and indeed she did, you know.  And a couple of other students that came up that was there from the city, couple of them came up to me afterwards and they were in tears because you know I told them the things that I had gone through, some of the things that you know didn't know if I was going to make it and so forth.  And they were on probation in their program at Union College, engineering program.  And they came up to me afterwards with tears in their eyes and they said you know I believe I can make it now after hearing what you told us, you know.  So that's why I do that.
Story_ID: 48197
Speaker 1: Okay. We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I guess my biggest hopes is that as a people I, you know, as a people that we have to realize that we're not in the twentieth century anymore.  We're, you know we are in the twenty-first century.  We're not going back to the twentieth century.  And my hope is that that message would get through from the standpoint of letting both--not just students but parents realize that their children are going to need you know for the most part more, different skills than they have going forward so that they'll be able to participate you know in society and be true contributors to society as one goes forward.  And it all centers, you know it all centers around having the right education.  And somehow that you know somehow that message it's not, it's--on a smaller scale it's a message to our own people but it's also a message to the nation because the nation doesn't realize the crisis that's taking place as far as you know the sorts of skills the next generation is going to have to be able to compete on a, you know on a global basis, okay.  You know the world is bigger than your backyard, it's bigger than your, you know than your village, it's bigger than your city.  You know whatever you're doing, your counterpart in India and China and Australia you know they're not taking it lightly.  You know, those same kids there aren't doing what you're, you know what the kids here are doing you know when you look at the bigger picture.  So hopes and concern, my concerns is that you know we're not getting the message out in a way you know that makes you know that will make a difference you know for our kids.  I mean you know there's always going to be a percentage that's going to do it the right way, but that's going to you know I mean if you got 5 percent, 10 percent, 15 percent even 20 percent whatever it's not enough, okay.  I mean you need a larger percentage that's going to you know that you're going to want to, you're going to want them to be able to be participants in you know in what's going to be you know what the twenty-first century is all about and unfortunately it's all technically based.
Story_ID: 48198
Speaker 1: All right.  Your 1999 book was 'Never Give Up - The Marshall Jones Story'.  And so you said teachers inspired you to write that book?
Speaker 2: Yeah, teachers and you know some of the elementary schools local to this area [Schenectady, New York].  And I started out actually going to a local fourth grade you know class and part of it was you know trying to share with, what I did.  But more importantly I was trying to share with them you know where I came from.  I mean I was proud to say that I came from a duck ranch on eastern Long Island [New York], that I was a New Yorker, you know.  But I'm not a city person and you know and I came from the duck ranch and you know and now I'm an engineer researcher at General Electric Company and all these things happened in between.  And I always remember that there was a young student in the fourth grade many years ago and he was from a single parent family and his mother was Caucasian and she was a veterinarian and he always wanted to be a lawyer.  And once I came into that class and said what I did, from that point on he wanted to become a scientist.  So it's a matter of not knowing.  I mean I, some years later I organized a workshop locally, had a panel of college students, engineering students.  A mom came up to me after that, her son was in eighth grade.  The guidance counselor says that he should take X,Y,Z courses in high school in order to go into engineering.  She was an MBA [master's in Business Administration], her husband was a lawyer, white, didn't know how to talk to their son about what engineering is all about.  And she was so happy that she, that this little panel was there and that she knew, that she found out something that she didn't know before.  So it goes beyond a number, you know just our people but it's the nation's people because--I mean issue because they are not, they just don't know what the choices are.  But it was teachers that, in the elementary schools and high schools that I've spoken at said that you know they encouraged me to do that and I finally did it and now my arm's being twisted because they said that you need to update (laughter).
Story_ID: 48199
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we always ask this question, what today when you look over, back over everything you've done you know scientifically and otherwise, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I say would be my legacy?  You want to just explain to me what, when you say legacy, is it relative to what people would think of me in the go--in--?
Speaker 1: Well now what things are you leaving behind for you know generations that follow?
Speaker 2: Okay, got it.  That's what I thought.  Okay, I think my legacy would be that you know that I would be someone that individuals would think was a technologist that had a large commitment to the community, to his people you know to society.  That one would see the linkage or the connection between the two.  You know we--the fact that you know there's an exhibit here at this museum [Museum of Innovation and Science, Schenectady, New York] about me, the museum wanted to do that, not just because of my technical accomplishments but also because of my commitment to the community and specifically to youth.  So things that are you know shown in that small exhibit, exhibits both you know both areas.  So I guess I would say that I would be looked at as you know someone you know that wouldn't be considered one dimensional.  And I mean for instance one organization I belong to, the 100 Black Men, there was a time when I was, I thought it was extremely important that our people had access to the internet and computers and so forth. And I came up with this idea where we got funding to set up what was called the 100 Net so that youth including grandparents were able to have you know training in the computer arena.  And it's something that we had an idea about that actually took place you know even to the point that there's an art center, Afro-centric art center in this area called Hamilton Hill Art Center [Schenectady, New York] where we're able to provide special computers where they were able to utilize these computers specifically that have software that they could use specifically for art.  And that all came out of that activity that we had you know through the 100 Black Men group that I was involved with.  So that you know, that's the community side versus the technical side.  From that standpoint you know it's sort of two sides to Marshall G. Jones.
Story_ID: 48200
Speaker 1: Now we always ask about family too.  Now do you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two sons.  They were both born when my wife [Annie Jones] and I were in graduate school.  My oldest son is Allen, also Allen Gordon Jones.  He's a special needs individual.  So you know he's you know he lives in a residence today.  He lived home until he was, in fact he left home the same time my younger son went to college and so he has his, you know disability.  He's mentally challenged and so he lives in a residence and much of my time is spent over the years involved you know in that area.  You know there's a special needs (unclear) school in this area.  It's nationally known.  I've been on the board there.  Been on the governor's board you know for another group here in the tri-city area, but anyhow that's Allen.  Kevin is a, just a year, little over a year younger.  He also works for GE [General Electric].  He saw what I did as I went along and I never tried to push him into engineering but you know he got a bachelor's degree in management science and then got a master's degree in industrial engineering from UMass [University of Massachusetts] also and he's worked for--he came into GE through one of the well-known training programs and he's worked for GE lighting, he worked for aviation, now he works for GE Healthcare.  He's in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  He's a manager of services, healthcare services for the Americas.  So he's doing well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, you still married?
Speaker 2: He's not married yet.  He has a--
Speaker 1: No, I was asking are you still married?
Speaker 2: Oh am I still married?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  You know we, my wife just retired last year and she's happy that she's retired.  She's trying to figure out how come she's able, how come she was able to do all she was doing before she was retired because she seemed like she got more to do now.  And so she's adjusting to that very you know very well.  She was a stay-at-home mom about the first five years and then she worked for a local bank here for maybe five or six years and a chemical company.  She's a--she ended up with a master's degree in accounting.  That's her area.  And then there's a grocery chain in here that's very well known through the northeast called 'Price Shopper'.  It's run by Gold Corporation so she's, about fifteen years she was an accountant there and she--yeah so we're still married.
Story_ID: 48201
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about the--we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think you asked almost everything I--I guess the only thing I would like to reiterate or re-emphasize you know the importance of the decision that my fourth grade teacher made [to make Jones repeat the fourth grade] was absolutely huge and whatever happened to me you know going forward because I don't think--if she hadn't made that decision I don't think I would be where I am today.  And one other little story, maybe ten years ago I went back to my elementary school and they had their seventy-fifth anniversary and I was sort of the you know big man on campus.  And GE [General Electric] actually purchased you know enough books for every family in that school and the thing that impressed me was cause at the time she was in her eighties and she still remembered that I was left handed in her class.  It was, she was extremely important when I reflect.  So I just wanted to share that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She encouraged you to keep using your left hand, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 48202
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy but it's a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I probably answered that question from the standpoint that I'd like to be remembered as this two dimensional person that cared much for their community and totally loved his work as a technologist in the laser field.  Because they, everybody can tell--everybody that gets to know me knows it just comes out that I love what I do immensely so I, that's how I would like to be remembered.
Story_ID: 48203
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this picture please.
Speaker 2: Who's in it, when and--?
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of myself and my wife Annie and this took place at a 100 Black Men function that you know they took pictures of each one of the couples at the function.  And they were--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  Well this would be Annie Ruth Jones and Marshall G. Jones.  This is an early picture of my son Kevin.  He was still in high school at the time.  You know his name is Kevin Douglas Jones and that's when he was wearing a lot of hair at the time.  He was about 17 at the time.
Speaker 1: That's in the 90s [1990s], he has a hairdo.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is my special needs son, Allen Gordon Jones.  And this took place about five years.  This is a picture of the softball team at the [General Electric Global] Research Center [Schenectady, New York].  We had won the championship and we were with Roland Schmidt with the white hair.  He was the, at the time the senior vice president of the Research Center.  There I'm up in the upper left hand corner when I had a little bit more hair.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah I see somebody with hair.
Speaker 2: Here this would have been in you know 2002, that's when I was selected as a Coolidge Fellow at the Research Center.  This is Scott Darling who was the vice president of GE [General Electric] Global Research.  This took place down in Florida.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) so big, I don't know actually how (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, this picture took place when I was working very early in my career with a CO2 [carbon-dioxide] laser at the [GE] Research Center.  I don't remember everybody's name.  In back of me is Bob White.  I worked with him for a long time.  He was a very good technician.  The fellow you know second from the left was a senior researcher that I was working with.  And this is the first time that anybody had done any work with a CO2 laser at the center.
Speaker 1: Don't see many Amish people in the sciences do you?  Making a joke about the beards.
Speaker 2: He's actually French.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't think he was Amish.  Go ahead and do that horizontally.
Speaker 2: Horizontal?
Speaker 1: So it will fit on the video frame.
Speaker 2: Oh you're going to, I see--
Speaker 1: Right, that is true.  I mean that actually took place, we talked about the face pump laser, that's what I was working ion in that picture right there.  And it was a lot of fibers you can see I was using.  And it's actually three fibers there and the rest of it's you know when I was a football player.  And I was in fifth grade there in this picture and this, on the track team.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The picture at the top left is when I was illustrating the aspect of having more than one beam that was being split.  And I was doing this with a laser that was definitely low power so that's why I'm able to do it in that fashion.  And the one in the lower left here is with, is the robotic system with the fiber optic.  All this was occurring in the mid-80s [1980s].  I have that picture.  So the picture in the upper left that is my fourth grade teacher over, you know she was--by '85 [1985], I was back at my elementary school in Aquebogue [New York] where I was doing a demonstration for the kids there.  That 100 Black--you know the black history month photo that's with [Howard] Latimer [African American inventor].  I actually knew his granddaughter who I introduced at a function down at GE headquarters.
Speaker 2: Who is Howard Latimer (unclear)?
Speaker 1: He was my, he was actually my hero because there are some similarities between his career and mine--
Speaker 2: That's right 'cause he was working with the filament for the light.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  He did--
Speaker 2: And he came in as an artist too (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: Wait, did you want to say anything else about the rest of that?  We didn't finish.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: You know at the bottom left is, I get hundreds of these kinds of little notes from kids when I end up going into the schools.  I have you know loads of that so--and this picture here is the one that appeared in 'Ebony' [magazine].  And I talk about my great uncle there a little bit and those are youngsters that--where we brought in.  And it was not long before it was in the same time frame I was doing that integration of fibers to the robot.  So-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's the one where I did the low powered demonstration relative to splitting the beam and having you know two actual little couplers there.  I had that ball there with the light shining on it showing that I had two beams coming out and so forth.  So--that's the same picture that, where I had the kids in.  But the cool thing here is that that roll of fiber, that's like 200 meters of fiber.  And so when I demonstrated that I was able to publish the fact that I had indeed coupled to the fiber was able to transmit over 200 meters.  And the--we had done all this in the lab and that had never been done before so that was, that's, that was a huge deal.  They had a big news conference out in California and there were pictures similar to that, that were splashed all over the newspapers worldwide.
Speaker 1: Nice.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
