Story_ID: 631558
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Flint Jones [sic. Flynn Earl Jones] is--
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones.
Speaker 1: --I know (laughter) and is the observer.  And I'd like you to start off by stating your name and spelling it for us, and giving your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You--you, you're counting on a lot you know, (laughter) you--you really--you really think there's anything left.  J-A-M-E-S, E-A-R-L, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth 17 January 1931, is the [U.S.] Army way of saying it, you say the na- the number first.  My place of birth, Tate County, Mississippi, a village called Arkabutla.  I think it's a Cherokee name, but like ark-a-butler, that was my town.
Speaker 1: And your--
Speaker 2: We lived on a farm though, we were not urban people.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Story_ID: 631559
Speaker 1: And I need to have your occupation?
Speaker 2: It took me a while to find one.  I was born a farm child and I went to school, then went to the [U.S.] Army.  And during the Army I considered a couple of things.  But the fact that my father [Robert Earl Jones] is an actor, I say is but he's deceased, but he is an is for me.  That's not the reason I became an actor, but it was half the reason.  The other half is that in school I had to find a way to deal with the English language in that, it's my first language, my only language, but I was hampered because I couldn't say, I couldn't speak it.  I'm--I'm a stutterer, I still am a stutterer, and you'll notice as we talk.  That's the other half of why I was attracted to, not acting, but so much as having very interesting words to say and being able to say them.  Most people don't have interesting things that come to mind, some people do, but most of us don't.  Most of us are very mundane and uninteresting.  But an actor can find all those interesting but written by all those wonderful people.  And even a stutterer can enjoy saying them, and that's the other half of why I'm an actor.
Speaker 1: Now we ask at the beginning, 'cause I wanna ask you a lot about your acting, which almost seems like, you know, was almost ordained for you, but I want to--
Speaker 2: Almost what?
Speaker 1: --ordained in many ways.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful word, so wonderful I don't believe it.  It suggests other powers.  Yes, I--I'll accept that most of us have destiny driv- driving our lives.  But I--I could very well have been a priest, 'cause I--I leaned towards that while I was in the Army.  I could've remained a farmer, which is a strong inclination for me still.  I--I could've chosen several things.  But the language factor and the footsteps of my father factor are things what drew me this way.
Story_ID: 631560
Speaker 1: So can you talk about your father, give his name--your father?
Speaker 2: Not much, 'cause I didn't know him very well.  That--that sounds horrible I know, but I--I can explain that simply.  His name was Robert Earl Jones.  We kept the Earl, it's a southern thing, in our names.  My son [Flynn Earl Jones] has it.  I don't know why we perpetuate it, but we do.  I like it.  It gives the two common names such dignity, James and Jones, there are billions of us, but Earls, special.  My father--my father was a prize fighter in Tate County, Mississippi before he met my mother [Ruth Connolly Jones].  He eventually migrated north and then east as a prize fighter.  And prize fighting led him into this world of cameras and other ways of seeing things.  He became a sparring partner for Joe Louis during the war, Second World War [World War II, WWII].  He met, because he was of the left wing, he met a lot of artists who also of the left wing, I won't try to name any right now.
Speaker 1: Well Paul Robeson was one.
Speaker 2: Paul Robeson was one, my father knew Paul.  He introduced me to him three times and I--things I will never forget, but my father then, from his association with poets and people from the renaissance period.  He lived in 99th Street, I think, in Harlem [New York, New York].  He knew Langston Hughes very well, performed in some of his plays.  I--I'm saying his name like you--you--you won't know him, but you probably do know him if you've seen a movie called 'The Sting' with Robert Redford and Paul Newman.  My father was the character with a great mustache who was Robert Redford's sidekick before Paul Newman showed up.  And the whole drama of that--that story was because my father as Redford's sidekick was murdered by the Robert--names again.  I--I love this man.
Speaker 1: Robert Redford?
Speaker 2: No, the other Robert.
Speaker 1: Robert Ne- Robert
Speaker 2: The British Robert.
Speaker 1: Robert--
Speaker 2: This is embarrassing.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, hold on, hold on.
Speaker 2: Robert Shaw.
Speaker 1: Robert Shaw.
Speaker 2: It's very embarrassing, but it does happen to me.
Speaker 1: That's--that's okay.
Speaker 2: If I don't use the name frequently, it sit--sits to the side.  But when Robert Shaw's character kills my father's character, it--it propels Newman into the picture.  Well, but my father made an impression and he's ve- very impressive.  My father also did movies, remember the character from the Harlem Renaissance period, he--he was an aviator, Colonel Julian [Hubert Julian].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Colonel Julian who was--
Speaker 2: Colonel Julian besides being an aviator and--and a quite an adventurer, was a film producer as well.  And he produced a couple of films that my father was in.  I know one of them with the actress either Muriel Rahn or Muriel Smith, I'm not really quite sure which.  But I've seen him in some films, some early films.  He, again, he is very impressive.  He struggled with the language because he didn't have a lot of education.  He didn't--he was not a stutterer though.  His--his struggle was--had to do with getting his tongue and teeth around complicated words, which most of us have that problem.  But he, I've worked with my father on stage.  There--there was a film that--the--the man who produced 'The Sting' also produced a little play off Broadway called 'Moon on a Rainbow Shawl' [Errol John] and I played a role, a neighbor of my father.  And we had a scene on stage, I remember every--every night.  But in that movie--in that little play was also Cicely Tyson, Billy Gunn [William Gunn], and again, names, they--they're sitting over here and waiting to be reintroduced.
Story_ID: 631561
Speaker 1: Sir, this is what--I--with your father [Robert Earl Jones]--you met--you went--you met him when you were twenty-one, right?
Speaker 2: Going back to Tate County, Mississippi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --and when he departed as a prize fighter to go north, he was under stress and I can't explain all the--the--I got the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] files and it's so much dedacted [sic. redacted], I can't make it out really.
Speaker 1: So you actually were able to find the FBI file because of his involvement with the left (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, sure. And with Paul Robeson, yes.  They exist, what you can make out.  It was the help of a cousin who's a lawyer from California, on the other, on Robert's side--side of the family that help--helped me get that.  But I--I'm off track now.
Speaker 1: No, you were talking, you're not off track.  You were talking about how, you know, his--his career and I asked you about the time when you were--well--let--you know, let--let's leave that right now.  I wanna ask you about your mother [Ruth Connolly Jones].  Let's stay on that.
Speaker 2: No, I--I was on--I was on to--on to something and I--and I lost--I misguided myself.  I wish I could find that strand.
Speaker 1: But he--your father had a significant career for--for his time.  I mean for anyone to be in movies or plays, you know, there wasn't for his time--
Speaker 2: He was considered, I think, a protegee of Paul Robeson's.  The only prob- he had the looks, he had the voice, the Paul Robeson voice and my father had it, I inherited it, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder has it--had it.  It--it's not a common voice.  Mine has gotten old now and is a bit scratchy, but it's an unusual voice.  He had all those as- all those qualities, but he couldn't sing like Paul Robeson.  And no matter what you wanna say about Paul's life, he is remembered mostly as the singer.  And he--he sung later in operatic songs too, but folk songs, songs of the people.  He's known all over the world for them.
Story_ID: 631562
Speaker 1: So your mother [Ruth Connolly Jones] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not my father [Robert Earl Jones] nor I, can- could sing.  My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes, your mother sir?
Speaker 2: She was a farmer's daughter.  She was the eldest of eleven children.  She went to school in Mississippi, but school for black children didn't go beyond about sixth grade.  The--black children were considered more valuable as wor- farm workers then students.  So the whole framework in the South was to--whatever department of education existed, was to allow children to be jerked out of school to be working.  My--my mother went as far as the sixth grade.  And because she liked schooling, she turned around and became a teacher for the first grade to stay involved with that world.  She--wh- what I know of her does not, you know, there was no--she didn't make a big deal out of--out of learning.  She read a great deal.  The things she read, I think, revealed more about her to me than anything else and I won't go into that now.  Those are--that's her autobiography that she never--never wrote.  But sh- my father left her when he discovered that I was in her belly.  I won't go into that yet, he just couldn't handle it, as many fathers can't handle it, especially in 1931.  The Depression [Great Depression] was devastating everybody and in Mississippi the boll weevil was doing its part in devastating everybody.  So he skipped town and I--I found him later.  So neither one of them did I know.  I--I had no association with my mother when I was in college.  She in- interrupted her life to come to live near Ann Arbor, Michigan where I was in school.  She moved to Jackson, Michigan, ran into a fella that liked her and then she had then left her second husband in St. Louis, Missouri, and now she became a third wife of a third husband.  And--but she had made that move just to be close to Randolph [Randolph Connolly], my uncle and me.  My uncle went--went to Ann Arbor, went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] the same time I did, but he went as a graduate student.  He's gotten his--his undergraduate work done in Grand Rapids, Michigan at com- community college.  So he enrolled in Michigan as a engineering student, graduate student, which is considerable.  He was an unusual man, my uncle.  But I was proud that we were in this--in school in Ann Arbor at the same time.  Our worlds never--never crossed, but we were there.  And that--that was her brother.  And my mother, the last thing she did really was to move near us.  I rejected it, I said you--I don't want you doing that.  I wanna do this myself.  But my uncle welcomed it, he said let--let's let her in our lives, 'cause she makes good dinners (laughter).  And we would drive or take a bus from Ann Arbor every weekend as though to Jackson and she would put up a good dinner for us.  That was worth it, especially for him, he was--he was the youngest child and she was the oldest child of the Connolly family.
Story_ID: 631563
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the Connolly family, because that--first of all you need to talk about Momma [Maggie Connolly] and Papa [John Henry Connolly], but--I mean pops, but I want you to talk about the family and even how far back, you know, on that side?
Speaker 2: I--at some point the story becomes legend, I think.  Sometimes good legend, usually if it's called a legend, it's pretty hot stuff and when it reaches that point, it's not just a bunch of facts, it is--it is a concept almost.  The--the Connolly family came out of Mississippi.  I have been able, with the help of a biographer, trace the line back to the first African who became the mate of an indentured Irish person, and they became--they--they created the Connolly family.  It was her family name by the way that they assumed my--my--my great-great-great-grandfather, because slaves didn't have last names.  She, being an indentured servant, did have a last name, her name was Parthenia, Parthenia Connolly and Brice [Brice Connolly], her husband, took her--during emancipation--took her name as his family name and he passed it on to us.  So we have a matrilineal name.  They were farmers.  They sustained themselves through farming, both with income and produce.  They had a large family, it's in the book. Large family.
Story_ID: 631564
Speaker 1: And so the Connolly name continued up through my [maternal] grandfather, John Henry Connolly.  He was a man I knew very well.  He--he was Papa for me, he was essentially my father, 'cause my--my real father [Robert Earl Jones] had not entered the picture fully yet.
Speaker 2: He was like your best friend?
Speaker 1: Oh John Henry, yeah.  He--he had a tradition when we moved to Michigan, fishing because very important both as a way to put food on the table, as well as--I won't call it a sport, who the heck knew anything about fly fishing then.  You put a worm on a hook and threw it out there and hope for the best.  But he would--he--he--besides Randolph [Randolph Connolly], my uncle, he had two other sons who didn't live with him, but whenever he went fishing, he would pick one of his sons or his grandsons to get in the boat with him, on- on- only one--one person.  And I finally figured it out.  We went to--we'd drive to a place called Lost Lake, it was a lost lake, it had no, no beaches at all, ov- overgrowth, but it had fish in it.  And he had a boat, and we'd go out and sit in the boat.  And he said there are two sports, one is called fishing, the other one is called catching fish, we're here to fish.  But really it was his way of presenting himself for counsel.  If we, his children or grandchildren, had problems we needed to discuss, there you'll have it.  Here's the time.  He would--he never said it in so many words, but I--I knew there was--that's what was going on, 'cause he never took more than one child with him at a time fishing.  I--I adore him and still I adored him then, I adored him as a father, I called him Papa.  I can't say he guided my life, 'cause that was sort of guiding itself.
Story_ID: 631565
Speaker 1: I'll give you an example of that, guiding itself.  When we moved from Mississippi to Michigan around 1936 I think, we--we sold all the--the livestock we had and we packed everything up including a piano.  We had an upright piano that my [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Conolly] insisted on keeping in that family and it was loaded onto a freight train.  Preparations were made for the family to then go by passenger train from Coldwater, Mississippi to Dublin, Michigan.  I, because my father's [Robert Earl Jones] mother lived in Memphis, Tennessee, this was a beautiful woman named Elnora Jackson [Elnora Jones Jackson].  Jackson by another family name.  I mean she--she wore a Gibson Girl type clothes and I remember how beautiful she was from ph- photographs.  Well they said, "We're gonna go to Michigan, but you're lucky, you get to go and live with this woman who is your father's mother."  I can't tell you what my reaction was then, but later when the car pulled up to Elnora Jackson's front yard and they said, "Okay it's time to go and meet a new family."  I hung onto the mattress and would not let go, my way of saying I wanna stay with that family, my first family.  And you know what, John Henry Connolly honored it.  He said, "Okay, we'll take you back to the family and you go on to Michigan with them."  That was the first decision I ever made about my life, and he let me make it.  I--I honor him in so many ways, but that--that's one of them.  It happened another time--I'll think of it later where he let me make a decision about my life.  It's--it's not common for parents to do for their children.
Speaker 2: Mr. Jones [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones], that was--you talked about that in your book and you've talked about it in other places as being a very traumatic experience--
Speaker 1: Very what?
Speaker 2: --you know, the traumatic experience that you almost got left behind.  You know, in that--
Speaker 1: What kind of experience?
Speaker 2: Traumatic, traumatic.
Speaker 1: Traumatic.
Speaker 2: Traumatic.
Speaker 1: I--I don't wanna mislead anybody about that.  The little boy who hung onto the mattress and no one knows how much trauma he was going through, I never expressed it in so many words.  I didn't say, "Grandpa no, no, no I wanna stay with you, with your family, I don't wanna go with Aunt--Elnora's family."  I didn't say any of that.  It was just a physical act of holding onto the mattress that was in the backseat with me and my father [sic. grandfather] acknowledging that, what that meant and so okay you can stay with the Connolly family.  If there's trauma, it's still going on.  If there's trauma, it's life-long trauma.  But I can't say that--that's why I'm a stutterer or that's why--
Speaker 2: But you said it's be--you had said that that's when you stopped speaking.  You know, that you--
Speaker 1: Did I say that?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, not the--the inc- incident with the mattress.  By mattress, when black people traveled they didn't have sleeping bags in those days and there were no hotels or motels that would accept black people.  So there was a small mattress you carried in the back seat.  I, being the child that was gonna be dropped in Memphis, I was lying on that mattress in the back seat.  And they said, "Okay it's time to go now to Au- Aunt Elnora."  I didn't say I'm not going, I just hung onto the mattress.  It was wordless.  And John Henry, my grandfather, understood that. That I had made a decision about myse- my life.
Story_ID: 631566
Speaker 1: Because we moved from that time to Michigan, and when I got to Michigan I was a stutterer.  My [maternal] uncle [Randolph Connolly] also was a stutterer.  I have tried to pin the stuttering down to the fact that I--I mimicked him.  And when you do that, sometimes it can--you--it's catching.  I--I mimicked my uncle's stuttering, partly because I wanted to keep him company, partly 'cause I wanted to mock him, all kinds of reasons.  But that's where the stuttering started.  And it was until I got to Michigan that it started.  Then also school started, my first year of school.  And it all converged--that was trauma, yeah, but it wasn't because of the mattress incident.
Speaker 2: It was the move, what was it?
Speaker 1: I don't--it was--it was everything.
Speaker 2: It was everything behind.
Speaker 1: But--but what I noticed, what I mark is that I was allowed to make a decision for my life.  That was not traumatic, that was--
Speaker 2: You standing up for yourself.
Speaker 1: That was a resolution, yeah.
Story_ID: 631567
Speaker 1: Can I ask you about your--your green eyes?  Are they other--like is that a Connolly tradition (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You'd think it would be from the Irish side, no, it's from my father's [Robert Earl Jones] side.  He looks more, I wanna say Caucasian, he looks more European then I do.  And I'll use the phrase European rather than get into the phrases Negroid, Caucasoid, all that stuff.  He looked more like someone who came from Europe then Africa then I do.  And he had green eyes, and I whatever odd eye color I have was inherited from him.
Speaker 1: See, I couldn't tell that in the photos, I couldn't tell his complexion or his eyes, but I remember hearing people talk about your eyes--
Story_ID: 631568
Speaker 1: They in contrast on my mother's [Ruth Connolly Jones] side, the Connollys, were landowners by comparison, considerable landowners.  And--and as African Americans that was not a common thing.  We were sharecroppers, we owned forty acres, but the rest of our produce was gotten from acreage that was sharecropped.  But the Con- the--the Joneses, they were--Jones was just one of the names that came out of Tate County [Mississippi].  Shockley [ph.] was another, we have Shockleys in my father's [Robert Earl Jones] side now.  Now there are two branches of the Shockley clan, one is white and one is black.  There's--there's a Shockley--there's a general store that's named either Shockley or another of the two-winged families, like two wing, black and white.  It was not uncommon.
Speaker 2: To have both sides.
Story_ID: 631569
Speaker 1: So you were saying in first grade in Dublin [Michigan] is when the stuttering got worse, afterwards?
Speaker 2: That's when it became obstructive, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how--was anyone concerned about your stuttering or did they--did they try to get you out of stuttering, you know, or did the teachers try to get you out of stuttering?
Speaker 2: It was my business I guess.  You know, therapy--who thought of therapy.  Who thought of remedial work for a child?  No, they dealt with what they got.  That was the hand they were dealt.  The middle school I went to in Dublin, Michigan in a one-room schoolhouse.  There was seven children in the whole school.  I was the only one in my class.  The girl in front of me, third grade, was the only person in her class.  The little boy behind me, Dickie Crofo [ph.], first grade was the only person in his class.  Doesn't sound so dreadful really, because we got a lot of attention.  For one, everything we learned was repeated over and over again from class to class.  With wonderful teachers, the first one was a Norwegian woman named Miss Elifson [ph.].  She reeked of coffee.  That I remember.  She smelled like coffee, she drank coffee constantly.  She was not unkind.  Coffee didn't make her cranky.  Coffee probably made her cool (laughter).  And then there was a woman, Miss Gardner [ph.].  Miss Gardner had a moment with me.  The first day of school I peed in my pants and she said to me, "Come up here."  School was a space with desks and then there was a space for classes, a long bench for classes.  Come up here means come up here to the class area.  And I walked up with dread.  I thought I was in for punishment.  She instead embraced me.  She was a full woman, embraced me in a way that nobody has ever embraced me before or since, and I collapsed in tears.  That was one of my teachers.  And there was another teacher, a very young one who became pals with my aunts.  She would come over, piano lessons with my aunts, more contemporary, especially during the music--the transitions of music from jazz to other.  That part of Michigan was all polka, polka and schottische, which we all accepted.  My aunts, however, 'cause they had connections in the more urban areas, they liked jazz, and when the boogie-woogie came along, they really liked that.  So that dominated our household, but I had to live with both, I had to live with--I--I didn't like jazz because the brass something about my ears, I still can't relate to it.  Only time I could relate was when I went out to Long Island [New York] to a music festival and Count Basie was performing, his whole band.  When his horn players stood up and let go of their brass sounds, I finally got it, finally understood it, what the attraction was.  But it was--it was not my favorite kind of music.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite kind of music?
Speaker 2: I didn't have one until Joe Cocker, rock and roll.
Story_ID: 631570
Speaker 1: So I want to ask you, during this period can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Not much.  Smells, don't exist anymore, I can't smell.
Speaker 1: No, of your childhood?
Speaker 2: I--I'd have to remember, wouldn't I.
Speaker 1: You would.
Speaker 2: I'd have to remember through my senses, but I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I--sounds.  The wildlife sounds when I hear them where we live in the woods now.  And when I hear certain sounds--bird sounds.  I can't say I know that bird, but there's an echo, an echo, yeah.  Sounds--
Speaker 1: Sights--
Speaker 2: Sights.
Speaker 1: Smells.
Speaker 2: Sunsets, when you're lucky the sunrises can strike a chord.  But those are--I think those are romantic things from my, my mind.
Story_ID: 631571
Speaker 1: So what were you doing, that's what I'm wondering.  Like, during this time that you are very heavily stuttering and you're--you've described yourself as mute, what are you--
Speaker 2: As what?
Speaker 1: Mute, you know, that you were not talking.
Speaker 2: Mute, yeah, I called myself a mute, yeah.
Speaker 1: But during that time, what are you thinking and what is going on up here?
Speaker 2: No, I--accepting what is.  I didn't try to connect anything, I just tried to make do with what I had and talking was important to me but I wasn't challenged very much.  The only reason I'm gonna have to talk to anyone from outside the family was when there was a visitor and I was asked to introduce myself and I couldn't.  That was embarrassing.  I didn't think of it in the embarrassment to my family, I thought of the embarrassment to myself, 'cause it was about me, you know.
Speaker 1: So, that--it--it--
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandfather [John Henry Connolly] built a church across the roads and across the tracks from our farm.  In that church every Sunday there'd be Sunday school.  During Sunday school I'd try to recite my--my chapters.  I was this object of derision, because--and I understood it.  It's funny.  Stutterers are funny.  And I know we shouldn't make fun of them, but it's funny.  And as they were falling on the floor with laughter, I understood it.  But because it was about me, when I got home one day I said I'm not going to Sunday school anymore.  And my grandmother [Maggie Connolly], another decision of my life, said okay.  Second decision of my life, stopped going to church.
Story_ID: 631572
Speaker 1: So were you a good student during this whole time?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You were not?
Speaker 2: I--I thought I was doing okay, but you know, when I got to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I was really a little frog in a huge--bigger than Lost Lake.
Speaker 1: Right, but you would not have gotten to the University of Michigan back then if you did not have something going on.  And I wanna take you to your--what about Donald Crouch?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's what was going on.  Probably for all--all of his students, he challenged us all to go to college.  World War II [WWII] was winding down I think.  I--I might be mixing up the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] with an--another period.
Speaker 1: Right, well I mean we're talking about 1945, 'cause you were at Dick--Dickson High School [Brethren High School; Kaleva Norman Dickson High School, Brethren, Michigan].
Speaker 2: I was what?
Speaker 1: You were at Dickson High School, is it Dickson though?
Speaker 2: Oh Dickis- Dickson, the Norman high school, yeah, Dicks--
Speaker 1: Right, Dickson High School, sorry.
Speaker 2: Dickinson, it is Dickinson?
Speaker 1: No it's Dickson.
Speaker 2: Dickson, Norman Dickson, Dickson.
Speaker 1: It's Bre- it's Dickson High School, now it's Brethern [sic.], but it's--it was Dickson High School.
Speaker 2: Donald Crouch was the teacher of English, geography, history, and Latin at Dickson High School.  And he became my--I think my second father beside my [maternal] grandpa [John Henry Connolly], a second active fa- father figure.  Politically, he--he understood--he was a poet.  And his world was Robert Frost, I think he knew Robert Frost.  He had taught in colleges, Donald Crouch, in Michigan.  He--he had retired to his farm hoping to be a farmer, and he realized that Dickson High School had fellows in it down there trying to learn Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer].  He couldn't stand it, so he dropped his plow and came back to teach English.  That was my good fortune.  In--in one of his classes, I was challenged to write poetry and I wro- wrote a piece that I thought was pretty good and when I showed it to him, he really thought it was pretty good, it's so good that I must've plagiarized it.  And he challenged me, if you--if you--if you didn't steal this poem, you get up in front of the class right now and recite it.  I did.  Because it was me, it was my words.  I had no trouble speaking that.  And he never discussed it with me, but I--I knew that he said this is something we have to make a part of this student's life, words.  And so we didn't have--we were--we're not--we weren't big in sports, I think we had a pretty good basketball team once in a while.  And that--that's still the way--the case with Dickson school.  But--where I ran into a blur there for a minute.
Speaker 1: Oh that's okay, but--but--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm about to say something, but I just blurred myself.  Wh- what was I saying?
Speaker 1: You were--you were--well you--the name of your poe- poem was it 'Ode to Grapefruit'?
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and that--that's a side issue.
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: Because, the issue is--
Speaker 1: His role.
Speaker 2: Huh?  Yeah, Donald Crouch.  He--that's why he dropped his plow.  He was a Mennonite, Mennonite preacher, Mennonite teacher, Mennonite citizen of Brethren County, Michigan [sic. Manistee County, Michigan].  Brethren, as in brethren Mennonite, brethren Mennonites.  There wasn't a Mennonite school, but there were a lot of Mennonites in the--in this farming community.  But he had--he had had exposure to great poetry like Robert Frost.  He also wrote poetry himself.  There was an awareness of politics that I found unusual among any of the citizens of that part of Michigan at the time.  He knew what the left wing was, he wasn't a left winger.  But as a Mennonite, he knew full well the contrast in politics that were going on in the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] period and all that.  He knew very well.  He didn't try to shape his students politically, but he was there, and I think had--had a quiet influence on our ability to open up our minds, and he did mine.
Story_ID: 631573
Speaker 1: Do you think your grades improved at this point or was it--or wasn't that--'cause there is no way you could've gotten into the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I remember sitting and went--drove up to Traverse City, Michigan to take a test for the Regents Alumni Scholarship to the University of Michigan.  My teacher said you--if you're gonna pick a big one, pick a big one.  And that was it.  I remember having cow manure on my boots.  I sat there and this whole array of students, none--no others dark like me, not even Native American, and there were a lot of native Chip- Chippewa Indians in our--in our area.  But I was the only dark person there.  I was so proud of myself.  I said you know what, you're stepping into an unusual world and it wasn't a challenge, but it was--this is an unusual world.  I wanted to do well.  I must've done okay in the test.  But the cow shit didn't stop emanating from my boots.  There I was.
Story_ID: 631574
Speaker 1: When I got to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], it was very comp- complex.  I--I today have not analyzed all that.  I had some run-ins 'cause I--I--I'd become a mason by that time.  And I had a little truck, a panel truck that I used in my masonry work.  I was only an apprentice, I was never a full mason, but I did apprentice and built some houses for my relatives in Muskegon, Michigan and my mother [Ruth Connolly Jones] helped with my uncles with foundations and so on.  There's things I had learned about concrete and cement, and masonry that I--I can use to make a living.  I built a church in Irons, Michigan.  Now I didn't build the whole thing, but I built the foundation and--and trouble--I'm troubled by it, 'cause I felt that we--we'd made mistakes.  My crew, I was hired because I had experience as a mason.  And I was--when I got to the job I was the primary mason.  I was--make sure it all went well.  Most of the crew were farmers, Polish farmers, a lot of them didn't speak English, but they--they knew masonry like I did.  And we got together and we, you know, put up lights at night and built this foundation and basement for the church.  I was always worried that it--I'd done something wrong, 'cause I--I didn't use a transom, I--I didn't use the equipment, the sighting equipment that determines depth and--and distance.  I was always worried, 'cause I was not trained in that--in the instruments of masonry.  But I got away with it I guess, I was not arrested, and the church is still there.
Speaker 2: The church is still there?
Speaker 1: The church is still, the last time I--I saw, yeah.
Story_ID: 631575
Speaker 1: When you're talking I was thinking, okay you're born in, you know, a small little backwater town in Mississippi, but then you move your--your--your [maternal] grandfather really fought, he--he sort of chooses Dublin [Michigan].  He--he's going there to homestead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was homestead, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was homesteading.
Speaker 2: And I don't know if it was any more complicated than the fact that my grandmother, his wife, Maggie Connolly, would get wanderlust.  This farmer's wife, eleven children in her life, and there come times when she said, "I've had it, I wanna move, I wanna go somewhere else."  And John [John Henry Connolly] would say, "Okay, I got a place we can go."  He would buy land sight unseen from traveling salesman and the land we lived on in Dublin, Michigan was one of those plots of land he bought without even seeing it.  I--I th- this I find interesting for all kinds of odd reasons.  Take--take it a fly, taking a flying leap on something.  And he did that, the site in Arkansas he'd bought and they--they tried living there for a while.  But the site in Michigan was--was the primary--that's where we all kind of landed, because the migration north was beginning to happen.  Not all of his children, John Henry's children, came to Michigan.  Some went to--one uncle went to Washington, D.C.  Some of the aunts, 'cause they were--their lives were determined by whoever they met and married, different parts of Indiana and--and but primarily in Michigan in both the Flint [Michigan] and Pontiac [Michigan] area, and the Jackson [Michigan] area my mother [Ruth Connolly Jones], and me going and uncle [Randolph Connolly], my uncle going to college at Ann Arbor [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Muskegon [Michigan] is a--was a strong--a stronghold for my--my--my aunt [Ozella Connolly Walker], one of my aunts married one of the only men in my family who was in the [U.S.] military, who had military service, Uncle Bob, Bob Walker.  He--he almost became as close to me as my grandfather did, as a relative, except we were not related.  But in terms of being pals, I don't--I don't talk enough about him.  I built--I built his house.  But his--his wife now lives in Houston [Texas] and she more or less keeps the family legends going, you know.
Story_ID: 631576
Speaker 1: So you--you know, and you said also in the book that your [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Connolly], she didn't trust a lot of people, you know, and she did not trust necessarily white people, right?
Speaker 2: She--I can't say she hated white people, 'cause I saw examples of her not hating them.
Speaker 1: She didn't trust?
Speaker 2: No, no trust.  There were--there are many men who were rug salesmen.  They would come to the farm and the minute that they opened their wares, she'd get out the broom and chase them down the driveway 'cause she didn't wanna deal with merchants from other countries.  World War II [WWII] was a real problem, because she didn't have much contact with the outside, but my grandfather [John Henry Connolly] did.  He--he worked in--he worked for forestry department.  He--he and his--he and one of my aunts worked in nursery, forest nursery, their conn- their connection with the outside world.  But grandmother, though, very isolated, so isolated that she would venture into other pursuits like Yogaism and she'd practice Yogaism on the sly.  Why, because she didn't want anybody to know she was doing that.  She's afraid of some sort of condemnation for doing something so esoteric.  I'd walk into a room, a bedroom and she'd be on the floor and would jump right up as if nothing was going on.
Speaker 1: But that was unusual at that time, this is--you're talk-
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --this is--this is--you know, you think of Yogaism later, but this is--this is the 1940--I--these are the 1940s?
Speaker 2: But--but esoteric studies that--that were stimulated by Madame Blavatsky [Helena Blavatsky] and Mary Baker Eddy.  The--these were people who were--
Speaker 1: Scientology was I think.
Speaker 2: Scientology, really?
Speaker 1: Oh no, Christian Science was Mary Baker right--
Speaker 2: Chris- oh yeah, all that.
Speaker 1: --was Mary Baker, that's right.
Speaker 2: But all those esoteric, I won't call them faiths, but whatever you call them, pursuits.  Yeah, she--she and she was aware of them, and was attracted to Yogaism.
Speaker 1: So you're--so you're at the university (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, I--I got onto her because besides esot- esoteric, she used to make pronouncements.  Now the mailman was driven and there was such animosity among the county people that when he would come to a mailbox, he would open it and there'd be horse manure--horse shit, put in the mailbox as a sign to him, we don't like you.  He didn't change his name though.  We got along with him fine.  But my grandmother began to say things like, if Adolf Hitler would bomb Mississippi first, he's okay with me.  Now I--I understood that, but we couldn't let her out in public to say things like that.  But she would add to it, since Tojo [Hideki Tojo] is really a colored fella, that makes Adolf Hitler a lot--lot better.  Tojo is a colored fella.  And I remember hearing a radio program that she would listen to one time.  It wa- I don't know, it couldn't have been propaganda, but it was something, some exploration of that issue of race with the Japanese, and she was glued to that radio.  I never heard it bef- since.  I never heard of this station since.
Story_ID: 631577
Speaker 1: When I would listen to some of the debates in the household, news is very important to us, radio.  My [maternal] grandfather [John Henry Connolly] every night at supper would read the portions of the daily newspaper that he thought we should not miss.  He would read it out loud, that was part of our sit down evening.  He read it quite well.  Some of his daughters would get pretty heated about it.  I'd be listening a lot and one day I said--his recommendation was, if you got a problem, write to the president, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  Write to him, tell him your problems, and I did.  And I expressed all the frustration I was feeling.  It was stirred up in the family about race.  And it was so interesting what I wrote, it was published in the daily paper.  You know, I was pretty fiery, so fiery to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] when I was in the [U.S.] Army and I'd be cleared for secret, they came around and talked to me.  They came around and talked to a lot of the neighbors too.  'Cause they wanted to know, what is this business about fire over the heads of the whites?  What are you talking about?  And but that--that's the kind of rhetoric I--I expressed to the president.  There'll be a fire over the heads of the whites.  I never grew into a rac- racist.  I think my grandmother [Maggie Connolly] was a full-fledged racist.  I--I--because I knew what it was, I knew how to avoid it, the thinking.  And I'm still busy avoiding it.
Speaker 2: But you grew up in really in a mixed environment.
Speaker 1: Mixed?
Speaker 2: Yes, with whites and blacks.  You grew up in a mixed environment.  You grew up in an integrated environment?
Speaker 1: The Connolly family was the only--there were two other black families in the whole county [Manistee County, Michigan].  Dating was a real problem.  (Laughter) You couldn't date across the ethnic boundaries unless you're very serious about it.  So you could be casually out to get, you know, a quick hug, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well you did get a quick hug one day--here and there, you did.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: You did, you got a quick hug there--here and there.
Speaker 1: Oh when I was child, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes when you were a child across the, the way.
Story_ID: 631578
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask about--'cause when you went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], that's why I'm saying you had to be--you were going to be pre-med, you were gonna be a doctor?
Speaker 2: And doomed to fail, because there's no way I could consume that much information on that university level for pre-medical studies.  In my sophomore year, I took the most difficult anatomy class that they offered for seniors.  If I can--if I can cut this, that was the phrase, if I can succeed in this class I'll continue my pre-med studies.  Of course I failed.  And that ended my pre-med studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leaving room for the pursuit of acting.
Story_ID: 631579
Speaker 1: I thought I might have a brain, but I was never sure.  I went for a test, an IQ test.
Speaker 2: What did you rate on the IQ test?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Somehow I didn't wanna know.  I didn't wanna know.  And it wasn't important to them.  I was in a counseling program for--'cause I had some difficulties like with that anatomy cl- course and pre-med.  I was having some difficulties and with studies.  And they were, you know, give- give me some counseling.  But the IQ test was a part of it.  I don't--I don't--I--I guess I was afraid to know.  'Cause I--I knew my [maternal] uncle [Randolph Connolly] was brilliant.  And so much of that was scary, I didn't wanna be brilliant like he was.
Speaker 2: But you were going and he was going--he was in graduate school?
Speaker 1: He was in graduate engineering school [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Engineering school, and you were--you were an undergraduate [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And so--but, I wanna understand how theater came, how did that come when you decided, you know.  How (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On--once I dropped pre-med I had to--I had to go ahead and get my degree.  That's really what it was all about.  The career didn't matter.  I thought because of my language difficulties, I could--I could sustain myself through the rest of my college years in the theater department or English department where--where I could--not hone my craft, but--but pay attention to my--my weaknesses and my--my voice, my speaking ability or inability to speak.  That was--that was my rationale.  I mainly just wanted to get through college.  I also had--I was taking Reserve Officers' Training program called ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I was gonna be an officer in the United States Army and I wanted to fulfill that.  So it was important that I do the four years.  My last year, I had classes I didn't--I didn't even show up for.  I mean I didn't--I didn't show up for the final exams.  There was a class in design, I didn't get the de- design.  Not that I blew it off, I just--I didn't--I didn't--I had no relationship to it.  But it was one of my studies.  An English class, which I did like, and the English teacher said, "If you'll just do one essay, oral essay on Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and read some Shakespeare I'll give you a passing grade."  I couldn't--I couldn't.  I loved--I loved getting up in front of the class now and then reading Hotspur [Henry Percy] and Henry V you know, or some character with some hot language, you know.  'Cause he--he liked--he liked his students to understand how li- alive Shakespeare was and how passionate he could get.  How--how human passion could be expressed in that fine language.  Now I enjoyed participating that way, but I couldn't--I couldn't bring myself to do the final exam.  And--and I--I'll use the phrase, I blew them off.  I dissed those classes and had to go back after the Army and do correspondence courses to fulfill my degree, my official degree.  But I got my bars anyway just from the four years.
Story_ID: 631580
Speaker 1: So you--you were, I think I read that you were the first African American to be cast in a play there on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: How many--how many black students were there, liked--
Speaker 2: There was one other woman, there was a woman.
Speaker 1: 'Cause this was a time when those kind of schools may have two students, sometimes.
Speaker 2: There was two, there was two of us.
Speaker 1: Because that was wh- were talking, we're still in the, you know, in the, you know, really in the mid--mid-'40s [1940s], you know, you started in '48 [1948] and you finish--well let's see fifty--you came back afterwards.  But I wanna--I wanna ta--
Speaker 2: But Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] has evolved to the point that the theater school [sic. Department of Theatre and Drama] is under the aegis of the music school [University of Michigan School of Music, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  The music school was the dominant school and I think the--given (unclear) in places like that, I think that has attracted more ethnic students then had been attracted before.
Speaker 1: That's fine.  But this is--this is--when you're going, not to say anything but it's light years away, this is--Michigan is a whole different kind of place at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't supposed to be there.
Speaker 1: But you graduated.  And I want, you know, you started to get involved--
Speaker 2: I graduated without my degree.
Speaker 1: Without your degree?
Speaker 2: I did not participate in the graduation ceremonies, throwing up my mortarboard, I didn't do that.  I just put my bars on and went in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: So your time in the Army, be--but you also--you were part of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] anyway, right?
Speaker 2: That's how I got into the Army.
Speaker 1: And this is the thing, in the Army you were commissioned as a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: That was the--that was the way it was set up, yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 631581
Speaker 1: So talk about your start with community theater at the Manistee [Manistee Summer Theatre Company] was it--is it--
Speaker 2: Well actually because I knew I was gonna go into the [U.S. military] service and I didn't know how that would work out, the Korean War was still hot.  I thought I'd be dead by the fall.  I took a class--I--I took a--besides getting my deg- a correspondence course to get my degree [from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I decided to take a year before I went to the service in summer stock--summer stock theater.  And I liked it.  I didn't play many roles, but I was stage carpenter, I got to be assistant stage manager.  I got into the workings of the theater and I liked the community of people who do--who do theater.  Yeah, I was the only black kid there.  But I wasn't ethnically isolated, there was a white student from--Paul Dreer [ph.] from Grand Rapids [Michigan].  Now he wasn't black, but he--he and I got along real good.  And they said that the theater was haunted but he and I could live in the tower--in the belfry if we could get up there wi- with a sleeping bag.  We--we didn't have to rent a house or digs.  And he did--he and I did, you know, we got--we became good--good friends.
Speaker 1: So what was it about the theater that attracted you?  Can you talk about that because when, you know, when you say I was a stagehand and these other things, you really know theater from the--from the essence of it.  You know it from the technical side and you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a chance to learn that yeah, and I like that, I liked that as much as I liked the acting side.  The acting was always a special challenge because of my language, because of my--my difficulty speaking, but that'll never change.  It still--I--it still exists.  I hide it pretty good, but it's still there and it was there then.  I--I took on--I--I didn't take on any heavy roles until I did the role of Othello by mistake.
Story_ID: 631582
Speaker 1: Well you played Othello--
Speaker 2: I played Othello.
Speaker 1: Was it five times (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In summer stock [with the Manistee Summer Theatre Company].
Speaker 1: Right, in summer stock (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One week's rehearsal, that's ridiculous.  I found out how ridiculous it was.  One of the sponsors of--of the summer stock theater, Anne Wittig, said of me, she said, "Jimmy's [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] Othello was God-awful."  And she was the most accurate critic I have--I've ever had.  It was God-awful, barely learned the words.  And that's one of the most complex plays that Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] almost wrote.  He didn't quite write it.  I'm discovering now, only now how incomplete that play is.  Shakespeare got sidetracked and to the fun of Iago.  He never fulfilled the tragedy of Othello.  And I found a way to do it, it's very simple.  It has--had to do with torture by Othello.  Othello becomes, not just the villain, but he consumes everything the villain has--has presented, he consumes it all.  He becomes a monster.  I--I'm still working on it as--in essay form.  I've never played it, but I mi- might direct it someday.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So how did you memorize in a week, you must've had--I'm tell--you have--you have a facility--how did you--that's--that's a lot to memorize in a week?
Speaker 2: But the hands have no memory and I can't explain it, except that if you write the words down there's a connection that happened in the mind from the hand and the physical that helps.  It's one--one thing.  My son [Flynn Earl Jones] helps me a lot in writing things down, helps me a lot, just--just going over them.  Repetition, repetition.
Speaker 1: So but you were hooked at that point, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did you li- you were hooked at that point--
Speaker 2: I was what?
Speaker 1: Hooked--hooked at that point?
Speaker 2: I--I don't know if I was hooked on theater, but I knew I liked it.  I knew it was a world I could--I could survive in, if not thrive.
Story_ID: 631583
Speaker 1: So what does your [maternal] grandfather [John Henry Connolly] and your grandmother [Maggie Connolly] saying about this?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was--became my--my primary fan, because given her biases and her anger, her rage about race, she was not just part African, she was part Choctaw, Cherokee Indian [Native American].  So she had it coming at her from all kinds of levels, being anti-white.  Because of all her rages, she'd come and sit in the front row of something we're doing on a stage and just couldn't get enough of it.  It was drama and nobody's getting hurt, and she was--she became my--our biggest fan.  My grandfather, you know, it's--can you make a living, he doubted it, but can you?  That was the only issue for him.  Got your degree, gotta do something with it.  But no, she--she got drama.  She was drama, she understood drama in her life.  She witnessed murder in her life.  She witnessed a sister and her mother kill a father-in-law [sic. stepfather], because he had abused the sister.  Th- this is legend, if I was asked to put my hand on the Bible and say is this true or not, no it is legend.  So, coming out of the world of intimate family drama, tragedy, horror, and--and living in a world of the larger scope of racial horror.  Her bedtime stories were about lynchings and murders and rapes, and hurricanes and floods.  We--we were challenged to go to sleep (laughter), but those were her bedtime stories.  But she is part--she is part of the legendary part of my--my life.
Speaker 1: So, you, you know, the first time that you played Othello was with Pam Pri-Printy [Pamela Printy]?
Speaker 2: Pamela Printy is a wonderful person, and that's all I can say.  She--she knew her lines.  And I was trying to learn mine.  That's about as far as we got.  It was a week rehearsal and a week performance [with the Manistee Summer Theatre Company].  And we got through it.
Speaker 1: But you start dating her also, you liked your Desdemona?
Speaker 2: I--I liked her, yeah.  That--that's all it amounted to.  We didn't have an affair.  Her f- her grandfather wanted to make sure of that.
Speaker 1: So that's why I was wondering what your grandmother thought of 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] as a story, you know, what she thought of that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it was drama.
Speaker 1: It was drama.
Speaker 2: We--we never discussed it and I just knew she was somehow into it.  She--she would not miss a performance.
Story_ID: 631584
Speaker 1: Maybe you were talking about Ma- Madge, is it, Skelly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Madge Skelly.  Madge Skelly was--she probably fits in with Donald Trou- Donald Crouch as someone in my life who became close to being another shepherd, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what were they saying to you at that time, because you have this gift of a voice, right? And you have a gift of presence, because she is the one who encouraged you to go study at the American The- Theatre Wing [American Theatre Wing, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well okay, you--you got all the facts don't you, right.  Thank you because I--I wouldn't have put that--put that all together.  No--yeah, she--I think she follows Donald Tro- Donald Crouch as in the mentoring and coaching me into a direction.  She knew there were three basic conservatories in New York City [New York, New York] that taught acting.  One was the Neighborhood Playhouse [Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre, New York, New York], one was the American Academy of Theater Arts [sic. American Academy of Dramatic Arts, New York, New York], and the other was the American Theatre Wing.  And I chose the American Theatre Wing 'cause it was a chance to use my G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  The tradition was with them, it--it had been formed by Helen Hayes and Helen Menken way back coming out of the USO [United Service Organizations] experiences.  You get a bunch of guys together who just been in the [U.S.] Army and looking for the--the visions in life and you get a bunch of girls, give them scholarships so they can have scene partners and you--you do a scenes, and you work and you learn things, and you get people like Lee Strasberg to teach acting.  You get--directing rather.  You get people like Will Lee who is one of the primary performers of 'Sesame Street.'  Good actor and a good acting coach.  People like Mary--Mary Hansen and her husband who taught speech.  Fanny Bradshaw who taught ooh classy speech.  I preferred the plain speech.  Good American speech.  But we--we--it was a good--good faculty.
Speaker 1: So how long were--how long were the classes?  How long did you study there at the American Theatre Wing?  How long--how long?
Speaker 2: I never counted, I--I never marked the years.  I was there over a couple of seasons.
Speaker 1: But fencing, voice?
Speaker 2: They gave us fencing, not for combat so much as for posture, for bearing.  They--they had a concept that Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] required arm's length behavior.  You gotta be out here.  You gotta fill up the space between here and there in movement.  To this space to move.  Also in speech--
Speaker 1: There was also acting in this business?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I was--I was fascinated that there was acting as a business, but that was a course (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that--that--no it was theater history.  Part of that history was, one day in class, Raymond [sic. Frank Readick, Jr.], his name was Raymond, Raymond because his personality was in a radio series called 'The Shadow,' he was the one that said, "Who knows what evil lurks in the heart of man.  The Shadow knows."  Raymond taught us speech.  He--he had a curious concept about black people's mouths and lips.  You got these, little lips, trumpet--trumpet stuff out--trumpet, it's bullshit of course, but (laughter) it's--it's--used as an attempt to get us going, you know.  But--but he--he said, "James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones], tell us who Ira Aldridge is."  I don't have a clue.  He said, "Shame on you."  And he tol- told us the Ira Aldridge story.  You know the story.
Speaker 1: I know it, the story.  I was su- that is--that's impressive.  I'm so--
Speaker 2: I had not a clue.
Speaker 1: Well there're a lot of people, but he was so famous?
Speaker 2: Well, this is part of theater history.
Speaker 1: It's a part of theater history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 631585
Speaker 1: So really, this is what I wanna ask you, is it--to be--are you experiencing because it seems easier from a racial standpoint the way you talk about it, but I don't think it was always that way, but the way you talk about it?
Speaker 2: Always easy?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, because a lot of the stuff was irrelevant.  It was not to be paid attention to.  The--the level of anxiety and--and defensiveness that my [maternal] grandmother [Maggie Connolly] experienced was not necessary.  That was a waste of energy.  The--being in Mississippi--I went back, I returned after we moved to Michigan, I went back in the [U.S.] Army.  Okay, the Army is two--two things.  It didn't--it didn't have any effect on our behavior in civilian life.  We still couldn't sit in the front of the bus.  We still--we're restricted as black people like--all the black people down in (unclear).  But, on the Army base, you were free.  President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] responding to some complaints about MacArthur's [Douglas MacArthur] army in Korea about black fodder.  There was a young lieutenant, a black lieutenant who--and the units were segregated then, he led his troops up a hill like you traditional and they were slaughtered.  And he came back down and said I'm not gonna--I'm not gonna--I--I quit, and your gonna have to deal with me, and they did.  Among other situations, MacArthur was really an asshole.  We count him as a hero, but he was--he was not.  Then he had generals like General Walker [Walton Walker] who was an out-and-out racist in that army.  But the--the concept was--the--the black 24th Division [24th Infantry Division] was quartered in Japan.  When the North Koreans started open war, they said well we'll send over some units to plug up the hole.  And the most important part of the unit was the band, it was ceremonial.  So black guy yeah, black guys send them over and this 24th Division and they fucked up.  I mean, it was war, and they weren't prepared for it and they certainly weren't going out prepared for the treatment that they--they'd been accepting all this time as being black people.  But I'll tell you something, when--when Truman decided, 'cause to get the taint of this cannon fodder of the system to integrate the [U.S.] Armed Forces, no problem, because what does integration mean.  Black guys and white guys, no girls, right.  No competition.  No--no fights over who's gonna get the girls, 'cause that is the under- underlying problem with integration, it still is.  Just not as lethal and not legally as problematic.  But I--I honored Truman for that and he got rid of MacArthur too in the bargain.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he integrated the--
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: He integrated the forces.  His integration, even--even Truman with his--he had a black cabinet so to speak, they called it Truman's cabinet.  He had in his--
Speaker 2: You know the whole thing, I don't know why I even try to talk to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no (laughter).
Speaker 2: Who am I telling (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's true.  No he--you learn a lot doing these interviews.
Story_ID: 631586
Speaker 1: I mean really at the time that you were with the American Theatre Wing [New York, New York] and I did not now until I read your book about their relationship with the Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].  I didn't--I didn't know the connection, and I found that fascinating.  You know, like even how it started.  But who--'cause, I mean, people like--I think did I--Paci- you know, I think people like Marlon Brando, did he spend time training?  He didn't train there?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: He did, I think, maybe later.
Speaker 2: Maybe, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe later, it would've been later?
Speaker 2: --a full-fledged conservatory from the time it was conceived up to the time I was there and sometime after.  It began to drop off and it dropped, it attempted teach students, it dropped the conservatory and remained the organization that sponsored the American Theatre Wing, the--the highest awards for the theater called the Tonys (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tony Award.  So--
Speaker 2: Anto- Antoinette Perry.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's what it's--that's how it got the name, Tony Awards (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tony.
Speaker 1: --after Antoinette Perry.
Speaker 2: You studied method acting there, right, no?
Speaker 1: I studied everything.
Speaker 2: You studied everything, okay.
Speaker 1: Ho- remember when I talk about the speech teachers--
Speaker 2: Right, the speech--
Speaker 1: --one was Mary--Mary Hansen who taught us real talking, good American speak.  And then there's Fanny Bradshaw taught us phony talking.  We--we had it all.  We--we had pretentious language, we had sincere language.
Speaker 2: So at what--what did they say about you though, what--how did they--what did they say they saw in you--potential in you?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head).
Speaker 2: They did--they did not, okay.
Speaker 1: You know things like reviews and things that declare hits and not hits, but you can't be taken personally.  Anything is personal is trouble, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. That's right.
Story_ID: 631587
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your first Broadway role in 'Egghead' ['The Egghead,' Molly Kazan]?
Speaker 2: 'The Egghead.'  Yeah, I--I played--I played the brother to the hero, which I guess, Billy Dee Williams.  There--there's a lot of problems with that--getting that production going.  It was about who's mature enough, who's well trained enough to sustain a Broadway production.  There's all--all the pressures of Broadway, it's business.  'The Egghead,' God, that was way back.
Speaker 1: But you understudied for [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards?
Speaker 2: Yes, there--there was a production called--oh 'The Egghead' yes.
Speaker 1: That was your first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm--I'm thinking about--
Speaker 1: Yeah I was gonna say--
Speaker 2: I'm thinking about the first production I was in.  But 'The Egghead' I never performed.
Speaker 1: You never performed, but it said where you met Lloyd Richards?
Speaker 2: That's where I met, I--I was hired as his understudy and he said, "I'll make sure you never go on" (laughter), and he did.
Speaker 1: Did he really say that to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'll make sure you never go on.  At least that's part of the legend anyway.  And he did--he never got sick.  But I got to know him and I watched the process.  I was able to watch the process.  Here was a legendary writer on grounds that she was the wife of, you know, names--
Speaker 1: Is it--no--
Speaker 2: She was the wi- of Elia Kazan.  She was Elia Kazan's wife, Molly Kazan wrote this piece about a--a very liberal professor and a radical student who was black.  And the professor's wife has a real problem 'cause she sees trouble.  She sees the black student exploiting her husband and she starts putting her foot down, but she--I remember the day that Molly realized she had to have help.  Hume Cronyn was directing and Phyllis Love was playing the wife.  And they couldn't get Phyllis to express the anger at her husband without crying.  It's quite natural, I--I think that's a good--that's a good thing to see, somebody getting angry enough to cry.  But they didn't want her to cry, they wanted her to fulfill her--her rage, and Phyllis just couldn't do that.  So they said let's get Elia Kazan in here to try it.  So Elia came--came in with his stuff about, you know, the method and all that.  And he's supposed to know how to make this work, right.  No, no.  But I got to know, I got to know by watching Kazan.  What--what I saw was he had developed a--a technique of manipulation of people into--into the fe- if they did--if they couldn't conjure the feeling, they couldn't intellectualize the feeling, and he would get them there anyway by manipulation.  It didn't--didn't work with Phyllis, Phyllis still wasn't going--anger for her was tears and it stayed that way.  And I guess the production suffered because of it, they didn't replace her, but the play was a flop, (laughter) and I sure didn't get to go on.  Poor Lloyd then, but I got to know and love Lloyd.  I didn't understand Lloyd and I even work--working with him later I don't fully understand him, but then I just say you can't take any of this personally or else you'll never get anywhere, you never understand anything.
Speaker 1: So why--when you said you didn't understand him, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Lloyd?  There's a great talent there.  I never saw it coming, I never saw--I never.  With Elia as a director, I--I saw it coming.  He wasn't directing me, but I saw it in the way he handled other people.  There was something that worked for him.  I didn't see what Lloyd.  Lloyd probably knew more about the American theater than anybody.  He knew as much about the American theater as Stanislavski [Konstantin Stanislavski] knew about the Russian theater.
Story_ID: 631588
Speaker 1: I was wondering when you first met him because you're both from Michigan, though he's from Detroit [Michigan].  And so I just--so that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I don't socialize.  I mean, I don't, I adore certain people, including Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], but I never hung out with him.  There was a tr- tradition when he--when he engaged Athol Fugard to come up to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] with some of his South African productions and I did couple of them.  Athol had a tradition of let's go out for drinks.  And I never did that, but it was--it was a tradition that most actors I think probably enjoyed.
Speaker 1: But you--you've also, I think you've described yourself as a loner; hence?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well oh, and that sounds like an attempt to say something dramatic, and I don't think it is.  I don't think I'm dramatic.  I--there's a tendency to accept isolation, not--not necessarily enjoyed, but receptive for what it is.  And I--I hope we can deal with aloneness without feeling lonely.  No, that--that's all.
Story_ID: 631589
Speaker 1: So that was your first production, so you learned about--because this is--this is really a major production that is--
Speaker 2: 'The Egghead' [Molly Kazan]?
Speaker 1: 'The Egghead,' I mean--
Speaker 2: And I wasn't performing.
Speaker 1: Right, you're not performing, but still even to get that close and to be cast as an understudy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I was very lucky.
Speaker 1: So, but the next year, you are--you have your first speaking role at 'Sunrise at Ca--Capa--Campobello' ['Sunrise at Campobello,' Dore Schary].  So can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--I had a few lines.  One of them was: "Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt], supper is served."  Edward--in pictures throughout history, you'll see [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt usually with assistant very close to him, sometimes helping him up or helping him stand, sometimes it's a black man.  That man, there were two of them, two black people.  One wa- and we called ours Edward, but we did Edward as a young person, he was not much older than Delano--Franklin's children.  In fact, that I--he hung out with the children.  And that's the--that's the role I played.  I--I had gotten some study in at the American Theatre Wing [New York, New York].  I--I thought I could handle being on stage, which has a certain pressure 'cause the audience, you know, and the attention.  One night I--I went into that state where if I opened my mouth again I'm gonna stutter, and on the M-word--Mrs. Roosevelt, that was the key word.  And my throat was--Mary Fickett was playing El- Eleanor Roosevelt.  She patiently stood there, let me get through it.  The audience, I think, knew what was going on.  They knew this young actor was frozen.  And they accepted it and I got past it, and then I said the line and exited the stage.  I got through my first and last stutter on stage.
Speaker 1: You know, it's extraordinary to me because I've known people with some stutterers that were so thick--
Speaker 2: So what?
Speaker 1: So--so pervasive that--that they--I mean we have an interviewer who was also a stutterer and I didn't recognize that he had been a stutterer.  But I'm saying that you--it--it's amazing to me, because some people cannot get past their stuttering.  And you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: I--I can't say that I have.  But I'll tell you something, I was recently asked to add that factor to a character.  I--I was playing in a movie with Robert Duvall.  It--it was written at the request of Billy Bob For- Thornton [Billy Bob Thornton].  Billy Bob heard this story about a--no he had married a woman whose father was a Chicago [Illinois] policeman.  So he wanted--he wanted the story to be, you know, developed.  So I--I'm playing the father in--the Chicago cop.  And the director said, "You're a stutterer, right?"  I said, "Yeah."  "Well why don't you add that to the character it--it would give him a vulnerability that I'd like to see in that character."  And I tried it, it was interesting.  I don't think I succeeded, 'cause it wasn't quite fully explored.  And--but it does suggest a vulnerability.  I had a schoolmate, Ken [ph.], I forget his last name who was a stutterer at--at Ann Arbor, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And we all delighted in his stuttering off stage and on stage.  He can--he can switch on and off.  I--I couldn't quite do that.
Speaker 1: So I just--I'm amazed.  So peo- do you believe that everybody who's a stutterer, do you believe that they can get over it?  Do you think that they--
Speaker 2: No. No, no, no.
Speaker 1: I think it's--it's probably maybe a certain type but you trained a lot, but I'm just saying that--
Speaker 2: Well I--I accept that I have not gotten over it.  And I can't say when I think it might happen.  I try not to think about when it might happen.  Also, I do a little doctrine if the script has trigger words that are in a tight spot, I--I'll ask the director if I can change that.  If I can slip around it and not get trapped into it.
Speaker 1: But that's hard to do with Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]?
Speaker 2: Impossible to do (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's harder to do with Shakespeare.
Story_ID: 631590
Speaker 1: But the play 'Sunrise at Campobello' [Dore Schary] that play won three Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].  I think it--it won three Tony Awards.  So this is a significant, you have a small role and you're in a major Broadway play?
Speaker 2: And--and we went on tour with it too.  I mean I'd been on Broadway and then I--I joined the tour.  We went to Washington, D.C. and other places like that.  And I--I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: So you're--at this point in time, and I wanna go back to your father [Robert Earl Jones] and w- and just here for a second.  Because you, around this time or maybe a little earlier, you had lived with him for, you know, I don't know maybe--I don't know if it was six months, it wasn't very long--for a period of time.  And then you would--you--you've been in roles, you know, you've been in plays together, why--what was--was it that he was trying to tell you what to do, that--that didn't work or you know I th--
Speaker 2: What didn't work? My living with him?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I mean you said that actually you got along around 'Othello' [William Shakespeare].  And that your father, you know, had a great understanding of the role Othello.  But what was it--was it you a young man with a person he doesn't really know and--or is it your father trying to teach you or tell you what you should be doing if you wanna act?  What was--
Speaker 2: No, that--that didn't come into play until I did the first production of 'Othello' that I thought really worked under the direction of Gladys Vaughn.  There was a time, Joseph Papp, the producer, wanted Gladys, the director, to make sure that the Othello she presented did not fit the mold of Malcolm X, but have the tenacity, the toughness of a Malcolm X and not be seen as a softy.  And Gladys said wait a minute--
Speaker 1: This is Gladys Vaughn?
Speaker 2: Gladys Vaughn, yeah, said you know that, she wanted me not to listen to it and she wanted me not to listen to my father, because they're both having influence on me.  Joe was having influence on the whole production that was gonna--that would've run it of--misguided it.  And--and his best intentions, he wanted to--he wanted to fit in the current because Malcolm X is very--a big psychic influence at that time.  And militancy was. But Gladys didn't wanna go there.  My father, I'm not quite sure exactly what he was driving at.  She, Gladys, said just be careful about envy father to son.  Just be careful.  And I understood it.  I didn't think my father was envious, but she said just, just be careful.
Speaker 1: Well, Othello is the major black role.  I mean--it--it's a major black role that hasn't had a lot of--it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That--that was the only production that I think we--we came close to getting it right.
Story_ID: 631591
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I wanna go back though, 'cause you mentioned Joseph Papp.  And you met him--I think you met him--I'm not sure, well I should know, in 1960 when you're twenty-nine years old?
Speaker 2: My father [Robert Earl Jones]?
Speaker 1: No, this is Joe--Joe Papp.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Joseph Papp.
Speaker 2: Oh Joe Papp.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and you, I think get a job playing in--you get a job for 'Henry V,' Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare] 'Henry V'?
Speaker 2: Well, wh- what happened was, I was walking on the street one day and Joe, who I don't know what our association had been in the past, but he said, "What are you doing?"  I said, "I'm not doing anything."  He said, "Well come in and carry a spear in 'Henry V'." I said, "Okay."  I looked at the script and there's this hangman, executioner, Abhorson, no a 'Measure for Measure' [William Shakespeare], wrong play.  In 'Measure for Measure,' which is considered a dark comedy.  There's this executioner, I said gee if this guy has a mask on then it doesn't matter what color he is right.  So it was being directed by Alan Schneider.  Alan was pro- was doing a play on Broadway.  I went and saw the play and enjoyed it and went backstage, and said, "Oh by the way Alan, in--in your production of 'Measure for Measure' coming up, there's this character called Abhorson, you know, if he wore a mask it wouldn't matter if he was black, right?"  Alan said, "No, you're right, okay come, come and join us."  It was as simple as that.  And Alan--Alan was not a pushover.  He was--he was a good strong tough director.
Story_ID: 631592
Speaker 1: But Papp [Joseph Papp] liked you.  You got to know Papp.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Papp liked you.  In fact--
Speaker 2: Papp once said, "I--I sense you're getting more and more opinionated every year we work together.  And when you get opinionated enough, you're supposed to direct."  That was a challenge, I wasn't ready for it.  I bit and bit the dust.  The occasion was Chekhov's [Anton Chekhov] 'Cherry Orchard' ['The Cherry Orchard'].  I loved the play, but I was forced--Joe Papp says there's a certain area you're not hacking it, so you gotta drop the role of director, go in as the--in the role of the character or you're not quite cutting it, play that role.  And I did.  It was not a successful production.  And I--I still love it.  I--I love what we were doing with it.  I did have a problem with the actor playing Lopakhin [Ermolai Lopakhin].
Speaker 1: When you said you had a problem--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What do you mean you had a problem?
Speaker 2: It was said of me that I was directing Jim [ph.] to play it the way I would play it if I was in it.  I couldn't argue with that.  I would play it the way I understood it.  And I was trying to direct him the way I understood it.  But it was used in a way to, you know, distance me.  And I--I distanced.
Story_ID: 631593
Speaker 1: But Papp, Papp [Joseph Papp] was doing something really innovative in the park.  He--he was very innovative in that park in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --in Central Park [New York, New York], because he was bringing theater to the people?
Speaker 2: Not just Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], he would bring Greek theater, concerts.  We--we did a little play--a production of poetry, he pre--presented in the park.  He--his whole thrust was free theater for the people.  I mean, he was a leftist, yeah.  But he was--he was one of the most creative leftists I've ever had any encounter with.  And all of New York City [New York, New York] had encounters.  He went up against a tyrant, Robert Moses, who was not just a tyrant, he was--he was a--a inspired boss, strong man himself who wanted to--Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones]--Flynn knows about the New York power, the power commission came out of Niagara Falls [New York], that was Robert Moses.  But Robert Moses was also involved with making sure that the free Shakespeare in the park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] would--would stop because it was ru- ruining the grass.
Speaker 1: Well I think he even, at one point, like said you--that Papp had to raise twenty thousand dollars like the next day or he couldn't--
Speaker 2: He what?
Speaker 1: He had to raise twenty thousand, and Papp raised it.  So Papp was--he was--he was--he was--he was a guy.
Speaker 2: He's part of the legends I--I didn't even know about.
Speaker 1: No, he--he was the guy.  But I also read that you and Ellen Holly were his--two of his favorite actors?
Speaker 2: We were two of his colored actors.  We were two actors of color.  And we were both in the production of 'The Cherry Orchard' [Anton Chekhov] and also later 'King Lear' [William Shakespeare].  She played one of my daughters in 'King Lear.'  It was, yeah, it was a strong relationship, but no- nothing romantic.  I--I tried, but not (laughter).  I gotta go pee.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Not inspired by Ellen.
Story_ID: 631594
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I like your son over there, he--he's on top of things, though you would not always know that it was.  That's right.  He gives a different impression sometimes (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't know what that destiny is, but it's something, I don't know whether it's prod--production or whether it be a producer or writer, 'cause there's--there's a talented actor, but all the talents are there.  And he inherited some from his mother [Cecilia Hart], some of his thinking is from his mother, and from both of us I think a go- good understanding of what the theater is.  He--he's always with me.  He's always, he's my counsel.  But not--I was gonna, yeah.  I--I don't mean to make revelations or--or share gossip, but about the Desdemonas in my life.  The legend is and I have not fought the legend, is that I marry all my Desdemonas.  It's not true.  I've only married two of them (laughter) and very different circumstances.  I'm now married to the second one, who is Flynn's [Flynn Earl Jones] mother.
Speaker 1: For a long time.
Speaker 2: Flynn was on stage with her during one of the Othello's ['Othello,' William Shakespeare] that she was in, playing Desdemona.  And I remember one day somebody had intruded on the space.  A member of the audience came down, we were playing a scene, she was on the bed, I was, you know, walking around.  This--this person came down and leaned against the proscenium.  Well for me the stage is not sacred territory, but it's ours.  And that was a violation.  So I think without stopping too much of the production, I went over and told him to get the fuck out of there, and he did.  But that was Flynn's night (laughter) before he was born.  And I was sensitive because--sensitive because she was my wife and she was carrying my son.
Speaker 1: So talk about your--your--
Speaker 2: And by the way, I think that is in the play.  Othello's--Othello's need is to have progeny.  To carry on the line, and it's all squashed, it's all quartered.  Yeah, sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 1: But that's sort of magical that she also was with child--
Speaker 2: With child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 631595
Speaker 1: If we'll go back to your first leading role with 'The Pretender' [Lionel Abel].  You know, on--you're off Broadway 'cause you're doing--you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--
Speaker 1: --you have the experience with the Broadway production and it wins three Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], but then you also, you know, people are going on--off Broadway and on--off Broadway, because off Broadway--
Speaker 2: And Shakespeare in the Park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park].
Speaker 1: And Shakespeare in the Park.
Speaker 2: Be- before I did my first Shakespeare in the Park, I--I found a little play that I was cast in right around the corner from where my father [Robert Earl Jones] lives on Bleecker Street, is it Bleecker, no, Commerce Street, called the Cherry Lane Theatre [New York, New York].  A wonderful theater and it's a le--legendary neighborhood, Greenwich Village [New York, New York].  I was cast in a play, it was during the civil rights heat period.  What was all very relevant.  I was to play a northern black man whose wife gets raped by a southern white man, and he mounts a lynch party to settle the score.  Well, that never--that scene never happened on stage, but that's his--that's his ambition.  And that's--that's a part in the play.  But what I--my main struggle was, I'm playing an artist, he's a--he's a--I think he's a composer.  And I asked my agent what makes a composer tick.  She says, you know, she has a friend and I think maybe had him as a client, the 'Lincoln Portrait,' names please.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Aaron Copland (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aaron Copland.
Speaker 1: Aaron Copland.
Speaker 2: Aaron Copland, she said, "Let's go talk to Aaron."  And I met Mr. Copland, a very nice man.  And I said, "Okay, what makes a composer tick?"  And Aaron Copland said, "The metronome."  Tick, tick, that was it.  I think I--I've never had a lesson more profound than that from--from a professional (laughter).  And I love this work.  I--I've done the 'Lincoln Portrait' more than I should've 'cause I love it so much.
Story_ID: 631596
Speaker 1: So what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First--first leading roles.
Speaker 1: Well I was asking about 'The Pretender' [Lionel Abel]?
Speaker 2: Oh the pre- okay.  I--I dodged that one because it--it dodged me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I remember the director [Herbert Machiz], you know, I was not--I was not very keen on how to handle homosexuals in those days.  But I had a homosexual director and I was not comfortable with it, but you know, one--one of my cast members was--was homosexual and I got along great with him.  And one day, he said, he was at a loss as how to direct me playing this--this composer, this artist.  And he sat on my lap.  Now I'm in trouble, right.  I'm--I'm not gonna get violent, I'm not gonna, you know, I'm not gonna respond even.  But he said, "Jimmy [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones], I can't advise you beyond this.  Play it like Cary Grant."  And I said, "I see."  I knew I was in the wrong production.  When I met Joe Papp [Joseph Papp] in the--on the street and he said come carry a spear, I said I'll be--I'll be right over.  And I--I think we can with--we did some recasting and somehow finished the production, but it was something that I--I would never want to count as--as an experience that I learned anything.
Speaker 1: Right, but that's where you also--did you know [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne before--
Speaker 2: Roscoe Lee Browne replaced my father [Robert Earl Jones].
Speaker 1: Right.  'Cause your father was in that production?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When--when the composer went to the South to mount a lynch--lynch mob, he hires the--the resident terrorist, black terrorist and my father was offered that role.  Again, dialogue was very complex and my father said, you know I--I'm not ready for this, there's no time for it.  And Roscoe Lee Browne came in and took over and played it.  Some--some nice memories of the cast this and that.  The director, I--I don't mean to put him down about being homosexual, that--that's not relevant except that he was out of--out of how to handle an actor, this one in particular, a novice.  And say act like Cary Grant.  Today, I might get some insight out of that, but I couldn't then.  I just went.  I was lost.  There's my last--my--my first leading role, and I'm supposed to act like Cary Grant.  I guess I learned a lot from him.  I don't think of it very often.
Story_ID: 631597
Speaker 1: So, then the next opportunity really are 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet], you know, the next year.  So--
Speaker 2: Was it next year?  Oh that's great.
Speaker 1: Next year, so 1960 was 'The Pretender' [Lionel Abel], and then 1961 are 'The Blacks.'  And this, I mean there're a lot of things that happened in that year?
Speaker 2: Well we--we--I done my first Shakespeare in the Park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park].
Speaker 1: You had done--right.
Speaker 2: But yeah, 'The Blacks' was--was a it--it was stuff of legend.  Every black actor that you've ever heard of to gain any prominence in the theater was in that production at some time or other.  We--we recycled each other.  I--I played it for a year and get, you know, get burned out and really start losing weight, which is enviable, but I--I got--I quit for a while and come back to it.  And that happened to all of us.  And Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] was in it, [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, Abbey Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Cicely Tyson?
Speaker 2: Cicely Tyson, thank you.  She and I played partners.  It was--it was--Jean Genet, real crazy. He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is a French--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --it's a French playwright, Jean Genet and he wrote--he wrote the--
Story_ID: 631598
Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Have we resolved everything about--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, but I (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's like we're doing--I don't know what play this is like for this, like this (laughter).  I don't know what it's--oh.  I don't know if we're having a disconnected conversation.
Speaker 1: I don't understand what you're, my hearing.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It was just that--it was almost like a play where no one is connecting and we're all (laughter) just (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--that's a moment that's hard to create.  Directors have slaved all night to get that moment.  It's very rare.  Most directors can't--can't get it.  You've gotten it, you got it on tape (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't even know if the tape is running.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes we are.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: 'The Blacks' happened during the height of the civil rights--what we call the Civil Rights Movement.   Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was still with us.  The freedom--the freedom marches were happening.  The whole conscience of the country was awakening, which is a wonderful thing.  It has not happened before or since.  The conscience of this country suddenly awakened.  Martin Luther King ha- had opened the door and the country responded.  Well, there was this production of Jean Genet, a Frenchman, called 'The Blacks' about the turmoil of black and white and come the colonial Europe who's on top--who's on top.  And Genet was having fun with it.  He was treating it like a mirror show on a--magic mirror show.  Downstairs he had black people including Cicely Tyson and myself, and [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne.  Upstairs, were whites, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and so on.  But--
Speaker 1: Jay J. Riley.
Speaker 2: Yeah, A. J. Riley [sic.].
Speaker 1: Ethel Valar [sic. Ethel Ayler].
Speaker 2: Name then all.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well that's and Chuck--Chuck Cardoni, Carjo--
Speaker 2: Charles Gordone.
Speaker 1: Charles Gordone.
Speaker 2: Very wonderful actors, yeah.  But--but they were playing whites, but to make sure that they were accepted as whites, they were given white masks.  We blacks had no masks, but the white people, the actors upstairs had masks.  And that--that was the overall--it was about the turnover, who's on top in--in the world.  It was a black fantasy of what's it gonna be like when we take over, you know.  And Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] played an interlocutory character who is never clear, but he was--he was setting something up that involved all of us.  And he would come in once in a while, he whispered something to Roscoe Lee Browne.  Roscoe was the majordomo.  He was--he was the--the show master and the white people in the audience were part of the show.  It was--it was quite a wonderful experience for us on stage because it gives a lot of chance to vent a lot of stuff, a lot of feelings, but it was theatrically controlled, written.  When I first saw the script, I don't know what the heck's going on.  The director, name.
Speaker 1: His name was Gene Frankel.
Speaker 2: Gene Frankel, another beloved of mine.  He--he said, "Well ju- just come in and read."  Two prominent people of the theater thought this production can be done only with American actors who speak, not classical English, but good American speech, but speak it in a way that we're not used to talking in--especially in urban areas.  It doesn't have a (unclear).  It's full-out traumatic theatrical English.  And they said phrases like, well you need mummers like Roscoe Lee Browne.  He--he was the standard.  So Gene Frankel had to cast actors who could talk the talk.  It wasn't Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], but might as well have been.  But it didn't make any sense either.  So he, come in and just read.  I said I know what the words are.  Come in and read.  The next day I had a shot of vodka, and went in there and read, and Gene said, "You're hired."
Story_ID: 631599
Speaker 1: Did you know most of the cast before you got cast in it ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So this is--this is something amazing, amazing gathering of--
Speaker 2: A gathering of--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black talent that would go on to phenomenal careers.  But it's just--
Speaker 2: I didn't know anybody.  I didn't hang out with anybody.  I--I-[HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou once said when we first met each other, she said you remind me of my son [Guy Johnson].  And I found out that her son was half white.  And I said uh-oh.  She was resolving something with her husband, life--lifetime, you know, it was an animosity.  So I didn't know what--what I was in for.  Well, Maya became the head of a faction of that production, the very militant and there was--there was some--some of the group that was strongly behind her.  Give you an example of the kind of militancy they was, this is foolish on my part then.  There was a production on Broadway by Jule Styne, was it by him or did he--Jules Styne a designer.  Okay let's--let's forget I said anything about who wrote it.  There was a production on Broadway called 'Subways are for Sleeping' [Betty Comden and Adolph Green].  It's a musical.  Okay, it opens and people go see it and suddenly our--our company says wait a minute, 'Subways are for Sleeping' we can--a scene with a subway there's no black people on that subway, bullshit.  So we picket.  I didn't picket.  [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne said, "Let the picket-ninnies go picket (laughter), we're not going.  We're not going near it."  But they did.  I mean, I--I'm not saying Maya mounted that--that picket--that protest, but people of her--of her thinking did mount a protest and became very active in protesting movements.  I just tried to stick to the work--what--what was I doing and how could I--I fulfill it.
Story_ID: 631600
Speaker 1: Did you feel you grew, I mean the--the production it ran--I mean you have a thousand, you even came back, that--it ran, I mean--I know there was an anniversary of a thousand shows, you know, when you had a thousand shows, but it--it took off.  Why--a couple things.  Did you learn th- any things theatrically there in that production [of 'The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet]?
Speaker 2: I learned it was very difficult to sustain a production for accuracy.  Our union says the night you open, whatever the director has given you, that must stay consistent for the rest of the run.  That's the hardest thing to do.  'Cause actors evolve.  Actors understand the characters better or le- or worse.  Things change, but yo- we're obliged by our contract to keep it the same.  Well this production became all over the place, even to the point that if we had a late night, in other words you--you did two shows on Saturday, if somebody was late and we're a half hour late going up, Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] would help make sure we cut a half hour out of the play.  It wouldn't run over, 'cause you had the next one coming up.  So that didn't happen often, but it--it happened and it was--became part of how we worked, how we worked that production.  The audience--the critics got--got wind of it and said wait a minute, something's screwy here.  And they began to make a fuss about it in the--in the press about how actors were distorting the Genet [Jean Genet] production.  And so I--and we tried to clean up act, but I learned that--that was one of the factors of a long run is to sustain the nature and the quality of--of the work.  And that was the most impossible production to sustain.  But, part of the issue was fatigue.  I--I know I got pooped out and had to quit for a while, but there's a recycling--for instance, Lou Gossett's [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] role was taken over by somebody else, my role was taken over by somebody else.  I--I love to give credit to the actors who came into it, but they're all well-known as well.
Speaker 1: Now, how long did the original cast, the first original cast stay together?  Do you know how long that was?
Speaker 2: It was over a year I'm sure.
Speaker 1: So, so after it's when people started, 'cause it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ange- okay, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and then there was, Abbey Lincoln.
Speaker 1: It was Cic- Abbey Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Abbey Lincoln--
Speaker 1: She was the best known at that point, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She--'cause she was from the music world.  And she was married to--her husband was the drummer.
Speaker 1: Oh shoot.
Speaker 2: Max Roach.
Speaker 1: Max Roach.
Speaker 2: Max was supposed to be in the production.  He was supposed to do the drum--play with Fuller [ph.] drums, 'cause it's about Africa, right.  And Max would sit there every day listening to all this stuff, and nobody understands, avant-garde stuff.  What am I supposed to play, what am I beating the drum about.  And one day he just said, "Screw it, I'm going home," and he quit (laughter).  And I think Abbey was tempted to leave, not too mu- I don't know if she did or not, but she was tempted to leave too.  And we got--we all got worried then, yeah.  (Pause) It--it was legendary.
Story_ID: 631601
Speaker 1: But it took off immediately.  The Bl- you were well reviewed immediately?
Speaker 2: Oh--oh it was--it was a big hit because the conscious that this play ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] addressed--matched the conscience that was going on in the country.  The awakened conscience of America by the Civil Rights Movement, by Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], were echoed in this--this production in a way that's un- un--
Speaker 1: I also think--I think that that had something to do with it, but it was also innovative in its staging, in it's--
Speaker 2: Perhaps, I didn't read reviews.  I--I don't still.  But I don't know how the critics assessed it, but perhaps you're right that it was.  It was Genet [Jean Genet] after all.
Speaker 1: It was Genet.  And people both black and white audiences were coming?
Speaker 2: Oh mainly white.  And it affected them.  I want to share something with you though that surprised me.  I saw a production of it later on, Adolph Caesar was--was playing I think the majordomo, was playing Roscoe's [HistoryMaker Roscoe Lee Browne] part, I think.  And that production, it didn't work, because the same conscience had gotten tired.  America had drifted back into a lot of its old lack of conscience, and that production didn't work the same anymore.  It was shocking.  We--we never knew that the connection was that strong with--with society at--at that stage in life.  But yo- you have people like Malcolm X was reigning very strong, all kinds of stuff was going on in this country that was very special.  Joe Papp [Joseph Papp] introduced some new playwrights, Ed, [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins, a lot of black playwrights.  It--it was a rich time so much so that the theater we played in became--became an institution for black theater.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Doug--Doug Turner Ward.
Speaker 1: So this is--[HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, you just mentioned--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 631602
Speaker 1: I think you were in the production [of 'The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] or you were in and out between 1961 and '63 [1963], so mainly you probably were there that first year and then you were sort of in and out, and people as you said were coming in and out of the production.  So you--you got cast in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' [William Shakespeare]?
Speaker 2: Oh I--I never lost my connection with Joe Papp [Joseph Papp].  Joe--Joe could never sustain a company, because he--he didn't have the--he couldn't pay the salaries.  He had actors like George C. Scott who had alimonies to pay.  Actors who had other--who, you know, who--who had a chance to do things in movies.  They couldn't--they couldn't sign up for a season with Joe Papp.  So Joe Papp just ca- catch what he could.  Why--why am I saying that?
Speaker 1: Because you said--you said that you went--I said you went to 'Midsummer's Night's Dream,' and you're saying that--
Speaker 2: I never lost my--my contact with Joe (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Joe Papp.
Speaker 2: Although I was not part of the regular company, but I was--I was there almost every--every summer.
Story_ID: 631603
Speaker 1: When does it or has it already kicked in, the perfection of one's craft?  You know because what you were saying you were--you were alluding to is [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and group were becoming activists, but you were focused on the craft.  And you even indicate, in a way, you know and that's what I was even thinking about, though you talk about you and [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne being, you know, different, very different, but you're very--both are very intellectual and you know, highly sort of intellectual--
Speaker 2: Have you interviewed Roscoe, did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, we did, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Good.  Yeah he--he highly intellectual, yeah.  I--I don't know if you ever witnessed any--he and Tony Zerbe [Anthony Zerbe] had a poetry program they would take out across the country, just a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: But he was brilliant too?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: He was brilliant.  Acerbic, I would call him a little, very, very much so.
Speaker 2: He could cut.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You have a--you have a kinder spirit, but you can cut too?
Speaker 2: Well I don't wanna pick a fight with anybody, yeah.
Speaker 1: But--but--so, what I'm wondering though, the question is, when do you decide that the craft is the most important thing?
Speaker 2: When did I?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, when are you deciding?
Speaker 2: Oh, back--back in the training, in the American Theatre Wing [New York, New York].  Not--a little bit University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  There's some fellow alumnis--alumni who feel the same way about craft.  It was--it was deeply drilled into us.
Speaker 1: So who are you looking at that you look up to--
Speaker 2: Then? Nobody (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, and that no one--no one on the stage captures your?
Speaker 2: The people I admire, but there's no one that's role modeling for me.  They can't, how can they?  It's--it's a false concept.
Speaker 1: So who were the people you admired?
Speaker 2: For different reasons, Marlon Brando and Sidney Poitier for example, for very different reasons.  Sidney showed us the height to which an actor can rise.  Marlon showed us the depth to which an actor (laughter) could plunge in terms of human behavior.
Speaker 1: But both gifted?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Both very gifted.
Speaker 2: Oh my God, yes, yeah, and very successful.
Story_ID: 631604
Speaker 1: So what about the rainbow--rainbow shawl, 'Moon on a Rainbow Shawl' [Errol John]?
Speaker 2: That--that was a production that George Roy Hill, who had produced the thing my father [Robert Earl Jones] was in, 'The Sting.'
Speaker 1: 'The Sting.'
Speaker 2: I--I guess he decided he could--he could do an off Broadway play with the petty cash budget of a movie.  He came out and found this little church and theater made of it and he produced.  Errol John, a Trinidadian writer, wonderful actor, and actor.  And he--he directed this production.  Cicely Tyson, my father and myself.
Speaker 1: Vinnette Carroll [Vinnette Justine Carroll].
Speaker 2: Vinnette Carroll.
Speaker 1: Ellen Holly.
Speaker 2: Ellen Holly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Billy Gunn [Bill Gunn].
Speaker 2: Billy Gunn.
Speaker 1: But, you know what's interesting about this is, I actually read a more recent review of the play, and it's a very inter--
Speaker 2: 'Rainbow Shawl'?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  And--and a more recent production, I don't know what year, but it really appears to be a fairly well-written play.
Speaker 2: Oh, very well written.
Speaker 1: And substantive.  And this is 1962 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a story of mi- migration to London [England], I mean the Caribbean immigrants to London.  That--that drama.  Talking about diaspora right?
Speaker 1: In fact, I think what I was reading about, it was a production in London of the play?
Speaker 2: Ah-ha.  Since, yeah since-
Speaker 1: So this is--I think it's more--it's more--it was more recent, so----
Speaker 2: I guess ours might have been the premier, huh?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yours was the premier.  And it had, and the thing is, it did not--it struggled, you know, I mean it did not do well financially, this play that you were in.  But--
Speaker 2: Ours?
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Our production was very well reviewed, it ran--
Speaker 1: It was well reviewed, but it didn't--I don't think it did well financially?
Speaker 2: Well it was in this little church.  It was off Broad- way off Broadway.  So--so off Broadway it was a new theater, you know.  No, it wasn't about making money.  George had made his money with the movie, George Roy Hill.  So this was an experiment to show how inexpensively you could do a off Broadway play.
Story_ID: 631605
Speaker 1: So how were your father [Robert Earl Jones] then, how was it playing, 'cause you're--you're playing a role of father and son in that play ['Moon on a Rainbow Shawl,' Errol John], and that's even (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we're playing neighbors in the play.
Speaker 1: Neighbors, I'm sorry, okay.  But can you talk about how it was to act or is it?
Speaker 2: I could tell day to day how my father was doing by his behavior through the character.  He had such a gift of simplicity that when he--when he sat down to a role that's what you got.  But you got all of it, got all of him.  Such simplicity that it's difficult to achieve, I can't, but at the same time, very revealing.  He performed with a rev- revelation about him.  There--he was--he went through a period of substance abuse I think, not--not deadly, a little drink now and then.  And when he brought it on stage, he was in battle, combat, I saw it there and I loved him more.  I didn't know why he had a drink that night.  Actors just don't dare drink before a performance.  In the old days, you had to knock back a few crap--something--something's wrong with that whole tradition, 'cause no, you mess up your brains and it's about words.  You have to build a false front of words to get away with it when you're drunk.  And they--they say the greats did it, Barrymore [John Barrymore].  I don't believe it.  You--you had to have built up such a fake front of wo- sounds for it to work even when you're drunk, anyway.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to understand so, did your father--I know he did not have your discipline of speech, but wh- did he have the same booming voice that you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, mo--
Speaker 1: So--so both of you with booming voices on the--on the stage together?
Speaker 2: We weren't booming.  We--we could, but we--it was not about that.  It was a very intimate play.  And it wasn't about booming voices.
Story_ID: 631606
Speaker 1: But at this point in time, he [Jones' father, Robert Earl Jones] had already introduced you to Paul Robeson, you had met him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  And when I did the production, which was a mistake, about--we called it 'Paul Robeson' [Phillip Hayes Dean] that was one of the big mistakes, we should've called it something else.  My--my father was there every night.  He was there probably 'cause he enjoyed the mess.  It was a mess.  There were critics outside making more noise than we were on stage, you know.  I mean not critics, pro--protestors.  Critics were--weren't too bad, I mean they--they knew it was incomplete.  And I had done it with--with a conviction that we used Paul Robeson's real voice singing.  I can't sing, but I'll tell you something, Avery Brooks has taken that same production out because he sings and made a great success of it.  And it works, it does work.  Whatever you wanna say about the play, it works with a singer.
Speaker 1: Well you're talking about the production you did of 'Paul Robeson' and where his son [Paul Robeson, Jr.] was picketing the production?
Speaker 2: That's the kind of mess it was, a real mess.
Speaker 1: And--and telling people that this was not representative of--of his father.  And it--
Speaker 2: He just didn't want anybody to address his father.  He--he felt--he was the cou- custodian of his father's legacy and nobody's gonna come near it no matter what--what you say--what you said.  No sculptor, no painter, no write--no playwright, no musician. No.  In a way, he was trying to bury his father.  Because there was a lot of father-son envy.
Speaker 1: You know, you know, what's interesting is I had at one time tried to--when I was doing research back for my--my honors thesis, I tried to get ahold of his father 'cause they were living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he--
Speaker 2: Paul?
Speaker 1: Paul--and he wro- and he wouldn't let anyone have access.
Speaker 2: No, he locked him--locked him away pretty much without being institutionalized.  He did have cardiac problems, I think vascular system was failing.
Speaker 1: What did you remember about him though when you met him?
Speaker 2: Openness.  Oh, he spoke to me--of me like he had known me all his life, 'cause he knew my father all his life.  But for no reason at all, my father said, "Hey come over here and meet Paul."  Oh, that was it.  I had nothing to say to him.  What do I have to talk about?  He had nothing to say to me, really except hi, we're in the same world (laughter).
Story_ID: 631607
Speaker 1: These are all iconic people--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yourself and the incumbents.  I mean you touched people who--and you have been surrounded by people who, you know?
Speaker 2: You can't live legends, it--it is said about you, after you're dead, but you can't live legend.  You can't live legendary.
Speaker 1: But I know, but often, I mean when you bring all of that together, like you know, in the--in--in 'The Blacks' ['The Blacks: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet].  And you know, and Papp [Joseph Papp] involved, and all the people involved.  Maybe, I mean it may say something--that's why I'm saying sometimes cream comes together, it rises?
Speaker 2: Something?
Speaker 1: Cream, cream coalesces to the top--at the top.
Speaker 2: What's the word, cream?
Speaker 1: Cream, cream rises to the top.
Speaker 2: Cream, yeah.  But the--the one thing that's, I think for me is truer--well the truest thing and it slipped my mind, just as I--I saw it and I'm pointing at it and it fled, the idea.
Speaker 1: Was it about Robeson [Paul Robeson], was it about cream rising to the top?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about legend.  It--it'll come to me.  Yeah, the tale is told when it comes to the fact that when you do a play, when you walk off the stage it all evaporates.  It didn't exist.  You mouthed it for a while, you made the movements and then it's gone, except in the audience's memory, and that's a fragile thing.
Speaker 1: But as the actor, but as the actor, the audience stays inside of you?
Speaker 2: It evaporate.
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, you even talked about it.  You talked about it in your book.  You talk about that relationship, there's some--
Speaker 2: Between the au--
Speaker 1: --between the audience and the actor.  You can't say that of that--you talked about the relationship between the audience and the actor?
Speaker 2: If I did, I--I should review it myself.  'Cause I--right now I can only confirm one thing I know about that relationship and that is about energy.  It is a polarity.  If the actor coul- could stand on the lip of the stage, turn his back to the audience and take a flying leap trusting that somebody there will catch him.  That's what going out on the stage is like, and when it's over, it's over.  You've made the leap.  You've been caught, now go back home.  You go back home.  I--I'm not trying to belittle any of it, but I'm trying to say how elemental it is, how basic it is, how small it is.  It's no big deal.  The minute you try to make a big deal out of it, you get into the area of promotion and agents, and you know, commercials that--that's where it starts going screwy and unreal.  A lot of what happens is unreal.  A lot of a thing called fame is totally unreal, yeah.  And that--that part is not valid between the actor and the audience.  The only thing is valid is when you're saying something or doing something that you or your total concentration is involved, the office has been involved too, the audience gets connected and that concentration in that brief moment, there's a marriage of thought, and feelings and--it's supposed to go away, it's supposed to go away, and it does.  Doesn't make anything less, it doesn't you know, make what we do minor, but it makes it very different from film.
Speaker 1: It makes it very different from film, but remember also, there was a long part of time you would--the film and other projects fed your theater habit?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Film and other projects fed your--your theater habit?  There's a--
Speaker 2: Oh there was a time I--I moved my family to Los Angeles [California].  I said, you know, I--I've worked in the theater and I had--my bank account is--is hurts, it's not working, so I wanna go make some money.  Yeah, I did.  They say, "Oh are you gonna retire from Broadway?" I don't know, I'm gonna make some money.
Story_ID: 631608
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions which I was really intimidated not to ask last time, I thought you were gonna shoot me out, but I'm gonna ask them.  But just state your name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Well now, and you say give the date.
Speaker 1: The date.
Speaker 2: I don't know the date.
Speaker 1: Today is the fir- is it--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  August 31st.
Speaker 1: August 31st.
Speaker 2: 31st.  31 August--
Speaker 1: Two thousand sixteen [2016].
Speaker 2: Two thousand and sixteen [2016], okay.  I don't use it every day.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Let me see your suspenders.
Speaker 1: They're black today.
Speaker 2: You did good (laughter).
Speaker 1: All the rest is there though, all the color.  Shall I start?  My name is [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones.  J-A-M-E-S, E-A-R-L, J-O-N-E-S.  My birth, 17 January 1931.  Today's date is 31 August 2016.
Speaker 2: So I--I wanna ask you five People magazine-ish questions that I didn't ask before, and I also wanna say that here today with us is Matthew Hickey who's our videographer, and Flynn Jones [Flynn Earl Jones] who is your son, much beloved son.  So, I want to--the five People magazine-ish questions are your favorite food?
Speaker 1: My favorite food, I love avocado, but as a dish I like strawberry shortcake.
Speaker 2: A favorite a time of year?
Speaker 1: Autumn.
Speaker 2: Favorite color?
Speaker 1: Blue.
Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 1: I've only vacationed in one place, that's Alaska.
Speaker 2: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: Favorite sayings?
Speaker 2: Yes sir, favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: I have--I'm gonna have to take some time to think that one out.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Do you have a favorite line in a play?
Speaker 1: Oh boy.  Yes, I--but they don't come to mind right now.
Speaker 2: Alaska?
Speaker 1: Alaska.
Speaker 2: That is your only place that you vacation?
Speaker 1: The only place I've taken a vacation.  I went there with my whole family.  And otherwise, I don't--for me, vacation is going home to the place in the woods where we live.  I can find no better place to vacate than that.  But we did go to Alaska one year.  One of those boat trips, you know.
Speaker 2: I hear it's beautiful there.
Story_ID: 631609
Speaker 1: I wanna start this interview because we were talking about--well actually I have a couple questions.  You had said that you wanted to clarify about your family, you know, your--your--the--the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wanna clarify what I call the double-wing family situation which does exist in many ethnic groups.  And--and in our case, there is a white wing and a black wing of a Mississippi family.  Now there's several names that bounce around in my head that apply to this, one is Shockley [ph.], the other is Visi [ph.].  There are a couple of others too, I can't think of them right now.  But in the case of one of them, besides there being members of the family that I know of as cousins, there is also a business establishment in Arkabutla, Mississippi, a store in the name of one of them, the white wing.
Speaker 1: Have you had any--any contact with the other wings of those families?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did they ever come to claim you?
Speaker 2: No, I've only driven by the store.
Story_ID: 631610
Speaker 1: So I wanna go and this time for us I'd like to talk about the--I'd like to talk--I really would like to go back to 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] a little bit, because--
Speaker 2: To do what?
Speaker 1: To go back to 'Othello'--
Speaker 2: To 'Othello.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the only reason I wanna do this because in the interim and doing just more research, I had heard you say in one interview that you were only satisfied with one of your Othellos.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I can talk about the one that I found most fulfilling and most fulfilled, and this is usually had to do with direction.  The director of the production we did in Shakespeare in the Park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park] we eventually took it indoors to an Off-Broadway theater [Martinique Theatre, New York, New York], that Ted Mann [Theodore Mann] produced, but it was directed by Gladys Vaughn.  It is there why I realized that perhaps a woman director is best for that play and that's probably true of several plays that Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] wrote, maybe 'Measure for Measure.'  It is best that a woman directed because the female entity is so strong and men tend to miss a lot, male directors tend to miss a lot and women directors are a bit keener in getting to it.  That was the case with our production of 'Othello.'  There was two men, myself and Mitchell Ryan, who are both the same age, we're both the same size, we're big men.  Mitchell was from the South, I was from the South.  He was white, I was black.  She made sure that Desdemona measured up to, if not in physical size, certainly in size of what do you call it, the entity--the--
Speaker 1: Stature.
Speaker 2: --space that that character fills in the audience's mind and eyes.  She made sure, and the woman who played it was very little, tiny, they're all tiny.  They tend to be tiny (laughter).  But in this case, Gladys Vaughn, the director, made sure that there was a balance so that Desdemona was a third pillar of a structure, two pillar structure.  The last one I did it fell apart into just an event two pillars--two characters and it didn't work.
Speaker 1: The last one you didn't like at all?
Speaker 2: I didn't like at all.
Speaker 1: You should talk about that production?
Speaker 2: I don't like to talk about it too much because it means I'm gonna be critical, not only of myself, but of others.  And I don't mind that if I can be constructive about it.  And the best way I can be constructive is to say what I think it should have been.  One, the woman director did--was helpful.  What happens in that play is Iago starts out insinuating to the married man, Othello, that his wife is unfaithful.  He even has backup hints and suggestions to prove it.  And he dribbles then out bit by bit.  At one point, Othello says, "Villain," he gets impatient, "Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore."  But he doesn't follow up.  Shakespeare gives this statement from the hero that the villain must give him proof.  Now he is the commander in chief sitting on the island of Cyprus, if not in Venice of that army, and that is an order he gives.  It is never taken that way though, it is taken only as almost slight reprimand.  I have never performed it the way I'm suggesting, I think is the way to resolve it.  But someday I might direct it, I don't know yet.
Story_ID: 631611
Speaker 1: I had an enlightenment once, when I was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] at an event, it was quite wonderful.  It led to 'Hamilton' ['Hamilton: An American Musical,' Lin-Manuel Miranda] really in a way.  Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones], could you help me with names.
Speaker 2: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Lin-Manuel Miranda.
Speaker 1: Lin-Manuel Miranda.  He was a part of the--it was a poetry jam, called a poetry jam [White House Poetry Jam].  I was asked to be a part of the poetry jam.  I had a choice between reading something modern poetry, now I considered Dr. Seuss my favorite.  But I figured I couldn't, I couldn't beat Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] 'Green Eggs and Ham.'  No one can, so I passed on that and went right to Othel- to Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  And I offered Othello's speech to the senate about how he met his wife.  And at one point, Mr. Obama's children [Malia Obama and Sasha Obama] were in the front row and I begin to caught an awareness from them.  They were--they were younger then Desdemona, but they were little girls and this man from the outside world was spinning this yarn, this story, not a lie, but a story that has fabulous elements to it and I began to let myself get into the fabulousness, especially when it came to the monsters that he said he'd met, the Anthropophagi men (unclear) whose heads do grow up beneath their shoulders.  And I began to play out the grotesqueness and I noticed the girls picking up their ears, which is what happens to Desdemona.  She not only picks up her ears, she picks up her spirit.  She begins to detest the story this man is telling.  When he finishes, he says himself, he testifies, "When my story was done, she gave me for my pains a world of sighs.  She said if it was strange, 'cause passing strange was pitiful to the wondrous pitiful."  She was condemning what he just said.  How dare you go through that life?  Not, how dare you tell the story, but how dare a human being be put through all you've been through.  She's expressing great sympathy but with outrage.  I gave that little element about her through Othello's speech, and I never realized that was in her character before.  The outrage this woman felt, that someone should live a life as horrible as the one he has led.  And I'd like to exploit that somehow if I ever did a production.  I wanna sug- I'm doing essays now, suggesting.  But what it leads to is a larger pillar that Desdemona represents in that play.  She is--she is a factor in the play, as big as the other two men.
Story_ID: 631612
Speaker 1: My father [Robert Earl Jones] has always been fascinated by Othello's command, "Be sure thou prove my love a whore."  My father was a scholar of that play in particular.  And he said, the image of Salvini [Tommaso Salvini], an Italian actor, way back in during the days of Stanislavski [Konstantin Stanislavski] in one of Stanislavski's productions of 'Othello' [William Shakespeare].  Salvini, which was--he was a big international star, he starred as Othello.  He would travel from country to country.  They would fit to him the local Shakespeare 'Othello' company and leave the role of Othello out for him, and he spoke always in Italian.  He didn't speak their language, and they spoke, but it didn't matter, because it was all so dynamic that the languages being spoken became irrelevant almost.  My father said the legend was, that when Salvini gave this command to Othello--when Salvini as Othello gave this command to the villain, Iago, he cast Iago on the floor and raised his foot to stamp Iago's head and the audience would rise in horror.  The real audience, the Italians, whatever, that this moment was taken to that height.  Well, that's nice.  Today, in the age of cynicism that we've been through, it's hard to get an audience to pay attention to acts of violence, even somebody say you draw a pistol in the first act, you better shoot in the second.  There's all kinds of rules about how do you depict violence on the stage.  In this case, I figured it out.  Othello can impress upon Iago his command, prove it, prove my love is a whore, is Othello to enter the realm of torture.  Othello becomes, takes on villainous behavior, bad behavior.  Othello becom- begins to consume what Iago is.  He's not a victim of Iago's, he consumes Iago.  And I can't say any more than that, it would require a director to make sure all this happened.  But what was interesting is waterboarding is very convincing.  I've seen depicted on television.  I've seen our soldiers who are trained to undergo it to prove how horrible it is and how absolute it is.  An audience sitting watching it no doubt we were talking about the control of this man's life and death is at stake, right in front of you with water.  I thought well why and how--why not have Othello waterboard Iago.  Anytime Iago would get sassy, or start evading the command, prove my love a whore, he gets a dousing.  Waterboarding was quite common in medieval times, even in the time that Shakespeare wrote his 'Othello.'  Armies did it to each other.  Luckily, it had been banned by civilized nations, but we've gone through a spate of it in our own army.  It is quite a shock and it's still being resolved.  Okay, that's all I wanna say about that.
Story_ID: 631613
Speaker 1: So, I mean, what your--you're also saying is that Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] is--is--I mean often very complex and can be interpreted different ways.  But, you--thi- thi- you're also saying that Gla- that female directors brought that out in you, but it was your father [Robert Earl Jones] was also influencing you.  That was an interesting time because your--your--your female director your--your--Gladys [Gladys Vaughn], she's saying be careful about your father, you know, because you wanted--
Speaker 2: Oh that's a--that's a different story.
Speaker 1: That's a different story?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Gladys Vaughn advising me that there were two men on the sidelines in our production who wanted to influence it.  One was the producer, certainly he had a right to influence it, but she thought we had a chance to resist his interpretation.  And did I mention what that interpretation was?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Joe Papp [Joseph Papp] was very much interested in making the Othello in that production fit the mold of Malcolm X, I'll be very blunt about it.  Not patterned after Malcolm X, but that spirit of fiery, intelligent, forceful, black man who took no crap from anybody.  She said we have to be very careful about making that our interpretation because we'll end up making Othello not vulnerable, and he is very vulnerable or she would not have been attracted to him.  And my father what--Joe Papp pressed to have it his way.  Gladys Vaughn convinced us, the company of actors, to resist that, to find other ways of interpreting.  My father was not involved with that debate, but he was involved in having his son fulfill what he always wanted to do with that role and he always--his whole life was spent endeavoring to play that role.  And I've seen him try it several times on stage, no comment about him.  But in that case, he saw it was going sort of big time and he wanted his son to fulfill his--his version.  I never was quite sure what his version was, because I was advised to avoid it because father-son is too strong, hard to resist, and I best keep it out of my head.
Speaker 1: Now, one other role (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm keeping both men out of my head, okay.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  One other--
Speaker 2: Joe Papp, the producer--
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: --my father.
Story_ID: 631614
Speaker 1: One other role though, Shakespearean role, that you have aspired to was King Lear.  You've talked about wanting to play King--King Lear.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: You've talked about wanting to play King Lear.
Speaker 2: King Lear?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I've played him.
Speaker 1: I know, but you said--
Speaker 2: And I want to do it some more.
Speaker 1: You wanna do it some more.
Speaker 2: It's the only one I qualify for (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well he's--he's a masterful character though.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: King Lear is a masterful character.
Speaker 2: A masterful?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, character.
Speaker 2: He's holy hell (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's holy hell, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I mean, he--you know what, I saw a production that was very satisfying, very fulfilling.  Jacobi, Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones]?
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Derek Jacobi at BAM.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Derek Jacobi.
Speaker 2: Derek Jacobi, a British actor, did a wonderful interpretation of Lear out at BAM, Brooklyn Academy of Music Theater [sic. Brooklyn Academy of Music] in Brooklyn [New York].  It was wonderful, especially when it came to Lear's breaking down and showing his vulnerability.  Mr. Jacobi was usually bathed in tears for a lot of that--those scenes.  Genuine passion, anguish, more than just storm and anger, but anguish.  And that was very impressive, except for one little thing that I have never talked to Mr. Jacobi about it, I've only talked to my family.  I never tried the production with that in mind, how to get the best out of his interpretation without making Lear go to second childhood.  That's the common theme among scholars, that Lear goes to second childhood.  He goes out in the woods and just loses it.  Takes off all of his clothes and runs around crazy with all the crazy people.  I don't think that's what happens and I don't know quite what is what happens.  But Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] has given us wonderful outlines, but often, not necessarily completed without the other human influence that brought in by other human beings.  Have I been clear by what I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, you have been clear.
Story_ID: 631615
Speaker 1: So have you ever directed?  You talked about just wanting to direct, but have you ever (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Di- Yeah, I've tried directing.  I once got with my dear friend, Joe Papp [Joseph Papp] again.  I might say some bad things about him, but he was very strong in my life.  Another one of the mentors and champions in my life.  Can I go way back?  Way back.  I was walking on the street one day, didn't have a job and Joe saw me.  He said, "Hi, what you doing?"  I said, "I'm not doing anything, I'm out of work."  He says, come--come in to the company and carry a spear.  That's a noble job in Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], to be a spear carrier.  It's mocked sometimes by people, but no to be able to carry a spear in Joe Papp's production of 'Henry V' [William Shakespeare] was big time stuff.  I was not only carrying a spear, but Joe gave me the role of Michael Williams, a common name, he was a Shakespearean character that he wrote about the war with France.  He put in the English Army was common people.  They were common men fighting for their country.  Michael Williams was a guy who's out on the battlefield.  The king decided, King Henry V decided to wander around the camp one night in disguise and see what the soldiers are thinking, see what the morale is.  And he runs into this one campfire and this Michael Williams is really complaining about the deaths this war is causing.  And when the king walks up and says something that provokes Michael.  Michael Williams lets him have it about the king has killing--is causing the deaths of all these people, right to the king's face.  Well, (laughter) that's quite a scene.  When the play was reviewed, not only did it get pretty good reviews as a well-done production, Michael Williams is singled out as one of Joe Papp's insinuations of left wing politics.  This is Joe Papp's way of reflecting on the Kor- the Vietnam War.  All these bodies killed for this war.  How many, "Yay, Yay LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], how many boys have you killed today."  Those things.  And the press got into that, 'cause Joe Papp was a left winger.  Joe Papp had a left wing background.  His real name was Papirofsky, Polish.  He changed it to Papp and they made fun of that.  The great Central Park [New York, New York] head, Robert Moses, very important figure in New York [New York] politics and life and power, decided Joe Papp didn't have the right to give free Shakespeare and have people tramp along--all over his grass.  So he tried to get that thing shut down, Joe Papp's free Shakespeare in the park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park].  Well, Joe fought it and won.
Speaker 1: Well, that started also a long collaboration--
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: That started a long collaboration with--I mean first of all Joe Papp became legendary in New York.  I mean, and in theater, period.
Speaker 2: But I swear to you, when Joe cast me he didn't have left wing politics in mind at all.  He cast a big guy who could carry a big spear (laughter) and who could challenge the king without knowing who the hell he was.
Story_ID: 631616
Speaker 1: I want to take us back to that time period, because you know you're doing theater and that is, you know, clearly how you began, but you also are doing--you're also--you're being cast in some TV shows at the same time.  And I'm--I'm talking about, let's see here, well, you're in 'East Side/West Side' on CBS, and then a year later you're in 'Dr. Strangelove' ['Dr. Strangelove or: How I learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb'], which is this--
Speaker 2: I was stepping in it (laughter), I was stepping into it, a lot of good stuff, I mean, I couldn't have chosen that myself.  I'm not smart enough as a career choice, to make those choices.  But I was stepping in it, I was stepping into some good.  I was stepping into the issue of Vietnam War with Joe Papp [Joseph Papp] and Shakespeare in the Park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park].  I was stepping into it on 'Dr. Strangelove' again with the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: Now, the director for 'Dr. Strangelove' was Stanley Kubrick.
Speaker 2: Stanley Kubrick.  Stanley Kubrick hired me and four other guys because we were young and college age as the bomb crew, B-52 bomb crew.  I was cast as the bombardier who couldn't get the bomb out.  A last desperate effort by this bomb crew because they couldn't--they couldn't make it to Moscow [Russia] to bomb Moscow, they had to pick another target.  And the captain, played by Slim Pickens, had to ride the bomb down like a cowboy and that was a big gag of this production.  I was the guy that couldn't get the bomb out.  I was named Jimmy Zogg [sic. Lothar Zogg], Lieutenant Zogg.  Zogg was patterned after the Green Lantern sidekick, Zoggy [ph.].  He was a bald-headed character in the comic book.  The writer, (unclear), names.  The author that I was most close to.
Speaker 1: Well, you were ke- he was a B-52 bomb- bombardier, but you're talking about the writer.
Speaker 2: It's there, it's in the program.  But the writer wrote sophomoric behavior in the American Air Force and made fun of the American Air Force, and they didn't like it.  They didn't give him any help till we had to patch together mockups of airplanes 'cause he couldn't--couldn't get from that U.S. Air Force 'cause he was so critical of them, and in sophomoric ways, not in profound ways, just stupid ways.  You've gotta get a quarter out of a Coke [Coca-Cola] machine to make a phone call because the wires are all down and you--and you shoot the Coke machine with your .45 and get--I mean it's just--he carried it to the edge, as he was famous for.  And Terry Southern is the author was famous for that kind of--I won't call it humor, that kind of satire.
Speaker 1: And--and it was, it--it developed quite a following that movie, 'Dr. Strangelove.'  It developed a following, quite a following.
Speaker 2: You know what, because the [U.S.] Army, 'cause the Air Force hated it and wouldn't give it any support, it became very popular amongst students worldwide, young people who declared it their cult hit.  And they loved the sophomoric aspect of it.
Story_ID: 631617
Speaker 1: At this point are you learning how to work between theater, the stage and movies, because there's a--
Speaker 2: No, I'm simply trying to learn how to work.  How to stay employed.  And I'll tell you something, I recognized early on that in most careers, there is a one track, you become a movie star, movies, you become a stage star, stage, you become a TV star, TV.  I said there are several fields out there, I'm gonna learn to walk in all three of them.  I'm gonna try to learn how to do TV, I wanna learn--will never stop learning how to do stage, and will try to learn how to do movies.  I just gotta get cast.  Walk around and try to knock on doors and you can get a job.  So I can walk--I'm a centipede, I'm not a monopede, one--one leg.  I want all five of the legs, movies, television, stage, commercials, animations, soap operas, all of them, and I did that.
Story_ID: 631618
Speaker 1: But what I find interesting, well this is not my question, I'll re-ask my question, but that you were discovering it right in that moment.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: See that's what I find.
Speaker 2: I so (unclear) found it interesting, how lucky. How lucky for me.  How lucky I was sitting there, how lucky the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] to ask for this whole event, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], poetry in the first place, I was lucky to be with Mr. Miranda [Lin Manuel-Miranda].  How lucky to meet Spike Lee who I hadn't really gotten along with all that much.  And we finally said hello in a civil way and I love you in spite of all this bullshit (laughter).
Speaker 1: He--he was sitting there--I'm tell you, totally memorized, looking--
Speaker 2: How do you know that?
Speaker 1: Because I saw a pic- I saw--I saw a clip from your performance and watched it several times, yeah.  And I was--'cause I thought wonder if he reversed that, you know, in that way 'cause I could see, you know, you had your hand movements and things like that, but you also the benefit of it being taped is that you saw people's reactions.  I mean, like they were almost in a holy space with you.
Story_ID: 631619
Speaker 1: I had asked the question about how--what about, well you were saying working, but how did you make decisions about who was advising you and how are you making decisions about what roles your taking?
Speaker 2: I don't know how most people manage their careers.  I don't think there's such a thing as the management of a career.  I think careers are happenings; you have to let them happen.  Mine has just happened.  I can't pin it on anybody, I can't blame anybody, I can't give credit to anybody, especially myself.  There just--I lucked out.  I fell into it.  I walked into it.  I stepped in it.  And that's all I can say whether it was stage, film, television.  They were good as accidents, and that's okay.  Here's an accident, I read a book called 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [sic.].  I'm excited about it like everybody who reads it is excited.  I get on the plane in the middle of a four-foot snowstorm, I fly up to Rome, New York where Alex Haley lives.  I trudge through the snow, I knock on his door and I said, "I'm just here to let you know that what you've done in that story should be fulfilled in film in some way."  And I didn't say I'm all for myself as the actor--
Speaker 1: You mean 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley].
Speaker 2: Well hub-bub was I ever hoping, yeah.  But I wanted and I met him, we became friends.  He and George [HistoryMaker George Haley] and his friend and I became friends that day over a cup of coffee and a four-foot snowstorm.  He once said, on the meeting he wanted me to do Chicken George.  Well, I was doing something in Shakespeare in the Park [New York Shakespeare Festival; Shakespeare in the Park], so I couldn't and Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], right?
Speaker 1: Lou Gossett.
Speaker 2: Got lucky enough to do Chicken George.  I was--the next best thing to Chicken George was to do Alex himself.  When Alex comes out of the [U.S.] Coast Guard, but then it had to go to--what segment 2, 'Roots II' ['Roots: The Next Generations'].
Speaker 1: 'Roots II.'
Speaker 2: Before that could be decided.  So I just stepped into it.  Stepped off a plane into four feet of snow and stepped into Alex Haley's life.  We became fast friends.  We'd swap apartmen-  I once did a movie that was quite extravagant.  My role was not much, but it was important in France, South of France.  And they rented a little apartment and little place near Nice [France] called Cros-de-Cagnes and Alex once said he had to do some writing and I said, "Oh let's swap out, I'll take your pad that you got up in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and I'll swap you the pad I got down here."  We became that kind of friends, you know.
Story_ID: 631620
Speaker 1: What did you like about him?  What resonated with you about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alex [Alex Haley]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  What resonated about--?
Speaker 2: He's a storyteller.  He really lived to tell stories.  And you know what, when we did the version of 'Roots II' ['Roots: The Next Generations'] with Alex coming out of the [U.S.] Coast Guard, we made the mistake of not having Alex like a bloodhound on the quest of his story.  We did--we wasted time having Alex covering his romantic life with his girlfriend.  Crap.  What, that wasn't important.  It wasn't that, really wasn't really that much important to Alex.  It's interesting to his career or his life, what was important was that he was the kind of bloodhound journalist who could sniff out.  Julie Christie, right, he was sniffing out her story.  He was assigned by Playboy magazine.  He was over in London [England]; she was not very tardy.  He'd get an appointment with her and she'd blow it off or something.  He'd end up at the museum and he discovered the Rosetta Stone.  And out of his discovery of the--his discovery of something that was discovered, for history the Rosetta Stone, he figured out how to put 'Roots' together.  How to put the three words he had found from his ancestry.
Speaker 1: That's interesting--
Speaker 2: Because he was a bloodhound.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, 'cause a lot of people don't know that he--he actually was a reporter for Playboy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Playboy magazine, yeah.  He did--we didn't cover the Julie Harris interview in our episode, but we did cover the Nazi, American Nazi, George Lincoln Rockwell.  And Marlon Brando insisted on playing George Lincoln Rockwell (laughter).  I don't remember much, except when I and Alex Haley walked into George Lincoln Rockwell's room--office, Marlon reaches down and gets a can of fly spray. Decontaminates the whole room because a nigger just walked in.  The word wasn't used in the production, but that gesture was saying this is a Negro getter.  A Negro suppressant.  I don't think the scene was all that exciting, because we wasted time again, instead of giving the writer time to write Alex, the bloodhound, Alex sniffing out a story, and he was--he was really uncanny the way he appro- he didn't offend Rockwell, he didn't really let Rockwell offend him.  He shot--he just rose above all that and got his story about the American Nazi.
Story_ID: 631621
Speaker 1: I wanna go back though to 1967 with 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] because this is--this is--I mean you--up, up until I think maybe the year before you actually get your first awards--no--no--no, it's not a year before.  I think you--is it 19--win two theatrical awards previously, I think in the early like 1963?
Speaker 2: You talking about the Antoinette Perry [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], the Tony?
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That was for, yeah for 'The Great White Hope' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Great White Hope.'  But no, there were two other smaller awards you won before that.  But this is your first Tony.  I want you to talk about how you came into this production and what this production represents.  You know, because you did this and you did the movie?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a wonderful experience and it was a horrible experience.  So horrible that I had to recover from it afterwards by going--ran off-Broadway in some Athol Fugard with my feet on the dirt.  But it was wonderful ended, it elevated me into a stratosphere of so-called stardom and all that stuff, which I didn't know what to do, wasn't my business.  It was fantasy land, it was all fairytale, as it always is.  The Oscars [Academy Awards] is about fairytales.  The work was done in the studio, the awards is all fairytale.  It's wonderful, I'm not saying it shouldn't be done, it should be celebrated.  But in the case of 'The Great White Hope,' it was very simple.  Howard Sackler, who wrote the play, and it wasn't about the South, the accent he created for Jack Johnson was really a poetic creation.  It wasn't Galveston's [Galveston Giant; Jack Johnson] accident, it was a poetic creation.  And when I learned it I realized that I wasn't just being a southern boy, I was--it was something else I was working on.  He was a cipher and I don't know how to spell the word cipher, C-Y-P-H--whatever.
Speaker 1: P-H-E-R [sic.]. I think that is--
Speaker 2: The real Jack Johnson was depicted beautifully in a documentary ['Unforgiveable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson'] by, Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones] what's his name.
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Ken Burns?
Speaker 2: Ken--Ken--
Speaker 1: No, that's--that's more, yeah that's--that's of the last few years.
Speaker 2: Ken Burn gave us a gorgeous and I mean gorgeous to look at, to sense human being in the real Jack Johnson.  You understood why women were all over him.  Why there was a big problem in his life.  'Cause he had an appetite and Howard Sackler tried to deal with that, at the same time dealing with some of the negative forces that were happening in the boxing world.  What was great about the play, 'cause they cast archetypes, archetypal actors.  The man who was against Jack Johnson named Cap'n Dan was George Matthews.  A hulking, old, hard-working actor.  He walks on stage and he is an oak, and you know, Jack Johnson is in trouble.  You, you--it's hard to imply that in film.  With film all you get is a nasty white man, and there're plenty of them, now why, what's interesting about a nasty white man.  What was interesting was that he represented a monolith of American power and--that existed in the boxing world, white power.  And they weren't gonna let go of that title to a jig (laughter). A black man, and Jack Johnson wanted it, he wanted that title, and he took it in Australia.
Story_ID: 631622
Speaker 1: So what was your preparation for that play ['The Great White Hope,' Howard Sackler] though?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went--I was doing that thing in--working in South of France.  It was a wonderful experience with Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton that my wife [Cecilia Hart] connects to very, very strongly still.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had married your current wife, right?
Speaker 2: I wasn't married, no, no, this had nothing to do with my marriage.  But I'm saying it is--resonates still in our life.  The movie didn't amount to much, it was called 'Comedians' ['The Comedians'] but my discovery of a friendship with Richard Burton led to her discovery of a friendship with Elizabeth Taylor, my wife's.  And it's a long story, I won't go into it any further.  Except to say--
Speaker 1: You can't say that?
Speaker 2: It's important.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about it?
Speaker 2: It's too, I'll try to, but let me get to the point.  I was advised to go from South of France by Howard Sackler.  He said go to London [England] and look up the trainer who was working with Laurence Olivier on his Othello.  The physical trainer, he might be able to help you.  And I did that for whatever it was worth.  But that's how it all started.  I began to train.  I didn't--I knew I couldn't look like a boxer, I don't have the footwork or the alacrity of my feet or upper body strength.  But I started working on it.
Story_ID: 631623
Speaker 1: And we did the play ['The Great White Hope,' Howard Sackler].  The play was a big hit for odd reasons.  We got awards for it, then it became a movie.
Speaker 2: But why do you say for odd reasons?  Why--why odd reasons?  I mean this is--
Speaker 1: Usu--
Speaker 2: You know, because you--it's Jane Alexander who is playing right, she's the mistress, the white mistress.  These are still for this time, really taboo subjects.
Speaker 1: That doesn't impress me.  Race never has impressed me.  It is the key often to a lot of drama, but at the end I can't be impressed by it.  I am it.  I was born in Mississippi, and there's nothing about race I don't have some familiarity with.  Let me move ahead.  The training proceeded.  I did the play.  Then the mistakes were made with the movie by trying to give Hollywood a package of romance between a black guy and a white girl, like that was a big deal.  That's what I mean.  It was not impressive.  But our production tried to make out that it was. Larry Turman [Lawrence Turman] and Howard Sackler made the decision to excise all the poetic elements in that script that gave you the monolithic Cap'n Dan that I told you was so scary.  It gave you all the other characters who irate against Jack Johnson.  So when he walked on stage you knew he was up against a lot of--a lot of trouble.  The movie never captured that.  The strongest thing I remember about the movie was when Jack was chased out of Europe into Hungary and he was denied the ability to fight.  They shut off his life, shut down--the Americans did, boxing association.  So he ended up playing 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe] with Ellie [Ellie Bachman], with his wife, that Jane Alexander played.  And he's on stage playing Uncle Tom, he looks out and he sees one of the members of the boxing association scouting him, watching him.  And he starts turning his performance to a mockery.  That's the most--that's the strongest moment I found in the play.  And there weren't many strong moments.  There weren't many poetic moments 'cause they were all excised trying to make it--
Speaker 2: You mean out of the movie, in the movie?
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the movie, yeah.
Speaker 2: Movie, yeah, okay.  You said the play.
Speaker 1: There was too much excised, cut out to make room for this romance between a black guy and a white girl.
Speaker 2: But to the play, on the play side, I mean like Clive Barnes said this--you were a whirlwind.  Like the play was a whirlwind, you came with amazing, amazing reviews.
Speaker 1: Well. Critics did have their say.  But one person called it inundation of theater.  The audience sat there in the theater and were inundated by what was happening on stage.  It was I can't--I can't describe it, that's what their job is, they're critics and they described it something quite phenomenal that could not be sustained in film.  That's all I know.
Speaker 2: So, that--that doesn't happen often either, Mr. Jones [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones], that doesn't happen where you--someone goes from the play to the movie, that is--
Speaker 1: Oh boy is it ever rare.
Speaker 2: That is extremely rare.  In fact, I'm trying to think of another situation that I can sort of remember that's not a--a--you know, a taping of a theatrical performance.  I haven't heard of--I'm trying to think that hasn't happened a lot.
Story_ID: 631624
Speaker 1: So, you were excited about it--you were excited that there was going to be this movie ['The Great White Hope'].  That was captivating you up.  But then--
Speaker 2: It--it was inevitable, it had to happen whether I liked it or not, whether I was excited or not.  I was ready to meet it, yeah.  And I trained.
Speaker 1: Right, the training, can you talk about, 'cause you trained--you also trained, but you also watched a lot of--
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: You watched a film too, right?  You were training.  'Cause you were trying--that's what I wanted to know how you got to your character development and how did you get to who this person was?
Speaker 2: Well, it was through the author.  You always have to go through your playwright, and I did and I liked Howard's [Howard Sackler] worked very much.  I feel sad that he was convinced by the film production that he had to lose certain elements, but he gave them to us in the play.  And we had a chance to act them in the play.
Speaker 1: So he got the chance to write the screenplay, that's unusual too.  He--he wrote the screenplay, that's unusual.
Speaker 2: Well, he had to agree to certain terms.  He was--now 'cause Hollywood deals in fantasy and the big fantasy was black guy falls in love with a white girl, yippie, skippy.  I'm being cynical right now.  It happens every day, it should happen every day.
Story_ID: 631625
Speaker 1: So in this time I know you get married, you get divorced.
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Me, the actor?
Speaker 1: Yes, you the--you the person not--you the--don't say the actor.  You the individu- the person, the real [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, gets married, to my namesake Julienne [Julienne Marie].  You get married--
Speaker 2: I married, I married a lady who I met when she was hired to be that third pillar, tiny as she was, that third pillar force in that play called 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] where the Anthropophagi story caught the attention of a young girl, yeah, we married.
Speaker 1: And you were married for four years, right?  From 196- '68 [1968] to '72 [1972] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't count them.
Speaker 1: Okay you didn't.
Story_ID: 631626
Speaker 1: That marriage [with Julienne Marie] ends and I'm just wondering when you have, 'cause you talk about this, that all of a sudden, you know, you are--you become a celebrity in that way, you know with 'The Great White Hope.'  You--I thought you started to say that how do you take that.  Like, how--how do you react to that.  You had even said something of the other interview that said that it was about being, not a giant, but something like you can't act it, you know, you can't (laughter)--you can't be it (laughter), you know, you can't be it, but I'm saying how are you reacting to these, I'm asking the question, how are you reacting to this--this next level of your--your ascendency in the world of theater and notoriety?
Speaker 2: The real truth is you can't, 'cause it's unreal.  There's nothing to react to.  It is all a sham.  It's been that way all along.  It's designed that way.  One should expect it when you walk into that world.  I did expect it, yeah.  But it's all based on fantasy.  It's okay.  Hollywood fantasy has given us a lot of bucks.  A lot of pleasure.  I stay up every night when the movie 'Grapes of Wrath' ['The Grapes of Wrath'] is playing.  It's one of my favorite films.  There's some wonderful things that have been done in film.  It's not un-useful fantasy, but it is fantasy.  And that's the problem with it.  And for a person who participates in you gotta be very careful that you have your feet somewhere on the ground.  What happened to me was after the whirlwind of the play, 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] and the film, and worldwide attention being in filming in Spain and then London [England], and finally it's over.  I couldn't wait to get back to where I started, which is off-Broadway.  Athol Fugard had written a play called 'Boesman and Lena' about two derelicts in South Africa.  [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee was playing the woman, I was asked to play the man.  Zakes Mokae was playing the old man called Outa.  And it was a place I could get my feet back on the ground.  I was so grateful of Athol Fugard, of Ruby, of Zakes, John Berry the director, I was so grateful that I had that chance after all that (gesture) whirlwind stuff.  What does Dorothy say?  We're back in Kansas.  We're back on the earth, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Toto.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) Toto.
Speaker 1: But who is telling you not to get confused?  'Cause a lot of time--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Who's telling you not to get confused, is that your inner--inner--inner being, who is telling you?  Was that your agent?  I just--I'm trying to understand who's influencing you or?
Speaker 2: You're on your own.  The amazing wise people in your life, but rarely.  You're on your own, I mean, you stepped out there on your own and you're gonna stay on your own 'til the end.  And when you--when there's a reckoning, it's yours.  You have to know when you're in trouble and find a healthy way to react to it.
Story_ID: 631627
Speaker 1: When you were in that production, tell me what that production meant to you.
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The one 'Boesman,' ['Boesman and Lena,' Athol Fugard] you know--you smile.
Speaker 2: Oh God, I loved it so.  I could be the actor that I started out being.  I mean I could do that in movies too, you know, there are ways I should've maybe developed more of the film acting career and found a way to fu- I mean actors I know, Robert De Niro and Al Pacino, they have done it.  Found ways of filling their hearts and souls in movies.  No, I never went there.  Never quite got there.  I was there, I'd love to.  But what I did, I found it in plays like Athol Fugard's 'Boesman and Lena.'  I could play--she and I played people at the bare bottom of society.  They played people with nothing to lose, really nothing to gain.  So what you're left with is the human--the human element, that's all you got.  And you have to start trying to understand that as an actor what that means.  Got nothing to hide, got nothing to, you know, all that sham stuff that goes along with show business usually, none of that.  One night, I was so nasty on the stage that two young men got up in outrage and left the theater.  "All right Jones [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones]," and he walked out.  'Cause I was a nasty man.  I think that night I was not only nasty to Ruby [HistoryMaker Ruby Dee], I was nasty to somebody popping gum in the front row.
Speaker 1: You know that is the second time you've recounted, not today but the last time you also talked about when you're second wife [Cecilia Hart], your second Desdemona, someone came up too close and she was with child, you know, and that you--and I think that that--I don't--I think there may be a third or fourth time you--you wouldn't--you don't suffer fools easily?
Speaker 2: No, but it's also a mistake.  We're supposed to let it happen, let it pass, and it'll take care of itself or it'll be taken care of by others.  Once the actor steps out of character, it's a great loss, the audience is thrown, your fellow actors are thrown.  By that I mean, you're outta step, you're outta it's like let's start all over again.  One night we were doing 'Fences,' [August Wilson] a wonderful production.  We were deep into it.  And some people started scurrying in the audience and we got the sense there was a rat loose in the audience.  Chaos.  And I didn't know what it was, I thought it might have been danger, so I said let's all leave the stage and the whole--I took my fellow actors off the stage.  And we came back when it was over.  'Cause there's nothing else you could do.  I see politicians react to heckling and yeah, it's the same thing.  But in the theater you have created a magic world and when something intrudes on it, it's very hard to sustain it.  And I made the mistake of blowing my cover a few times.  When the man leaned on the stage and my wife was carrying Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones] in her belly--was lying on the bed, I went over to him and said, "This is our territory, you move away."  I didn't know what he was go--wanted to do.  I'm happy I did that one.  Because people don't do that.  They don't come and intrude on--lean against the stage at the proscenium.
Story_ID: 631628
Speaker 1: I don't play much to the church traditions of call and response, I don't like it.  When it happens in the theater, I really don't like it.  And I--but there's a bug in this stuff.  I'll stand up here and do my role and you do yours, but when my role has incited an audience and the role of Troy in 'Fences' [August Wilson] makes a lot of women, even as old as I played him, kind of thrilled that there's somebody heroic.  This guy's funny, he's a lovely, lovely man.  And then they find out he's an asshole.  They find out he's unfaithful to his wife, in fact he's impregnated the woman down the street and she died in childbirth and he brings the baby home.  I'll tell you that story in a minute.  But, the women in the audience at that point become Troy Maxson's enemy.  And they say--hurtle expressions at me like, why don't you drown the damn baby, you know.  Our producer was a little girl, Carole Shorenstein Hays, very wealthy from San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: And this is 'Fences'?
Speaker 1: 'Fences.'  When her son was born, she asked if I would take him on stage so he could get his Equity [Actors' Equity Association] card as an infant.  And I said that's a lovely idea.  You know, union card, your workers union card.  And so we devised a way, I used to carry a fake baby, a doll in a blanket and I act like I'm being very careful with him and I come down the stairs and I said, "Honey would you take this illegitimate child into our lives."  I asked the impossible of my wife, Rose [Rose Maxson].  The audience has a fit.  The night I carry little Wally [Wally Hays], a real baby in my arms, and I'm whispering to him and this child, his little hand comes up and touches my mouth like you'd say shut up.  And it's a little white hand.  Woman in the audience said, "I knew it, the bitch was white!" (Laughter) That's an interruption, but we asked for it, we brought this--a real child on and one of my favorite moments in theater.
Story_ID: 631629
Speaker 1: You had described some of the--just made some mention of 'Fences' [August Wilson] and the making of it.  And you--you talked about [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards.  You described him at that point, I think, complicated.
Speaker 2: As what?
Speaker 1: Complicated?
Speaker 2: Complicated.
Speaker 1: You described him as complicated.  And I know.  I wanna talk because this is your se- 'Fences' is your second Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My second what?
Speaker 1: Tony Award, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this--but I want to understand about this production and you know, what happens because there is yourself, there's Lloyd Richards, there's the producer and there is--is that it, no there's--
Speaker 2: Who got awards?
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm not talking about awards. I'm talking about getting to the production.
Speaker 2: Getting to the production?
Speaker 1: Yeah, getting to the production of 'Fences.'  'Cause I had heard that, you know, tensions got--oh and there is August Wilson, why am I forgetting him, you know, that's amazing.  The playwright himself, that's amazing.
Speaker 2: Who created it?
Speaker 1: Who created it.  And there is, it's complicated relations, period.  So, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: No my relationship with Lloyd Richards was not complicated, but it became complex with the production.  Here's what happened.  I'll start from the very beginning.  It's a difficult production to sell 'cause it's about black people, right.  We opened it at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], it was a wonderful production.  A good experience for all of us, writer, the actors and director.  Good, good experience.  But we couldn't get anybody to bite.  We--the value of Yale University is it's close to New York [New York].  You take a train on and it happens all the time.  Producers ride out and see a production and ride back.  That's good for us or that's not good for us.  No one said 'Fences' is good for us.  Nothing happened to it.  No bids from the big world.  So somebody suggested, well let's take it on the road, let's take it to Chicago [Illinois].  It happens in Chicago at the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], that when we did the production, also a good production, well received, in the audience was a woman named Carol Channing.  She saw the production--
Speaker 1: The Carol Channing?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Is it, which Carol Channing?
Speaker 2: Oh the--
Speaker 1: The--the Carol Channing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the performer.  And she's a friend of the Hays, of Carole Shorenstein Hays, she's a friend of the Shorensteins, a big family of San Francisco [California].  She calls the daughter; she calls Carole Shorenstein Hays and says, "Carole, go down to the Goodman Theatre, there's a play going on there about your family."  And Carole Shorenstein Hays goes and see this play about this black family, and the dynamic going on between the father and the son and the whole family.  Carole, the young Carole Shorenstein Hays recognizes it is, yeah.  It is a dynamic that is common in many families.  And she decided to produce it.  The first, and her father [Walter Shorenstein] had given her a million dollars just to go produce a play and that was it.  Well, the problem was, we opened it in San Francisco in contrast of what we had received in--at Yale.  There were--there were problems that we hadn't solved, neither the director nor us, the actors.  It gets painful, because in spite of the weaknesses that were pointed out by the San Francisco press and they're sharp, they know what good theater is and when they come down on something, they're, you know, it hurts.  They came down on this production in certain ways that we had to solve.
Story_ID: 631630
Speaker 1: But, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards had to get back to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], he was the--
Speaker 2: He was the head of the--
Speaker 1: Head of the drama department at Yale, and the author had something, and they were finished.  They got on the plane and went home.  And I said to Carole [Carole Shorenstein Hays], I said, it's not finished.  You can't let them go.  And she contacted them, both the writer and the director, and said we have to meet in New York [New York], and by the way you're fired.  As a business gesture, she had to fire them before she could get control of the production.  And that, the young actor playing Cory [Cory Maxson], the young man, playing my son--
Speaker 2: His name is--wait--Courtney Vance [Courtney B. Vance].
Speaker 1: Courtney Vance, thank you.  He didn't understand, I mean, Lloyd Richards had been his mentor, had been carried him through Yale as a student and he had given up a role in the production with--
Speaker 2: See I'm not good with this part--
Speaker 1: Names, they flee my grasp.
Speaker 2: But you're saying Courtney was going to be part of--he had given up another production?
Speaker 1: He had a chance to play Bigger, Bigger Thomas in 'Native Son,' the movie.  Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones], who was it?
Speaker 2: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  I'm looking it up.
Speaker 1: I see, I see, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big--big time--big time playing the mother [Rose Maxson] I think.  He gave that up.  And now he's in a production where his hero is being fired, and he doesn't understand why we can't get along (laughter), it's simple as that.  And--but I was--it was my fault really, I instigated it.  I said to her, "You promised to back me up and it needs more work."  My problem I had was that there was a scene between the son and the father [Troy Maxson].  They were at loggerheads.  It was very dangerous, this is where there's a play going on about your family, Carole.  This is where she recognized that dynamic when father and son come di- become dangerous.  The author has the mother come on and resolve it.  And I said, "That's the problem.  That's the weakness.  You gotta give the audience a resolution between the two men.  The mother can't come on and solve it for you."  The author didn't want to do any re-writes, he already re-wrote stuff.  He said, "No, what you got is what you got."  I said to Lloyd, "What do we do?"  He said, "Well we'll pantomime then, we don't have the words, we'll--."  And it became a pantomime over the baseball bat.  Not the greatest thing, but it worked.  The mother didn't come on stage, the two men fought it out.  At one point, the father has the bat in his hand and he subdued the son enough that he could now bash him, and the question becomes: is this man gonna kill his son or not.  And it simply resolved, he can't.  He lets go of the bat and that is the end of the scene.  For me it was a compromise, it worked and nobody had to write anything.  Just cut a line and made the play shorter.  Because the mother had quite a--quite a thing to say.  You know, for an actress to learn what she had to say was quite profound.  I said it's--it doesn't work, because it's not between the two men.
Story_ID: 631631
Speaker 1: So this is the thing.  The--who--so the play ['Fences,' August Wilson] gets to Broadway and the play does well on Broadway.  So you're saying that everyone got fired or no, that everybody got fired but they got re-hired, but under conditions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the firing was just so the producer [Carole Shorenstein Hays] could get control of the production.  And I--you got to get a lawyer to explain it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, no I understand that happens all the time.  So, what I--
Speaker 2: Does it (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It does (laughter).  Well, they do that a lot.  You know, they--everyone has to submit their resignation, and then they're re-hired.  That's more common now.  But I--what, but this is a very te- from that point on the production dynamic is tense?
Speaker 2: In the production?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, the play is too good for it to--
Speaker 1: But what was the writing?  I had heard that he had--that August [August Wilson] that there had been a lot of re-writing of things, you know, that had to be done for the Broadway.  Like any production, but for the Broadway production, is that not correct?
Speaker 2: He didn't do much re-writing, he hated to re-write.  He was so good that what he wrote was pretty much it; that should work.  In this case, the one key was the mother [Rose Maxson], the mother can't resolve a battle between the father [Troy Maxson] and the son [Cory Maxson], they had to resolve it themselves in front of the audience, the audience has to see a resolution.  That's what a play is.
Speaker 1: So this--to--you--you win a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre]--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You win a--you actually won a Tony for your performance and August Wilson wins a Tony.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a good production. That was a knockout (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--that really is what takes August Wilson, puts him on the path, that production.  It was a knockout production.  What happens with Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], what does he--what ends up with them--with him?  'Cause he--
Speaker 2: Lloyd continues at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], the main energy up at Yale, thinking he'd get some illness eventually and has to stop working.  I don't know the whole--the story.  When illness gets into a situation, nobody wants to talk about it.  So it's not a part of the grapevine, it's not a part of the rumor world, you know.  It shouldn't be.  It's too private.
Story_ID: 631632
Speaker 1: What does 'Fences' [August Wilson] represent for you in your career?
Speaker 2: It represents for--a play about black people offered to black people, it's about we don't have enough heroes.  We grasp at what little we get, and that's what happened in this play.  Women in the audience and they would come on Sundays especially 'cause they'd come as groups and that's when the trouble starts.  It becomes very unruly because they, you have awakened their need.  I had it happen down in Washington, D.C. playing the role of, in a not very good production of 'Paul Robeson' [Phillip Hayes Dean].  Women of that time said, it is so good to see a black man that we can accept as a hero.  And no matter how bad the production was, and it was, they came to see it.  It became a favorite show for black women to come and see.  'Fences' was that too (laughter).  When Denzel Washington did it, it was a wonderful production too with--Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones] help me.
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Viola Davis.
Speaker 2: Violet Davis [sic.].  It was a won- in fact, she carried the second act before you got to the problem with the father [Troy Maxson] and the son [Cory Maxson] so wonderfully.  The play works, it's a wonderful play.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the other thing I was just thinking about was, I was thinking of our classics because this set August Wilson up as a classic American playwright, which we have had to that, you know, that point.
Speaker 2: He belongs in the same galaxy of Arthur Miller, Tennessee Williams, Eugene O'Neill.  And that has nothing to do with volume.  You gotta write more than one play to really get into that galaxy, and August did write more than one play.
Speaker 1: Well, he wrote very strong with characters too.  His characters--his characters, he has as much--he has a Shakespearean quality to his writing.  I mean maybe that's overstating it, but there's I can see how you could like, you know, we just--his characters, you know, are--they're complex, his characters are co--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay I see you smiling, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Just great story telling and ever character has--
Speaker 1: Every--everyone has that.
Story_ID: 631633
Speaker 1: I think in one interview you talk about how you came into theater when it was the everyman was, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was coming in and then I think of the role Lennie [Lennie Small], you know, that you played 'Of Mice and Men' [John Steinbeck].  So your--can you talk about these, you know, you--you've even said that--you said that with 'Boesman' ['Boesman and Lena,' Athol Fugard] too that people on the lower rung in some respects, not that all of them were, but I want you to talk about these roles.  Like even the role of Lennie, 'Of Mice and Men' that was a signature--
Speaker 2: Not many people become king.  Where everybody becomes the subject of a nation.  Not many people become the president, not many become the CEO.  But you got a lot of people working in the trenches.  And it's those people when you focus on them, the story starts getting universal and that's what I love.  When an actor can take on a role like that and you play what I call every man, that's why Marlon Brando became a phenomenon in American movies.  The roles he took on were not about captains and kings, about guys on motorcycles, and when the average American came out of those movies, they said hey I could do that.  It's true, they could do that.  They have done that.  Then Marlon Brando brought in the talent that reflected on the common man.  And I was lucky to come into the theater at that time by the way, when you didn't have to be a member of a royal family like the Barrymores to be an actor, you could be a nobody, and Marlon Brando and all those guys from the so-called method world were part of that.  That was hard to capture those roles as actors, you know.  By looking at honest human behavior and learning how to have the courage as an actor to get on stage with it.
Story_ID: 631634
Speaker 1: So can you tell me the story before we leave, a reference you made about Elizabeth Taylor and Rich Burton [Richard Burton], I mean, 'cause you--then you even threw in Laurence Olivier, I mean just (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I have no relationship with Laurence Olivier except at the time, at the time he did his Othello, I did one over here and was compared favorably by one critic.  I didn't do badly to be compared with Laurence Olivier.  And it was a wonderful production.  It was not a wonderful production, but it was a wonderful interpretation of the role Olivier did.  The role--the playing of Iago suffered a great deal.  It lacked what I've been talking about the need for torture.  How desperate it is that he have the truth.  Your question?
Speaker 1: My question about Elizabeth--Elizabeth Taylor (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a simple story.  I did a movie that nobody's ever seen.  It was called 'The Comedians' set in Haiti.  We couldn't film it in Haiti because Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] was still alive.  The film was written by, help Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones].  Wonderful writer.  You, your reader will forgive me for not always having those in mind.
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: That's okay Flynn, we'll get it.  Not because I don't love them, because I just don't use their names frequently.  One of the greatest writers in English language.  He wrote this story about the diplomatic world in third world countries.
Speaker 1: I don't know who wrote it, but Sir--
Speaker 2: Can I go ahead with the story?
Speaker 1: Yes, please, start.
Speaker 2: He cast Elizabeth Taylor as the wife of a diplomat who is stationed in Haiti.  He was--like some South American country.  She was German, but she was married to this--Peter Ustinov played the diplomat.  She became a lover to the man who owned the hotel, the Trianon Hotel [Hotel Trianon], famous hotel in Port-Au-Prince [Haiti].  And Richard Burton was cast in that character.  The first time the two of them had roles that were equal in length and in money.  They were each paid a million dollars apiece, and that's kind of what the spirit was about really, it boiled down to that (laughter).  Because the director, Peter--no idea.
Speaker 1: I saw Sir Alec Guinness, but I don't know, he was in there, but--
Speaker 2: These names I know so well.
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Graham Greene wrote it.
Speaker 2: Graham Greene, is that a big name or not.  And the director, Flynn?
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Peter Glenville.
Speaker 2: Peter Glenville.  A classic gentleman of a British director.  But gentleman gets in the way, because he didn't wanna go near Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, as the director he stood back.  And they got no direction.  This is a pretty complicated little story.  They needed direction like all of us did.  I knew I needed direction and I asked for it, he gave me direction.  He and I enjoyed working together, 'cause I was one of the only actors on that set who accepted his direction.  I played the lover to Richard Burton's mother, who was a Haitian doctor who was aligned to the revolutionary forces in Haiti.  Anyway, nobody wanted to see a movie about Haiti with Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor in the front ground and something going on odd in the background, but Haiti, which we don't know enough about and that's what the movie became.   When we're not getting enough about what's going on in there.  'Cause it's about revolution.
Story_ID: 631635
Speaker 1: But I got along well with Richard [Richard Burton].  I won't say we became pals, but I knew I loved him as a human being so much so that when I decided to get married finally, I asked him to be my best man.  He agreed, but I chickened out, long story.
Speaker 2: What's the long story, you can't stop there. (Laughter) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it stopped when I eventually came through, I did marry.  But at the time--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute (laughter).
Speaker 1: I had to call Richard, said no I called it off.  He had set up his brother to greet me at the airport in Scotland.  I was gonna get married up there.
Speaker 2: Wait, so this is--this is to Cecilia [Cecilia Hart] that you were gonna get married?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Oh some--oh.
Speaker 1: The first wife [Julienne Marie].
Speaker 2: The first wife, I see.
Speaker 1: What sealed it was later when I would--I'd meet Elizabeth [Elizabeth Taylor] and we were--we had a friendship.  We were both honored by The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] the same night.  And we had a nice, you know, rapport.  I never became pals with her either.  But when my wife [Cecilia Hart] met her, my present wife, the mother of Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones], met her, they got along swimmingly and until the day Elizabeth died, they became friends.  My wife, somehow, understood her.  My wife collected all the books about the two of them; we have them in our library.  And became a nice relationship only because I'd worked with Richard and gotten along with him.  And she honored that and respected that.  And she loved my wife too.
Speaker 2: That (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That simple, that doesn't happen often in show business.  Usually, the more dazzling and troublesome than that.
Story_ID: 631636
Speaker 1: I mean they [Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton] were a big deal still, I mean on the higher echelons of production and money they were a big deal.
Speaker 2: Well a million dollars back then is that's a hu- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Big money.
Speaker 2: --that's like a huge amount of money.
Speaker 1: But the both stars to get the same salary that was, yeah, equal salaries.  It was special.
Speaker 2: You know, because they were really--they had on-off camera, it was almost like modern da- they were living 'cause they were married and then they, you know, and she had had all these husban- you know, they were--and they were royalty on--
Speaker 1: They were royalty, yes, yes, thank you.  It's that simple, they were our royalty.  They were not every man.
Story_ID: 631637
Speaker 1: I want to ask you, just how do you prepare for a role?  Like how--?
Speaker 2: Oh, the script, you go to--what the author has written.  I'm working on one now.  The last thing he said to me, they said to me, see 'Wuthering Heights' [Emily Bronte], you might understand something about the character.  I said okay, good exercise.  So I got a copy of 'Wuthering Heights' voice--voice book, and I got to sit down and start listening to it.  Do you know the story of 'Wuthering Heights'?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know what (unclear).
Speaker 2: It is, what human--what goes on between those two human beings is key to what goes on in this little play we're doing--this little movie we're doing.  Now, I can't talk much about that, 'cause it's--
Speaker 1: I want to say it's still just so wonderful--it's wonderful, it's in your blood--it's in your blood, but--
Speaker 2: Oh it--I step into it, you know.
Speaker 1: But I wanna also besides reading the play and working with the director, how do you work on your character development, are there things that you--how you approach a role and--
Speaker 2: You, you have to eventually make the dialogue a part of you, which means memorizing all the words and understanding what they're saying, what they mean.  That's one of the chores, but it's not a bad chore.  Once you do it, you feel much better.  You don't feel like you are the character, but you know what the character said and you try to figure out why--why is he saying that?  How am I supposed to say that?  Well what do I leave when I--when it comes out of my mouth, what am I leaving?  It's a good exercise.  It's about language.
Story_ID: 631638
Speaker 1: So when did you move to California?  That's the other thing, you said that you moved to California just to--because, you know, the stage had gotten too, you know, and it didn't pay well, you know?
Speaker 2: I, except for having a couple of marriages that were wonderful, and I--my life was affected somehow in terms of where I lived and what I did by those, how much money I should make to make family, you know, keep the family going.  I had to consider certain things.  I did abandon Broadway for a while, theater. There has never been just Broadway, theater is everywhere on stage.  I--there was a time when I said no, I'm broke, I'm broke too long, my coffers are suffering.  And the chance of making a little better money, I can do one job on the stage and get a hundred dollar and I can make the job on film and get a thousand dollars, you know.  Acting is the same, but the medium determines.  I decided to move to California.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?  Was it in the early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it after Flynn, Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones] was born?
Speaker 2: Flynn started school.  When did you start school Flynn?
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Ah--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty--
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES): Eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 2: What, '89 [1989]?  I thought you were born in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Yeah, but we didn't move out here 'til the year '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: I see okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982] was 'Fences' [August Wilson] still, right?
Speaker 2: Right, '82 [1982] was 'Fences,' uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Then it went--that went on for a while.
Speaker 2: No, '87 [1987], no--
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Eighty--
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] is 'Fences,' '82 [1982] Flynn--Flynn is born.
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Barely though.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Barely?
Speaker 2: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Well, the last two weeks of December.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Before I was completely born.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You were completely born.
Speaker 2: I was what (laughter).  I never heard of it was like I was confused (laughter). I was like looking--
Speaker 1: This interview is really about my son, did you get a camera on him over there (laughter).
Speaker 2: We have to get, he's the voice behind.  Okay, so but no--
Speaker 1: He's the mind.
Speaker 2: So, so after though, after 'Fences' you decide that there's not enough--you know, it's--
Speaker 1: It's bad to go broke that much that deeply.  It's not that I had a lifestyle to sustain.  I didn't do that.  I lived in the woods, nobody cares what my house looks like but my wife [Cecilia Hart].  I built a house in the woods that was like for a giant.
Speaker 2: Wait, you built that house, did you build that house by then?  You built the house in--
Speaker 1: The house I live in now? Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I--'cause I remember I loved--'cause you decided to buy the house, you got some money and went and what--'cause your wife came later, a little bit.  You were spending weekends and she--or at least that's the way it says it in the book.
Speaker 1: It's very complicated when it comes to houses and wives.  But where I live now, my wife determined that it should become a home and not just a--I built a pass through shelf for--like you pass through Thanksgiving dinner.  You're a giant, oh you spilled the stuff all over yourself if you try to pass it from the kitchen to the--it was rid- there are no closet space in my house.  I built for--as a lodge really.  And for hanging guns all over the walls, that sort of thing, you know.
Speaker 2: It was your man hole.  What they call a man hole (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A man hole, yeah.  And she civilized it, yeah.  A lot of it is civilized with photographs of Flynn.  Flynn and family.
Speaker 2: That's lovely.  So--so, you moved--you moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 1: We moved to L.A., we bought a house out there I guess and we tried--we rented several times.  We tried living in Santa Monica [California], which was very nice and the air was pretty good 'cause in the morning fog would come in every night, every morning and freshen the air.  We lived in the valley, bought a house there.
Story_ID: 631639
Speaker 1: Is this the same around this time, so you--you get cast in 'Field of Dreams' with Kevin Costner?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes--you got cast in 'Field of Dreams' with Kevin Costner around that same ti--
Speaker 2: I don't know them by the dates.
Speaker 1: Okay, well it came out that was--I mean you were making the film before that, but you the film is released in 1989.
Speaker 2: I see, I don't know where I was living then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But, and then you do other things like 'Gabriel's Fire' and--
Speaker 2: I tried to make a living in California.  I enjoyed doing TV series.  I enjoyed getting up every day and going to work, early.  And that's what a series does to you, it does for you.  It's hard to make them work though and I tried a couple of times and didn't make them work.
Speaker 1: But, is--was it more stable, the money there or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: It's we- so there was a stark comparison between that--
Speaker 2: Income, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and income, okay.  So you have a very comfortable existence, but why didn't you stay?
Speaker 2: Why didn't I stay?  I don't know, I don't remember.  I had a good reason for coming back to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Well, that--that's then, so maybe is that the reason?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: What--what was the reason to come back to New York?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: You don't remember why you came back?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Is it the community or lack of community or you liked the community out there?
Speaker 2: I never relied on community.  You mean, something about--something about the place that I rejected, no it was fine.
Speaker 1: No, you just decided, so how long were you out there?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Six years.
Speaker 2: Six years, okay.  So six years.  So you--but during this time, you are in several, you know, series, there's even 'The Vernon Johns Story' ['The Vernon Johns Story: The Road to Freedom'] that you--
Speaker 1: The reason I'm out there is to work.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 631640
Speaker 1: When do you start doing voice over work though?  I mean, where does that come--when do you--
Speaker 2: When do I start doing what?
Speaker 1: Voice over work.
Speaker 2: Well, I started focusing on commercials, I don't know the year.  But I got very lucky in terms of the commercial fortunes to be cast as the voice of Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.], the telephone company.
Speaker 1: Do you--you don't remember the year though?
Speaker 2: Why should I remember the year?
Speaker 1: I don't know--okay maybe it's not important then.
Speaker 2: It wasn't important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, go on.  It's not just Verizon, it's CNN, it's--
Speaker 2: Right, right, I was lucky.  What happened was, once I did 'Star Wars' the Dark, so--called Dar [Darth Vader]- base voice became key to my finding work in other areas.  They wanted the voice of authority they called it.  There was--Lee Iacocca had a car called Laser and they had a driver with a helmet on, and they wanted me to voice the commercial.
Speaker 1: Let me get this, this is bothering me so much, I'm sorry sir, that's not your fault.
Speaker 2: They wanted me to voice a commercial and I did, it was successful.  Then I got other work, and I work- I work for Red Mule Glo- White Mule gloves too and I worked for Strutsens Car Parts [ph.], you know.  I voiced a lot of stuff.  I enjoyed voicing.  I also enjoyed doing animations for film.  And I loved doing commercials, so I got lucky doing several.
Speaker 1: So 'The Lion King' is probably you know, one of the ones that you're, you know, you're known in terms of the animation.  And I--
Speaker 2: It's another way of working.  I say I wanna be a centipede not a monopede.  I wanna walk on all--all the legs possible as an actor.
Speaker 1: And that, when you're voicing like that, are you actually--I just wonder how that works.  Do you ever see what you, do they do it before or do they do it afterwards.  Do you ever see the animation?
Speaker 2: You mean see the words apply to the--no I rarely see the result.  You often don't see your fellow performer, like with 'Lion King' I never did anything with the other actors.  Like, I would not have known how to behave in a room with [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg playing one of those hyenas.  I'm glad they didn't ask me to do that.  But you're standing in front of a microphone, they place a human being, an editing--an assistant director up and they read the words of the other character.  With Jeremy Irons, I never had to confront him doing Scar.  It would've been, not good.  It would've become actors being either competitive or nervous with each other.  This way, you're just doing your role and you're listening to the director and mainly listening to your role.
Speaker 1: But that work becomes very lucrative, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It--that work--that work started to become more and more lucrative for you, right?
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't, I didn't count the pennies, but it was work, yeah.
Story_ID: 631641
Speaker 1: Well, how did CNN come, because that--I mean besides Darth Vader, I mean it was literally every day--
Speaker 2: I remember Ted Turner was involved with it somehow.  And it really started with--when the Olympics [1980 Summer Olympics, Moscow, Russia] were boycotted.  Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] our president decided the Goodwill Games in place of the Olympics.  I think I was asked to voice something about the Goodwill Games--I could be confused about this--in Russia.  So I got a trip to Moscow [Russia] with Ted Turner.  I also got a trip to Cuba with Ted Turner.  I got to Cuba on a journalist visa.  And quite a wonderful experience.  Not always good, but I'm glad I was there.  And I hope someday maybe to go again.
Speaker 1: So Ted Turner was, he's quite a character.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he (laughter), he went duck hunting with Castro [Fidel Castro].  I mean, there are all kinds of (laughter), what.
Speaker 1: Oh he's what--so how was that?  I always wanted to meet Castro, I mean I've got.
Speaker 2: You wanna meet Castro?
Speaker 1: I did, I was fascinated by him.  I am, but this is not my interview, so let's--that's what I said I wasn't gonna do.  But, anyway, so can you talk about--
Speaker 2: I didn't meet him either.
Speaker 1: You didn't meet him?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd be much more hot shot (laughter) if I had.  I'm a working actor.
Speaker 1: But no, but Ted Turner is a character, if you--he--he--he's a real-life character there could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was important in my life, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--and tell me that.  So, how did that happen though?  I mean, so you go, you go to--I remember when he was doing the Goodwill Games.
Speaker 2: Well, I ended up doing "This is CNN," I said it several times, and now it still plays.
Speaker 1: It is so, it makes you--I'm telling you your voice sounded--people talk about you with, you know, as Darth Vader, which is--that's also, but it just--it's--it's comforting to hear, "This is CNN."  It's almost like a voice of authority.
Speaker 2: I believed that when two aviators came back during the Gulf War and when they got back to their barracks they could hear, "This is CNN International," and they say yeah we're home, you know.  It represented home for them, yeah.  And I felt, I won't say proud of that, but I felt special about that.
Story_ID: 631642
Speaker 1: So talk about the 'Star Wars,' you've talked about that also because you did not, that wasn't even a big thing at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Right, it wasn't a big thing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, you just, in fact your name, you weren't even associated by name with 'Star Wars.'
Speaker 2: I didn't wanna be.  I said it's more fun to make it a guessing game, who is that?  I would say, no it's not me, it must be [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder.  The Uncola nut guy.  And I got away with that for a couple of seasons, couple of years.  It was fun.  Then when I knew that Darth [Darth Vader] was gonna die, I said okay I'll accept credit for that--that episode.  And that's all there was to it.  Darth didn't have a whole lot to say a lot of times.  David Prowse had voiced him being in the costume.  Darth Vader was really made up of a composite of a guy who fences, would be in costume, a guy who breathes, a guy who is when the mask is finally taken off and revealed, it's not David Prowse, he was a bit upset about that.  He's a composite character.
Speaker 1: So did--did--did your--did George Lucas ever speak to you, like how did he I mean how did he find your voice or is that for you to--so he's given maybe some voices to choose from cause he--
Speaker 2: Well, he--we were at Pratt Institute [New York, New York] commencement and it was a wonderful experience.  And we were on stage together and he finally confessed that he thought of using Orson Welles as Darth Vader, but he thought Orson might be too recognizable.  So he picked a guy born in Mississippi, raised in Michigan, who had a stutter, that was me.  I was lucky enough to play Darth Vader.  And that's how it started.  He finally admitted that.
Speaker 1: Well, the franchise even continues to this day.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: The 'Star Wars' franchise continues to this day.
Speaker 2: Go Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California].
Speaker 1: Go Disney (laughter).  'Cause I think he was upset with the last production but he, you know, it continues to--
Speaker 2: Did it matter, (laughter) no.
Story_ID: 631643
Speaker 1: So this gives you heightened visibility.
Speaker 2: What does?
Speaker 1: All--the voice over work becomes almost as--I won't say as prevalent, but as--as much as, you know, your stage and acting work, but you move back here.  Now when do you get itchy for the stage again?  When do you get--
Speaker 2: Oh, always.
Speaker 1: Always.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  When I say I wanna be a centipede, it's not that I wanna keep walking on the same leg for too long, because good roles are written all throughout history and if I see one, I wanna grab it.  If it's on stage or if it's from film.  I wanna be ready for it, that's all.  It's very simple really, just looking for work.  You know, everybody does it.
Speaker 1: But not everybody is able to do it consistently, as consistently throughout.  Not everybody.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean nobody sticks to it.  Yeah, I'm stubborn.
Speaker 1: No, not everybody is able to consistently, even though they have the desire to do it as consistently throughout.  But I wanna go back to the voices, because one time on one interview you talked about--this is not in your book, but I found this interesting about how there are--your voice, the tenor of your voice, that in the black--in the black sphere and the black community, there are only four, you said four have had these naturally deep voices.  [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, who you just mentioned, and--
Speaker 2: It's a timbre, T-I-M-B-R-E, a tone, is not just base, it's you know basso.  And I don't always sound that way, only when I'm very relaxed.  The older I get the more high pitched it gets, you know, and scr- and sometimes if I'm working on stage, I make sure I pitch it outta there, I pitch it up so that I can be understood.  The dark voice is very muddy, sounds muddy and it's hard to distinguish consonants with it if you're listening in a seat that's far away.  So I have to be very careful to pitch it up out of the base.  There's nothing consistent about it.
Speaker 1: But until you mentioned that, I hadn't thought about it in that way, you know, 'cause these are rich, they're almost like rich, deep, I don't wanna--I was gonna say wine, but wine--it's like a deep vo- vodka (laughter) or something.  They are very, like naturally deep and they're totally recognizable when you said that.  But if you were to compare, 'cause you said your father [Robert Earl Jones], you said Paul Robeson, you said Geoffrey Holder and yourself.
Speaker 2: Well there are others, I'm sure.  But there are actors who imitate Darth Vader by the way.  And so they're out there, but for me the known entities are Paul Robeson, my father, Geoffrey Holder.
Story_ID: 631644
Speaker 1: The intentionality of your career.  Like once you made the decision and this is what I'm--I--I want to sort of speak to because I--
Speaker 2: Do you wanna know what I'm up to?  What is my intention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: What is my philosophy?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't have one.  I'm not out to--there are actors I know and respect, who became spoke persons beyond the commercial, I--you know.
Speaker 1: I'm not talking about that.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me try to rephrase it.  I'm not talking about that.
Speaker 2: Or became fodfathers by the way.  And I really don't want that.  And I don't want to have anything to do with that.  Sorry.
Speaker 1: No.  I'm talking about how is a [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones created and sustained?  And if you were to look introspectively into your career, because what would you say how a James Earl Jones was created and sustained?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  And there's not an answer for that.  I am as much of an accident as anybody, and we're all quite accidental, no matter what we say about our heritage and all that.  There's nothing that determines our fate, except us, ourselves.  When I say when I was a little boy hanging onto a mattress and made a decision about my life, that's really what it's about.  Children don't get to do that, but when it does happen, you know it's profound, the child knows it's profound.  He's lucky, he got--he got what he needed, 'cause he was able to say what he needed.  He--it--who or, that's not right.  That's very rare because we're quite accidental.  There's nothing--what's the word, determinism, fate, no.  I think it's important that we live with that, that we live not thinking I'm a big shot because of.  You know, I--I--the world owes me because of, you know.  That's what's wrong with racism.  There's a presumption that you inherit a right to think you're better than somebody else.  That is life killing, not life giving.  And you have to accept the opposite of that, we have no privileges.  We weren't born with privileges and if the wealthy think their--their children have privileges they're making the big mistakes.  And you don't have to join a political movement or class to figure it out, you've gotta let it happen to you.  Someone said that Thomas Edison probably couldn't see very well.  He had to invent the light bulb, was it Thomas Edison?  That the great inventions probably come out of some really simple basic primal organic need.  And you can probably explain some weird inventions the same way, people have weird needs.  This one is often some kind of philosophy now doesn't it and we don't belong there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This interview doesn't belong there.
Speaker 1: No, well no, (laughter).  You're saying you don't wanna go there with the--I'm saying that we do get to that point and I just think, like what I would like for this interview to do is--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: I would like for this interview to give an inside look that maybe haven't been covered by other interviews, that's what.  And I just I, you know, the thing is you talk about that little boy, when you talk about that I had tears starting coming to my eyes.
Speaker 2: Mine too.  'Cause it's every little boy, it's every little--every child, every child has a need to determine his life, it's life, and we rarely get it.
Story_ID: 631645
Speaker 1: There might be a discovery in every production I've done that if we explored it together you might find something of what you're looking for.
Speaker 2: Okay, can you--can you help guide me?
Speaker 1: Well no, I'm just thinking about 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' [Tennessee Williams].
Speaker 2: Yes, can we--
Speaker 1: That had nothing to do with anything more than when I first came to New York [New York], I wa- we were encouraged to go see everything, we students.  I went to see Burl Ives in 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'  And other wonderful actors were in it.  But I looked at him and I said I know what the southern man is.  Doesn't matter about color, I know what the southern male is in terms of what Tennessee [Tennessee Williams] was looking at, was writing.  And I think I could play that person.  Burl Ives played Big Daddy with a certain lyricism because Burl is a folk singer.  He knows what music is and he brought that to his, and I wanted to bring something closer. 'Cause I think Tennessee Williams has always been trying to tell this tale on the South and he's bound to the South, but he's also trying to expose something about the South.  And there are foibles and there are characteristics of all his major characters that expose what historians talk about quite clearly that when President Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] was shot, President Johnson [President Andrew Johnson] made a compromise saying you can no longer enslave these people, but you can do anything else with them you want.  That was a horrible moment in American history and it still is horrible, it still goes on.  Do what you will, do as you want with them, but just don't enslave them.  That was a President Johnson said that.  In affect he said that.  We don't know where Lincoln would've taken it if he had survived.  But Tennessee Williams, I think, has been trying to tell that story all along and I think he came the closest to it maybe with one of his greatest plays, and that was 'A Streetcar Named Desire' [Tennessee Williams].  He tried to expose southern mythology through the character of Blanche [Blanche DuBois] and he got carried away with it, so did the director (laughter), Kaz- Kazan [Elia Kazan].  Because she was supposed to be destroyed and that was the mission of that legend, to destroy her.  Tennessee has some unusual characteristics including homosexuality.  He probably had more sympathy for women than most women do.  But at the same time, Blanche's character was close to a she-devil as you could invent.  And you know, I was at an Ohio college once and a friend of mine was a professor out there and she showed me a production in workshop of 'A Streetcar Named Desire' with two white girl students as Blanche and Stella [Stella Kowalski], and a young black student as Stanley [Stanley Kowalski].  And what was interesting was, it became very clear that Stanley's role is all about paranoia, what are these bitches gonna do to me now.  He was anti-woman, he's ever--so I think 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,' Big Daddy is a destroyer.  So when I got to play it, I probably went overboard with his negatives and not giving him enough vulnerability.
Story_ID: 631646
Speaker 1: I got to play him [Big Daddy in 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,' Tennessee Williams] twice once here and once in London [England].  It's a role I wouldn't mind doing again, like with Lear.  I don't know if that tells you anything or not about me.
Speaker 2: Yes, so you know, so that's the thing.  You gravitate to the every man and gravitate to the southern.  A lot of, you know, things where you have an end and actually when you talk about the southern you talk about it almost even in terms of it being a culture then or black or white or anything, just southern.  And you gravitate--you gravitate to characters.  You know, you say good stories, but just thinking of your characters, let's see, Othello is tortured nature of--
Speaker 1: Not always what?
Speaker 2: Othello is, you know, there is a tortured nature of Othello.
Speaker 1: There's a what?
Speaker 2: Tortured, tortured nature of Othello.  But I'm just so, what roles have you haven't played that you would like to?  You know, there--or wish you see someone else that had played and thought I could--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Man Who Came to Dinner' [George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart].  (Laughter) I'll put the word out.  It's a hard one, it's a hard one to produce.  Too many penguins.
Speaker 2: Did you ever tell Sidney Poitier that?
Speaker 1: Beg pardon?
Speaker 2: That you wanted to play 'Man Who Came to Dinner,' did you ever tell him that?  Sidney Poitier, did you ever tell Sidney Poitier that that was a role that you would've loved to play?
Speaker 1: Why would I tell Sidney that?
Speaker 2: He was in 'The Man Who Came to Dinner,' right?
Speaker 1: No.  That was 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner.'
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner,' I'm sorry, no. 'Man-' (laughter).  Sorry, sorry. Duh.
Speaker 1: No I don't wanna play them.  I don't wanna play the guessing game.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 631647
Speaker 1: So what about, what about the 'Beloved Country,' 'Cry, the Beloved Country' [Alan Paton]?
Speaker 2: Oh my God.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting production because of--that's an interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Next to my relationship to the South, that relationship I think I understood.  I understood the gentle black man and how a black man can be gentle without being worried about being too vulnerable or too much of a victim.  He had a religious reason for being gentle.  But when we did that movie, it was badly timed because of young black men in South Africa did not wanna see an old black man being gentle about white people.  Being reasonable.  He didn't wanna--they wanna see us being now unreasonable, payback time.  That's what was really going on in that country and it probably still is to a great extent.  That's really partly why I wanted to do the movie.  Sidney Poitier did a version of that story.  He told me a lot about it.  About how he was allowed into the country only on a white man's visa.  He was an honorary white man.  And it didn't always work 'cause in reality, he'd be in a toilet and he's out of toilet paper and the guy next to him, and he would say, hey will you buddy, would you hand me that roll of toilet paper.  His black hand coming out from under the--they wanted to lynch him, over toilet paper.  This is how basic it was.  And that's what President Johnson [President Andrew Johnson] would've allowed in this country.  If--if more reasonable voices had not been, you know.  Why it happened in South Africa, I'm not quite sure, I've not studied it.  But something horrible was unleashed there.  And Alan Paton was the first time anybody ever tried to talk about it.  And Alan Paton's novel 'Cry, the Beloved Country' was the only thing that students of South Africa ever had to go on for a long time.
Speaker 1: I think the year that it's written is somewhat interest- you know, that it's 1946 and then, you know, the longevity of that story, you know, as--as, you know it's 1946 you developed the--the plan.  You were playing at a 1995, you know, and that was--was it right--
Speaker 2: After Mandela [Nelson Mandela].
Speaker 1: After Mandela.
Speaker 2: They didn't wanna hear anymore gentleness.  So the movie was a flop in Johannesburg [South Africa], so our producer said well the heck with it then, he didn't wanna promote it here.  It would've been better if he had promoted it, but he dumped it and went on to something else.
Story_ID: 631648
Speaker 1: So what about the--the--the thea- the productions in the last like ten years.  Like I know that--
Speaker 2: What (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about working with Robert Duvall?
Speaker 2: Oh Duvall, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: He's a good character actor, right?
Speaker 2: I love him, yeah.  And he said, "If you hang around me enough, you'll know I'm in love with Argentina and the tango."  He says, "I wish you could visit Argentina, but they don't let colored people down there all that much."  Simple as that, and they don't.  And when Peron [Juan Peron] brought his fascist regime in, it fit in very well with what Hitler [Adolf Hitler] was doing.
Speaker 1: What about 'Driving Miss Daisy' [Alfred Uhry] with Vanessa Redgrave (unclear).
Speaker 2: I love working with her, I love working with Angela [Angela Lansbury].  I loved he character.  What was funny was, you see Morgan [Morgan Freeman] had done that on stage for years and then in the movie.  Wonderful.  And when the author--
Speaker 1: (FLYNN EARL JONES):  Alfred Uhry.
Speaker 2: Alfred, Alfred Uhry decided okay it's time for me to do it.  I remember we met with Morgan.  We were walking to the backstage area and he said to Morgan, "Well can James Earl [HistoryMaker James Earl Jones] do it?"  Morgan says, yeah he can do it.  Now, what that means, I don't know (laughter).  Is he capable of acting it or is he allowed to do it, you know.  I don't know.  I don't know why Albert asked him, was he joking, how much was he joking.  I don't know, Morgan's answer was exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting thing because you might, he might wanna be saying, can he do it, do I have permission for him to do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure that in Hollywood they encouraged that sort of propriety, proprietary feelings, you know, this belongs to me, you know, I don't care.
Speaker 1: You know, I have wanted to see you and Cicely Tyson in the 'The Gin Game,' [D.L. Coburn] but it--it--it closed before I got there.  You know, was able to see it.  But I just thought that would be pretty wonderful, but you have--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It was not a good experience.  It could've been, but we didn't--couldn't rehearse, and I won't go into all that.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: We lacked rehearsal.
Story_ID: 631649
Speaker 1: Of the awards that you've gotten, which one has meant the most to you, of all the awards, you have tons of awards.  Probably have a whole room or maybe several rooms of awards.
Speaker 2: Well, my li- wife [Cecilia Hart] likes them all.  She likes my honorary Oscar [Academy Award] too.  Did you know I had an Oscar?  Honorary, but I've got an Oscar.  I just didn't have to fight for it.  And that's the best, that's the best kind.  I just got it.  It's not my favorite, the reason why it's not my favorite.  They're all just trophies I'm afraid.
Speaker 1: What about The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What about the Kennedy Center award [Kennedy Center Honors]?  Did that, well did that have any more special meaning?  The Kennedy Center?
Speaker 2: Why that was meaningful is that that's the one event that's annual where every person of any political stripe is a part of.  It is--it's a more deeply mixing of the American politics that exists and it happened because of the culture.  Cultural entities get celebrated.  And everybody wants to be a part of that.  It's a good thing.  It's a horrible award, I mean it looks like dominos strung together, I don't know who invented that.
Speaker 1: I haven't thought about that.  But I just think of the performance, you know, how it's presented--people are presented.
Speaker 2: Oh they go all out.  They--
Speaker 1: Oh my God 'cause you had, you had Sidney [Sidney Poitier] who opened it up for you and you had, oh God--
Speaker 2: It's a good show.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it's often well done.
Speaker 2: I mean not talking just about mine, I loved it.  It's a good show.  It's the strongest gesture of democracy I think (laughter) think we have going.
Story_ID: 631650
Speaker 1: So you show no signs of stopping.  You show no signs.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I show signs and the signs I show limit the--my work I can get.  I have to watch my health to make sure that I can sustain work.  I have to lose weight and pitch my voice back down low so I don't lose my--my type.
Speaker 1: You mean with your diabetes?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Your type with you--you mean don't lose your type in terms of?
Speaker 2: What makes him hir- what makes me hirable.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The older gentleman.  You know, I can't take much of it very seriously.  I admire it, but I don't worship it.  There are certain, what is built into the traditions, falsenesses, they're not healthy.  I live with them.
Speaker 1: Is that internally?  Did you say--when you say I live with them, are you talking about yourself internally or you talking about the industry, the profession as a whole?
Speaker 2: Oh I can only speak of myself.
Speaker 1: So you're taking internally?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like the whole issue of awards, themselves.  At best, they're just trophies.  But I don't--I can't go around saying that because they mean too much.  Do you know what happens every awards season?  The amount of money and passion and anguish put into those things.  And the amount of backbiting and the amount of gossip that goes into it, and the amount of bullshit that goes into it, it's--it's enormous.  And yet, there's something worthwhile about it and I accept that.  But I don't kid myself, that's all.
Story_ID: 631651
Speaker 1: I have a few more questions and that really has to do with, how do you perceive of yourself?
Speaker 2: Huh (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, if--how do--how do you--how do you perceive of yourself?
Speaker 2: As little as possible.
Speaker 1: No, but I'm asking how--how do you describe yourself then?  Are you--you--if you could--are you a black man in America?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: See.  How do you describe yourself?  I know you don't describe yourself that way, but how do you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I play them.
Speaker 1: I know, but how do you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I'm a person.  As simply as I can get it, as simply as I can see life, that's how I believe it.
Speaker 1: But then you have a miraculous way you've transcended race?  You've transcended race, you can see, you know, whether--taking a celebrity out you've transcended race?
Speaker 2: No, we all should.
Speaker 1: Oh should, but you've transcended it.  That does--
Speaker 2: I've been lucky and I won't say I'm enlightened, but I've--a lot of the nonsense I've had has been peeled away.
Speaker 1: Do you know how blessed that is?
Speaker 2: Oh I feel it, I feel it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know, you know, I mean to--you've lived the American dream and you've transcended race.
Speaker 2: It doesn't spare me from the anguish of racism.  'Cause I see it too much around me.  But myself, I no longer take it personally.
Speaker 1: So in that, what are your--we're living in a very fractious time period right now, what are your hopes--
Speaker 2: A very what?
Speaker 1: We're living in a very--a time of a lot of acrimony and fear--you're laughing about that.
Speaker 2: It's wonderful.  It's got pus--pus had to come out.  I mean, the sickness and pus that we call racism, I talk about it.  I was--I came from that.  Not pretty, nothing pretty about it.  But you don't have to live it.  That doesn't have to define you.  I hope it defines fewer and fewer people each year.  But I'm not out to instruct anybody.  I'm not a godfather.  I don't have answers.  I would loathe myself to try to present myself with answers.  One reason is, very simple, when I received the Marian Anderson Award, I listed all the incidences in my life where I failed vocally and in terms of being articulate, I could not articulate what I wanted or needed.  And that's a dangerous place to be.  The temptation is to explode and be destructive.  But I have accepted--I'm--being a stutterer has defined it for me.  I don't blame it on stuttering, but it--being a stutterer I know what being tongue tied is.  I've had the experience too many times and in life and death situations I've had that experience, being tongue tied.  So I don't present myself as a spokesperson in any way.
Speaker 1: But there is something to be said, sir, about being a role model for--
Speaker 2: Oh you can be, but you have to--you can't present yourself as that.
Speaker 1: No I didn't sa- no I'm not saying that, but I'm saying that you could even see, you could say that the whole black community and other minorities or people disadvantaged have been tongue tied.  And that--
Speaker 2: I don't mind.  In fact, your whole program here, you have to define the classification, it's good to say this is about black people, that's good.  It doesn't, but it's just a category, you know, that's all it is.  And that's good to have a category.  I like the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], Jim Billington [James H. Billington] said we have a great stock of race movies and it is a great stock about movies made about black people, you know them, and some are wonderful and my father [Robert Earl Jones] is in some of them.  The cowboy movies, Scandinavians have the same thing.  I don't know what they call them, they're not race movies, but ethnic movies, Scandinavians have them, the Library of Congress is full of--there was a time when not everybody could go to the movie theater and they'd understand English.  They had Chinese, you know.  Library of Congress is full of--full of all that good stuff.  And it helps to be able to have a category, and we have a category, black people.
Story_ID: 631652
Speaker 1: So this community that you came up--out of, what are your hopes and concerns for the community?  The community, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community and what are your hopes and concerns as we very--we're in the 21st century, what are your hopes and concerns for American society?
Speaker 2: We have to live it out.  I don't pretend to have solutions.  The problem is its own solution.  And I don't wanna be a tight ass philosophically about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So--
Speaker 2: The problem is its own solution is that--
Speaker 1: I love that idea, the problem is its own solution.
Story_ID: 631653
Speaker 1: The other thing though is, if you were--if you were to start all over again, would you do anything differently?
Speaker 2: I thought about being a doctor.  I thought about being a priest.  I became a Catholic after I was allowed to quit Sunday school in the Methodist world.  I've enjoyed teaching, I enjoy teaching in the ser- armed services.  I probably would've made a fairly good teacher.  I don't know what I would do better than what I'm doing.  I like being an actor.
Speaker 1: You've found your life's passion very--you've found our life's passion.
Speaker 2: I found one that works for me.
Speaker 1: And--and--
Speaker 2: You should've too.
Speaker 1: I love acting, I do.  I've really, anyway that's another story.  So--so the other thing (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it's not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes it is (laughter).
Story_ID: 631654
Speaker 1: This is a little departure but this is back to your Desdemones [sic. Desdemona].  Why did you fall in love with your Desdamones?
Speaker 2: It's about exposure.  Why do you fall in love with anybody, because you're around them a lot and long enough to get to understand them.
Speaker 1: But you've played so many other characters, why was it Desdemone that you fell in love with?
Speaker 2: You know what--
Speaker 1: Remember, I said you were a mini serial fellow (laughter).
Speaker 2: I--first of all I don't mind that the women I have married both have played Desdemona.  The thing is I didn't marry them all.  I played seven times, I didn't marry them all.  I'm not hell bent to marry my Desdemonas.  But I'll tell you something--
Speaker 1: But it's something about that character though too?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No, nothing about the character, about the woman?
Speaker 2: No I don't think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]?
Speaker 2: There are women in Shakespeare that are much closer to what I, I think and feel.
Story_ID: 631655
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the role of your wife [Cecilia Hart] though, in your life?
Speaker 2: My wife.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: She says we've found each other's sense of humor and that made it possible for us to be together.  And then other things followed.  Love followed.  I knew I loved her father before I knew I loved her for instance.
Speaker 1: So, her father, who was her father?
Speaker 2: He's an Army colonel.  Flynn [Flynn Earl Jones] knows him about as well as I do.  We hung out some.  But he wasn't--his stories were not war stories (unclear), but his stories are about serving.  He had a chance to work in Burma with a lot of African American engineer corps [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] guys, and he liked them.  Whenever I go to Africa I make sure he went with me.  And in not Nairobi [Kenya], what country is--
Speaker 1: Kenya (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kenya especially.  When you go into the airport of any foreign nation it's easy getting in, getting out is when you gotta (laughter) meet the guy whether it's a taxi driver or the customs guy, somebody's gonna, you know.  And Bill [ph.] was always good.  These black guys with the rifles you know, he knew what they were.  He knew their world.  He's an Army colonel (laughter).  It was always great to have him with me whenever I was in a situation like that.
Speaker 1: And what about Flynn, what does Flynn represent for you, that's your son?
Speaker 2: I think it's about the thing that's celebrated in some movies I've done, the circle of life, uh-huh.  It's not corny, it's recycling your life.  It doesn't mean necessarily inheritance in having children that inherit, that's not important, but it's important to know that your energy is being recycled.  I always thought with my father [Robert Earl Jones] his having a son meant he's had another chance to get it right.  Not that he's responsible for me, but genetically another chance to try it again, to try that gene to see if that gene can get it right.  We don't have a whole lot of control over it do we?  Over the genetic behavior.  I liked it, the Jones gene still exists and there's another chance to get it right.  I think I have to call a halt to this 'cause I don't know if we--
Speaker 1: I just have one more question.  And that is what--
Speaker 2: Unless you wanna talk about Flynn, that, that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 631656
Speaker 1: But what do you want your legacy to be sir?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm not sure if I, I don't know.  I haven't worked that out yet or if I ever will.  I don't know if I--if that's important to me.
Speaker 1: What do you want people to--to
Speaker 2: Oh no that's not--
Speaker 1: You don't want--
Speaker 2: That's their business and I'm content to be myself and let them be, left that be.  I'm not into trying to--I can't color their opinions.  I do not dare burn energy trying, that's not what I'm here for.  I wanna understand.  Like right now the whole--I'm gonna go home tonight and watch television, news, that's what I'll watch.  I'm just trying to understand what the hell's going on (laughter).  I don't need to solve it, I don't need to have a solution for anybody else, but I'm trying to find out what's going on.  Something pretty weird and unusual, and I'm glad I have a son [Flynn Earl Jones] who is witnessing it, glad we're all witnessing it, it's very important.  I think America is going through some important changes and they're changes, they're not solutions.
