Story_ID: 127722
Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, we're gonna begin, and we begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton and I am the interviewer. And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. And this interview is taking place in Silver Spring, Maryland, on Monday, August 30, 2004. Now, if you would please, Dr. Jackson, for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it please?
Speaker 2: Raymond, R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, Jackson, J-A-C-K-SO-N.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Providence, Rhode Island. December 11, 1933.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Jackson--oh, and your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: I'm a university professor, concert pianist, and church organist
Story_ID: 127723
Speaker 1: And the next couple of questions, are some People magazine-ish questions just to help us get familiar with the process and help us learn a little bit more about you. So if you could just give me short answers to these questions that would be great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food. Good question. Anything sweet (laughter). Desserts.
Speaker 1: (Laughter). Your favorite-
Speaker 2: Apple pie.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you have one?
Speaker 2: I never thought of that.
Speaker 1: Well, if it comes to you during-
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --the course of our conversation, please do share it with us, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay. All right
Story_ID: 127724
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Jackson, if you will, let's begin talking about your mother. Starting with her name and where she was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother was Beulah Boyd Jackson. She was born and raised in Bracey, Virginia. She lived on a farm. There were four brothers and there were two sisters. And I remember visiting her home area there because there was lots of cotton fields and tobacco fields, and that in itself was an education for me. Lots of chicken. And every time we would go down there, the taste of fried chicken was absolutely wonderful. The ham was great. And it was just really a very hospitable country area. Totally different from my growing up in the city in Providence, Rhode Island. So she--when she was twelve years old, I believe it was, eleven or twelve, her mother passed away. And so she really on her own left Bracey, came to Rhode Island and started working. She tried to find a place to live, somebody who would take her in and employ her, no matter what it was.
Story_ID: 127725
Speaker 1: She [mother Beulah Boyd Jackson] found a lady on the east side of Providence [Rhode Island]. Her name was Helen Pierpont [ph.]. And Helen asked her, "Well, Beulah, what do you do?" And she said, "I--I don't do anything, but I'm willing to learn." "Or what can you do?" "I--I can't do anything, but I'm willing to learn." And that honest answer opened the doors to her being employed in that home. And started the wonderful relationship where my mother learned everything about homemaking, about how to do things, how to do things in the kitchen, in the laundry, or--or and any kind of housekeeping or--or procedures. And so she--my--my mother had a wonderful work ethic. And so as she grew, she--she loved somehow to work on people's hair. And so she had very strong hair--hands. Very strong hands. And so she would sort of give people--find people who were interested in having their--their scalp massaged and their hair washed. And they would always say, "You know my hair seems to be growing." And so after a while, she began to think, "Well, maybe I can go into beauty culture." So she began to make her own shampoos, put her own oil together. She would have the paper bag and would transport her own hot irons, curling irons, straightening combs, and whatever. And would go from door to door doing people's hair. And that was the beginning of about fifty years of working as a beauty culturist.
Speaker 2: And she just decided to go--why Providence? Why did she decide to go to Providence?
Speaker 1: Providence because one of her brothers--and the brothers were all older--was living in Rhode Island. So it was like the brothers would take two of the brothers would take one sister, and the other two brothers who were in other parts of the country would look out for the other sister. So that's how Providence came.
Speaker 2: And did she ever share any stories with you about either life on the farm growing up or what life was like in Providence growing up at that particular--those particular time periods?
Speaker 1: No, not really. She went to elementary school there. But never really advanced academically.
Story_ID: 127726
Speaker 1: But she [mother Beulah Boyd Jackson] always seemed to have a very strong work ethic. Very hard worker. She was almost tireless. She was a person who could work from sun up to sun down. She--she would get up very, very early in the morning. And, of course, that came from growing up on the farm where you--you get up with the chickens. And she would perhaps get a little bit sleepy around seven or eight o'clock and would take one of those real short two hour, three hour naps so-called. And then be ready for the next day. So she--and she was very personable. She just loved people. People would generate to her and she would always find ways to help them. She always remembered that the people there on the farm were people who were less fortunate and had less income. And so she would always find clothing, box them up, ship them to Virginia. And it was like a--like a great big Marshall Plan. Great big care package that would be looked forward to by--by people down there. It had overcoats and shoes and--and stockings and shirts and suits and whatever was left over either from our home or from friends. She would always ship them home.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What she would call home.
Speaker 2: Aha, aha.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127727
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father now, Dr. Jackson. Starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up?
Speaker 2: My father is also Raymond T. Jackson, Raymond Thompson Jackson. And he was Raymond Jackson, Sr. and I was Raymond Jackson, Jr. I grew up being called Little Raymond and my father was Big Raymond. And my father grew up in Worcester, Massachusetts. And his mother [Addie Jackson] was a piano teacher and an organist. And I think my musical talent all came from his side of the family. My father moved from Worcester to Pawtucket, Rhode Island. And then when he and my mother [Beulah Boyd Jackson] met, they married, lived on the East Side of Providence [Rhode Island]--
Story_ID: 127728
Speaker 1: My father [Raymond Jackson, Sr.] at that time was a mechanic. He was very handy with his--with tools. He could do just about anything in the home from plumbing to carpentry, to electrical work, painting. He was really good--good at those things. And all of those things, fortunately, I saw in the home. And so it taught me a lot. I--I just felt that I was also learning some of those trades as well. But my father was also interested in beauty culture. And my mother seeing that they could make a partnership, sent him to school.
Story_ID: 127729
Speaker 1: My mother [Beulah Boyd Jackson] sent my father [Raymond Jackson, Sr.] to New York to study, I believe, at the Moler [ph.] Beauty School in New York City where he trained and then came back to Providence [Rhode Island]. Got his license and the two of them started a business in our home. Which was at 43 Camp Street in Providence, which was the East Side of Providence. , it was a middle class, predominantly black area. And that's where I grew up. And my mother and father had it--owned a three story tenement house. And it was on the first floor that I grew up. We had the front two rooms as a beauty parlor. And they eventually had as many as six employees working for them in those two front rooms. And then we lived in the rest of the house. And the living room which was right next to the beauty parlor, had a piano. And the piano, of course , I would always seem to gravitate to the piano. And I would put my hand on the keyboard. And somehow even as a child of age three and four, they felt that they heard a musical touch. So it was from that--hearing the sounds that came from the piano that they said, "Well, maybe we'll give him piano lessons." So interestingly one of my parents' customers who came to get her hair done, Madeline Junebru [ph.] who lived just down the street from us, gave piano lessons. And so I would go down to her house. And I had my first piano lesson there which I can still remember very, very clearly. And so they had a sort of a bartering system. Where I paid fifty--or well they paid fifty cents a lesson. And then, of course, today lessons you--no one's ever hearing of fifty cents a lesson. And they would give her, or do her hair for--for less. So it was that kind of relationship. So that's how music began in my family.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But my father had a lot of music. Somehow he learned to play and maybe his mother taught him. I--I never did find that out. But my father occasionally would go to the piano and he would play. There were music cabinets and lots of music. And so after I became somewhat able to read music, I would always go into that music cabinet, pull out books and started developing sight reading and playing a lot of--of pieces that I became quite familiar with early in life. And so that helped my ability to read music well. 'Cause today you find that--that many youngsters, they don't read well. They--they struggle to--to play the piano or they play by ear. And--but with all of the music in my home, that was at that time, I learned to read well. And my ear was good. And I just loved the sound of the piano. And when I was- --taking lessons and other kids were outside practicing and I would still have to put in that twenty minutes or--the teacher would always say practice it twenty minutes or practice it thirty minutes. Put five minutes on this exercise, ten minutes on this piece, they were very, very specific you see. So I would make sure that I got my thirty minutes in or my forty minutes in. And then in going to school, if it was a question of when do you practice, well if you don't have time after school because of homework, get up in the morning. Get up a half hour early in the morning and do your practicing. Get that done. So that was the kind of ethi--work ethic that preceded my development.
Story_ID: 127730
Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, how far back can you trace your ancestry? What do you know about your origin? Do you know if you came from free people, slaves, or did--can you trace it back at all?
Speaker 2: I am still attempting to find out some things, but it's my thought that they were free people. That there was a migration to Massachusetts and maybe even up into Nova Scotia. My mother--my grandmother [Addie Jackson], my father's mother that I mentioned, was a pianist and organist and teacher. I always heard that there was a great-grandfather who was a violin professor. And only recently in discovering a cousin, a distant cousin in this Washington area who took an interest in--in delving into family history, did she find out that this , David Thompson Oswell [ph.] is his name, was very prominent in both Worcester, Massachusetts and in Boston, Massachusetts. He was a violinist. They called him Professor Oswell [ph.]. He taught a number of students including white students, which was rather extraordinary at that time. And he on the side did some barber work. He--he would cut hair. But most interestingly, he produced some musicals. He apparently was able to compose and to direct and produce musicals that were presented to the community. And this cousin that I referred to was able to find some old playbills that are up on the wall right now. We have reproductions of--of those announcements. And interestingly, the names of some of the performers in those were people that I would be visiting with my parents whenever we would go up to Worcester to--on holidays like Labor Day and--and Memorial Day we would visit the cemetery. And I would hear names, you know, they--they were all foreign names to me, and being very, very young and you don't ask questions, unfortunately.  You know I can think of hundreds of questions that I wish I had asked, you know. Who was David Thompson Oswell? What did he do? What was his background? What was his family background? All of those things unfortunately I--I don't have the answers to right now.
Story_ID: 127731
Speaker 1: Did you spend much time with your grandparents? I know your mother's parents were deceased, but what about your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My father's [Raymond Jackson, Sr.'s] father lived with us for a few years until he passed away in our home in Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Fred Jackson. And--and he--he was a laborer. I remember him very vaguely being a very tall, slender man. Very kind man who would take me on walks when I was a little child. And we would walk up to --up to the main streets and visit some of the neighbors, especially those who were shut in, who couldn't get out. And so we would visit. Then one of my favorite places was to go to the firehouse and get up on the fire engines. And so that was most of what I remember about him.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother [Addie Jackson]? Did you know her at all?
Speaker 2: I never did know her--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 127732
Speaker 1: All right. Mr. Jackson, tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Ooh. Well interestingly in talking about my grandfather [Fred Jackson], he was a smoker. One of the earliest memories was the fact that he had a cigarette in his hand and it got--burned a hole right there on the top of--of my hand. That is to me was (laughter) one of those things you just never forget. But I remember also, you know, lots of times at church. My mother [Beulah Boyd Jackson] was a very avid Baptist. And she would go to church and I would always be there and going to Sunday school and going to the prayer meetings and all of that. So I would always remember what was going on there, the music, the different teas in the afternoon, the visiting quartets and choirs and all--all those wonderful concerts. So those early memories are very, very vivid to me.
Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: They were very special. Christmas was always something that--decorating the tree was something that we all participated in. And I remember my father [Raymond Jackson, Sr.] getting the Christmas trees and we would get the lights on and then get the--the special feature was the angel hair. Putting the angel hair around the tree and--and that would cause circles around the lights as--as you're looking. That was very special. And then expecting Santa Claus to come down the chimney. And I--I grew up with that myth. And all holidays was--was really quite special. Thanksgiving we would have family. My aunt, who was my mother's sister, who also lived in Providence [Rhode Island] and at one time lived on the third floor in the house where we lived, we would all share Thanksgiving together. And we would have a house full of people.  Memorial Day was always a day that we would visit Worcester, Massachusetts and go to the cemetery. Fourth of July was always a day that we would go and see the parade.  The first of August was always the celebration of Emancipation because in Rhode Island it was a different date from other areas. And we would go to the amusement park and we would see everybody that we would never see otherwise through the year. They would be coming to Crescent Park. And so that--that was a special day.
Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the--the smells, the aroma of cooking. My mother [Beulah Boyd Jackson] was a great cook. And she loved to make hot rolls. And everybody in the community would know her hot rolls. And if she had extra she would take pans of hot rolls to neighbors and--and give them to them, especially people who could not get out.  So that aroma was always memorable. Apple pies were always memorable.  The smell of springtime. Just seeing flowers come up and the--and the--and the leaves and--and the--the buds begin to pop open. The forsythia and the gladiolas and seeing them around the house. And just that aroma, that was always very, very special. The sounds of--of the street. You know, you would always hear activity. You would always hear the fire engine. You would always--in fact, growing up--and you remind of the fact that ice was sold. There was a wagon, it was a horse drawn wagon in which the ice man would come through. People--not everyone had a refrigerator, they would have an icebox. And the ice man would come through and he would be hollering ice, ice. And people would come out and say I want a great big block of ice and he would take it up to their second floor or third floor or where ever and put it in their icebox. And the same thing with wood. People who bought wood. And that also would be a horse drawn wagon. Rags, people--a man who would come through who would be collecting rags. And so you--that sound and hearing the clopping of the--of the horse hoofs, that was something that I--I really hadn't thought about that--
Story_ID: 127733
Speaker 1: You kind of told us a little bit about your community a little bit earlier. But can you kind of describe your block for us? Can you kind of describe your community?
Speaker 2: It was a--a residential area. Within two or three blocks there was everything that you would need from the grocery from the A & P [Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] and the First National Stores, to the laundromat, to the shoe-- to the cobbler, to the barber shop. My mother and father's [Beulah Boyd Jackson and Raymond Jackson, Sr.'s] beauty shop.  The dentist was right next door. There was across the street a cleaners. There was a tailor also right across the street. So everything that we needed or wanted was right there at hand. You didn't have to go any more than two blocks to get it.  Everyone knew each other. You would go out and you would always speak to everyone. There was never an occasion in which you would pass somebody and would not say good morning or hello. And at that time the older people would tip their--the gentleman would tip their hat and would say how do, you know. And so--you so miss these things, these wonderful amenities. These wonderful ways of--of communicating and--and recognizing each other. And it's unfortunate that we--we have lost so much of that today. But people were very, very close. You always knew everybody. And if something happened you always felt that bond, a sense of--of togetherness, of support, or of help, of reaching out. Or if there was an occasion going on, you would be there to support it and to attend.
Story_ID: 127734
Speaker 1: And what were race relations like in Providence [Rhode Island] during, you know, this time the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: At that time, at least to my knowledge, and sometimes you grow up in a--sort of a sheltered environment and you're not really aware of what's going on, on the other side, but I felt that race relations were--were normal. I am sure that there would be others who would disagree. I'm sure that there were people who were coming during the Second World War [World War II, 1939 - 1945] who were looking for work. And that shipyard was there at Quonset Point Naval Base in--in Newport and--and there were nuts and bolts factories. And people I'm sure who were finding it--difficulties of find employment or--or were doing menial labor. But my--at least from my experience, my race relationships, even in school or in the community or in the greater Providence area, especially because of my association with music and my sharing music and--and participating in musical events with people who like, for example, those who were also taking piano lessons, the majority of them were in the white community. So my interactions with them would--would be a very positive one. And that happened all the way through elementary school, junior high school, high school. And going into the music clubs and being members of the Junior Music Club and then eventually the Senior Music Club, the race relationships were always very respectful. And I think a lot of it probably had to do with the fact that my parents, who were very respected professional people, and they exposed me to the better things that would help to develop my life. And then I think people respected the fact that I--I was a dedicated person to--to growing. I--I--I would strive for excellence either in education or in my music and so forth. And so this in itself helped to generate a good sense of race relationships. And that--so this was sort of centered around me now. I'm sure that other people probably might have had different--a different story to tell. But mine was very positive.
Story_ID: 127735
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Doyle Avenue Elementary School [Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: D-O-Y-L-E?
Speaker 2: D-O-Y-L-E.
Speaker 1: And was it an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there? What were some of your favorite classes and your teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, we had very, very dedicated classes and teachers. The--the students were good. They were well--well-behaved. We--we were disciplined. There was no--there was no rebellion, you know. You--people--people were--were very disciplined. And musically we had--always had an orchestra. I would play in the orchestra. I would play the piano. It was in junior high and senior high school that I got into other instruments. But in elementary school I would play the piano. And the chorus, I would play for the chorus. And so the idea of playing for groups, whether it be in school or whether it be in church, I was always accompanying--always being able to use my piano skills or play solos in school events.  I loved to play sports. When I was a young kid we would always play softball or--or pitch horseshoes or play football. And the touch football, not tackle, I never got into that. But school it--it provided a--good balance.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: A good balance to have--have fun. But also to be very serious. Because the community was one that would strive for--for--for growth. People who came to Providence initially or came to that area were really trying to get a better life for themselves and for their children. And so they were working at it. And they really made sure that their children worked at it too. They wanted them--the children to have a better life than--than they themselves did.
Speaker 1: And what type of student were you during elementary school?
Speaker 2: I always considered myself a good student. There was always--my father [Raymond Jackson, Sr.] would always say, "Whatever is worth doing, is worth doing well." And--and that was something that he would preach over and over and over again. The golden rule or--or some of those wonderful things that would--would get--make you strive for excellence. And so if you didn't do well, you just--it was not acceptable. And, in fact, it wasn't even a part of my thinking. I had to be the best that I could be, you know. And if I wasn't the best in the whole class, at least I had to be the best that I could be. And usually that was pretty good because it would at least get me either to the top of the class or pretty close to it.
Story_ID: 127736
Speaker 1: And Dr. Jackson, would you give us the names of your siblings and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: All right. I had one sister. And so she was born in 1940. And her name was Addie, A-D-D-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Jackson. My grandmother, my father's [Raymond Jackson, Sr.'s] mother--my father's mother was Addie. My mother's brother's wife, my aunt, was Mae. So those two names were put together. So my sister and I we grew up, we were very, very close. She was born with a disability, which really brought us even closer together as a result of that. I was the big brother who sort of looked out for her while my parents were working. And she would always feel that with me she was safe and she was able to do more things than with her parents because there was a rather large age discrepancy between my parents and my sister. So this--it was sort of like in a way I was a parent as well as a big brother.
Story_ID: 127737
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Jackson, we were talking about the elementary school years [Doyle Avenue Elementary School, Providence, Rhode Island] then. So, Dr. Jackson, we were talking about the elementary school years, and tell me during that time, at that age, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: I had lots of dreams. Somehow music took hold of me. I loved music. I loved not only to play it, but to hear it. There were concerts that were going on in Providence [Rhode Island]. We heard some of the greatest artists coming through. The Boston Symphony would be coming. The Metropolitan Opera. Aaron Richmond Artists Series. So we heard really the greatest artists and I really--would always look forward to that. On the radio every Sunday afternoon the New York Philharmonic would be broadcast from Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York], and I would not miss a Sunday afternoon. Hearing these artists was to me an inspiration. It was sort of like that's what I want to do. I want to be a concert pianist.
Speaker 1: And you knew this from an early age?
Speaker 2: I knew that from an early age. And I would play--I would get some of the bigger pieces that I could play and on our Elbridge upright piano to me it sounded like the grand piano in Carnegie Hall. And I would just play and play and play and it was just something that I--I was totally inspired doing.
Speaker 1: Mhm, mhm.
Story_ID: 127738
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about junior high school. What was the name of the junior high school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Nathan Bishop Junior High School [Nathan Bishop Middle School, Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: And what were some of your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a continuation of elementary school. Of course, there were many more musical activities, and many more pianists, and they were very, very, good pianists. We would put on musical productions. There was an orchestra and because there was so many pianists and not an opportunity for all pianists to play with the orchestra at one time, the band and orchestra director thought that perhaps I could learn to play another instrument. So that's when I learned to play the bass violin. And so I played the bass violin in the orchestra. And to play in the band I was taught the glockenspiel. And so that gave me an opportunity to march with the band as well. And of course we had many opportunities to perform. We had competitions that were going on. Local music clubs were very active. And so there would be competition. There would be awards given. There would be radio--radio--the "Providence General" and "Bulletin Newspaper" were very supportive of the arts. And so many of us would perform on radio Sunday evenings at 7 o'clock. And it would be a young artists' series. So we had just so many opportunities. And we would form duet teams and we would--we would perform together. So it was--it was a great community. And I can remember really outstanding clarinetists, and trumpeters, cellist, violinists. It was--it was a very special time. And the East Side of Providence [Rhode Island] was just full of--of really young talented musicians.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends during junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I had some really wonderful friends, not only junior high school but continuing on through high school. My closest friend, who was also a member of the same church where I grew up, Jesse Chapman [ph.]. We would be buddies. We would go to the different events together. We would play tennis together. We would go to concerts. And he was also a pianist. We went to the  Conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] together. We would commute from Providence to Boston. And we had a very, very and still have a very close relationship.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Manuel Araujo, who was a wonderful trumpeter, who is now in Colorado. He after graduating from high school went on to play professionally in the major symphony orchestras. He is in Colorado. there--there were so many very good friends.
Speaker 1: Were most of your friends musicians?
Speaker 2: Most of them were, yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: High school was Hope High School [Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: H-O-P-E?
Speaker 2: H-O-P-E. And this was just down the street. So I didn't have to walk any more than five or six minutes to get there. And Hope High School--it was a big school. But again a lot of young musicians. In fact, we had such good music classes and aspiring musicians that we would put on real Broadway productions. And "I Remember Mama", for example. And some--some of those wonderful Broadway musicals. And we would compete in competition, in state competition. The band would was outstanding. In fact, there were so many really good young musicians that the band--the music director formed an after school music class just for us to prepare us for college entrance and to develop theory and ear training and music writing. And so all of that helped to prepare my preparation for the conservatory.
Story_ID: 127739
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities were you involved in, in high school [Hope High School, Providence, Rhode Island]? Were you involved in any clubs and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Again, in more--more music.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: The Young Artists Club. Again (unclear) musicians. I was always involved in the--the plays that were going on, but in a musical capacity. All of the sports activities were sort of self-directed. I loved track. I loved running and playing different sports. But most of those were during the summertime. During the--during the break. And I would go to the summer camps. Went to camp. Some of them in Rhode Island. Sometimes up in Maine. And I--I would just love to play different sports and swim. And I felt that I was reasonably good at that.
Speaker 1: In--tell--so around the high school years were you still--did you still have this dream of becoming a concert pianist?
Speaker 2: Always, always, yeah. And my parents were very, very perceptive forward looking.
Speaker 1: When I was eleven years old my mother and father felt well, he's going to college. He's going to need college money. why don't we give him organ lessons? So at age eleven I began to study organ. And they found a teacher, Frank Converse, who was an instructor at the Providence Bible Institute [Barrington, Rhode Island] at that time. And I would--especially in the winter, it was really difficult to get to an organ. You have to--I mean winters in Providence, at that time when it would snow and the--and the--and the snow would be banked up and you'd have to climb over the bank just to get onto the bus. And--and--but in the coldest of winter days I would travel thirty, forty-five minutes just to get to a chant--a church, a cold church to practice organ. But nevertheless that was again another motivation. So I learned to play the organ and that was beginning when I was in junior high school and just kept on going through high school. And when I was sixteen, I believe I had my first church job, as a church organist and the choir director. And ever since then I've been playing organ and directing choirs until most recently. I--I haven't had a choir, but I've always played the organ. So that all began in junior high school. And so I've--I've had wonderful experiences on--on the organ as well as on the piano.
Speaker 2: And so what were your thoughts about college? Where were you thinking you'd like to go to college?
Speaker 1: Well, the New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts] was always the goal. Either New England or Julliard School [New York City, NY]. And being from Providence, Boston was just forty-three miles away. When I was in junior high school and my parents felt that I had just about exhausted the ability of the local teachers as far as the level of training that they could offer me, and knowing that I was really serious about making music a career, they decided to send me to Boston. Every Saturday I would take the Greyhound or the Trailway bus from North Main Street and Doyle Avenue. Get on that bus and travel for an hour, or an hour and a half. Sometimes dreading the--the enclosure of smoke and all of that sort of thing. It was sickening, but nevertheless I was going to Boston and I was going to have a piano lesson. And so when I got to--to Boston, I was at that time, I believe, I was in the ninth grade and every Saturday I would have a piano lesson and then I would come back on the Greyhound bus and then prepare for each--each week's lesson. But that prepared me for my entrance into the conservatory. That was my dream to be a--a full time conservatory student.
Speaker 2: And what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 1: 1951 graduated from Hope High School. Was awarded the Hope Key. Which was given for outstanding contribution as a student and for my extracurricular activities in music. And that--different certificates that we would get from the music clubs and from the radio station, all of these were an outgrowth of--of that wonderful high--public school experience, junior high [Nathan Bishop Junior High School, Providence, Rhode Island] and high school experience.
Story_ID: 127740
Speaker 1: And so , when you graduated from high school, you then moved--did you commute back and forth to college or did you move to Boston [Massachusetts]? Because you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The first three years I was commuting.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you did get into the New-
Speaker 2: I did get into the New England Conservatory [of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] as an undergrad piano major.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: My first teacher there after going full time was Jeannette Giguere, G-I-G-U-E-R-E. Wonderful, dynamic, French background. Very disciplined, very inspiring teacher. And I learned so much about--about piano playing, you know. Every time I would advance to another teacher, I would see another level of--of performance and of development. And with Giguere, it a was very inspiring. I was a very conservative youngster. I--I was always brought up to make sure you're very respectful. Keep your emotions in check. Make sure that you are a gentleman and that kind of thing. So I think that sort of shaped the fact that I didn't always feel like I could let go.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm
Speaker 2: Or even know how to really let go. And she would always say to me, "Gosh, I gotta light a candle under you. You know you got to play with more fire." And I would try, you know. But still when I look back at it, I can see what she was talking about. This was the reserved New England kind of background that sort of shaped my personality. And my efforts to--to really be more dramatic or dynamic.
Story_ID: 127741
Speaker 1: And so it was interesting that after I graduated from the conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], in 1955 and those were some special years which I needed to share with you-
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --but when I went to New York to The Julliard School [New York City] for my graduate degree and then I came back to the conservatory to visit one time and somebody who had known me as an undergrad at--in Boston said, "Are you Raymond Jackson?" I said, "Yes. Ooh, you're different. You've changed." (Laughter) New York overnight had changed me. So, but anyhow, the--those were very special years at the conservatory.
Speaker 2: Tell me a little bit about the conservatory. What--what was it like? What was a typical day like? A typical day of school like?
Speaker 1: It would be filled with classes. We had classes in the--the theoretical classes, the music history, the ensembles. We had some academic courses in the humanities. We had languages. we also had fraternal organizations. And I was a member of the Phi Mu Alphas Sinfonia Fraternity. And-
Speaker 2: Phi Mu Alpha?
Speaker 1: Phi Mu Alpha. And it was the first fraternity--first musical fraternity in the country. The conservatory was a school in which there was--one had great pride. It was always well operated. the--always--always an intense interest in students. I found the administration and the faculty to always be interested and supportive and encouraging. And you worked hard. You really worked hard to--to--to develop. They had standards in which you had to maintain technical standards. And musical standards. So it wasn't just do--do whatever you can. It was really at a very high level.
Story_ID: 127742
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: What was the minority population like there [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: We had very few--very few minorities. Interestingly, Coretta Scott King was also a student--a voice student at the conservatory. She came to New England the same year that I did.
Speaker 2: And were you all friends?
Speaker 1: We were friends. For the first year I was president of my class and she was vice president of the class. She was a singer and she--I believe she came from Andover College [sic, Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] in Massachusetts. And so we--we had a very friendly relationship. I didn't know her well, but nevertheless as far as minorities are concerned we had--I think in my class there were three out of a class of, oh, maybe eighty or ninety students. So it was a very small number. But the relationships were always good. We were always sharing together and going places together.
Speaker 2: When--when did you graduate from the conservatory?
Speaker 1: I graduated in 1955. It was a four year degree program.
Speaker 2: And what was your degree in?
Speaker 1: Bachelor of Music. In the Piano Performance. And it was a very significant time. you had to give a senior recital. And I remember my senior recital very vividly. it was a very successful one. And then--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What did you play?
Speaker 1: I played a [Johann Sebastian] Bach prelude and fugue. I played the [Ludwig van] Beethoven 'Waldstein' Sonata [Piano Sonata No. 21]. And probably some [Frederic] Chopin nocturnes and [Sergei] Prokofiev if--I don't remember all of the program, but I do remember very clearly the--I think I also did some [Johannes] Brahms, some Brahms pieces. But the Beethoven sonata which--a piece that I played then which has always been with me and has always been on many of my programs. And then we all had to perform, had to perform with the orchestra. And I did the first movement of the Beethoven Piano Concerto No. 4. And so after--near the end of the semester I was invited to play for graduation with the orchestra, with the conservatory orchestra playing that same concerto. And then that in itself was an honor. But the biggest honor came in graduating in which I was first in my class and graduated Summa Cum Laude. And the only person to graduate with that high honor. And then beyond that I was awarded the George Whitefield Chadwick Medal which was the conservatory's highest award. So it was the first time anyone black or white had ever graduated first in the class and been awarded that medal. And I believe even to this day that may still be the case.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But Boston newspapers really took that story and they--they ran photographs and--and articles in--in the Boston Herald and the--and The Globe. And I remember the photograph that would--came out. And my girlfriend at that time she called her aunt who was in New Jersey and said, "Hey, Raymond he walked away with everything." So, (laughter) so it--it was--it was a very special time.
Speaker 2: And were your parents very proud?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes. My--in fact, my--my mother was living at that time. My father had passed away three or four years before my graduation. So he didn't get a chance to see that. But they were very, very proud, yes.
Story_ID: 127743
Speaker 1: And so, how did Julliard [The Julliard School, New York City, New York] come about?
Speaker 2: Julliard it was sort of like you had to go to the next level. The teacher that I mentioned Jeannette Giguere said, "Now you've--you've got to go to Julliard. You've got to study with Beveridge Webster." Now Beveridge Webster used to be on the faculty at the conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. And so he was a specialist in French music. And so with her recommendation I went to Julliard. And I'll never forget the first meeting of incoming students and you go into that great big room, all of these students from all over the world coming from Europe, from all over America aspiring to be performers or great musicians or composers or whatever. And very impersonal. I mean you just knew no one, no one. And the president at that time of Julliard was William Schuman who was a very distinguished composer. And I'll never forget the first thing that he said, because I felt oh, I'm from the New England Conservatory. I graduated first in my class and I got this medal you know I'm--I'm gonna be hot stuff here at Julliard. The first thing he said, "I don't care"--he said that to the group--"I don't care where you are from, how many honors you have, what your background is, here at Julliard you are nothing until you prove who you are." I said, "Woah" (laughter). That--he must have picked up something from me because I grew to understand exactly what he meant.
Speaker 1: And could it have been also that many of your classmates were also coming from environments where they had achieved so much as well.
Speaker 2: They--they--they have--they had. Because the level--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The best of the best.
Speaker 2: The best of the best. The level of the Julliard student was incredible. You know, I--I thought I played the piano well until I got to Julliard, then I began to see oh, my God. This is unbelievable, the level. And it was--it was not like one or two that were outstanding. There were just hosts and hosts of wonderful pianists, wonderful violinists. And the level of--of training was so much more intensive. And the expectation was so much higher. And so you really worked. So I went from being an A student at the conservatory, to a C student at Julliard. And I really had to work very, very hard to be an A student at Julliard. But I'm grateful for that because it took the blinders off. It took off the--the protective veneer that--when in growing up in Providence [Rhode Island] in which you were everybody's darling. You were everybody's special talented little professor who was going to go on to be a big success in the world. You suddenly realized that you had to really earn those medals. And so I became a much stronger pianist. A much better artist. A much better student. And much more perceptive student because my ears were enlarged. My thoughts were enlarged. My eyes were--my vision was enlarged. All of that made me a much better--really prepared me.
Story_ID: 127744
Speaker 1: And then just being in New York [New York]. Being where you had all of this wonderful exposure to the concert, to Broadway, to the museum. Not that we didn't have those in Boston [Massachusetts], but I mean you just escalate all of that in New York. And--and--and that community, the New York community and especially the black community was vibrant, was really vital. And one lady who--whose family was from Providence [Rhode Island], when she heard me play and she had been a singer, a professional singer and had retired from the stage, and she heard me play and she said I've got to help him. And this was Josephine Heathman. Josephine--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Help him like so other people can hear him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay. Uh-Huh.
Speaker 1: I've got to help him to be exposed. To introduce him to--to the musical community, to the--those who will be able to help his career get ahead. And she single-handedly introduced me to music clubs. I became a member of the National Association of Negro Musicians [NAMN]. And would perform in the competition. I won--in 1957. I won their national piano competition. And then in 1959, I guess it was, I was put in--I entered the JUGG Incorporated Competition and was awarded the Town Hall Debut Award. And I gave my town hall debut--the first of three town hall recitals because of her. And she just introduced so many--so many things to me. And so many people. So that's how I got to be known in the New York community.
Speaker 2: And what year did you graduate from--you get your master's degree from Julliard [The Julliard School, New York City, New York]?
Speaker 1: Well, Julliard was more than a step above all the other schools. Where I got a Bachelor of Music from the conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] the Julliard School gave a Bachelor of Science in Music. Which meant more intensive courses more academic credit in music and in in academics. So it took me two more years just to get the equivalent of their bachelors. So I got a second bachelor's degree, a Bachelor of Science Degree in Piano. And then continued to get a Master of Science Degree in Piano. So it took me four years to get my master's degree. Which I didn't mind at all.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Because I just loved that environment. And the--the teachers were extraordinary. So I worked with Beveridge Webster, he was my piano mentor. And then I continued on there at the Julliard School in the professional diploma--diploma program. And worked with another great teacher Sascha Gorodnitzki whose background was more of the Russian school. And I was exposed to a different kind of teaching. A different kind of play. And so he really helped to enlarge my playing even more. And so--and then it was much later that I went back to Julliard to work on my doctorate, several years later.
Story_ID: 127745
Speaker 1: But at the end of the--of the master's program is when I was encouraged to go to Fontainebleau in France to study at the American Conservatory of Music. And that enabled me to work with and play for such outstanding artists as Robert Casadesus who was a great French pianist. And Clifford Curzon who was great English pianist. And Nadia Boulanger who was perhaps the queen of--of all pedagogues and--and mentors. Who taught Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein and all the other great, great American musician and composers. So I was in that environment with these great pedagogues and artists. So it was from the Julliard School [New York City] that all--all of that opened up.
Speaker 2: And what years were you in France studying and the American--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: From 1960 to 1961 I received a fellowship from the Howard Foundation [George A. and Eliza Gardner Howard Foundation, Providence, Rhode Island], not Howard University.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But the Eliza and--what is the other name--Howard Foundation which is in Providence, Rhode Island. They gave me a grant which enabled me to go to the Fontainebleau American Conservatory for the summer of 1960 and then to stay in France. And I had just gotten married, my first wife, Annette, we had just married the previous December. And so they gave enough in the grant so that she could go along with me. And so the two of us lived in Paris for those nine months following Fontainebleau. Lived in an old French Latin quarter which is absolutely stimulating artistic--artistic environment. And lived in a house that we--we were sure that would have been typical of a Mozart-Beethoven house. Walking on a spiral staircase up--up there. And then renting a piano and the piano movers they had to struggle up those narrow staircase to--to bring the piano up into this apartment that we rented. And there I would practice all day long. And to practice it drove the neighbors crazy because I was practicing from sun up until sun down. And you could see--hear people saying, "Fermez la Musique," "Stop the music." But I understand by the end of the year they missed it (laughter).
Speaker 2: And so what did you do after you left France (simultaneous) in 1961?
Speaker 1: After I left France I came back to the States. In '61 [1961] and I began to--I got a position as a church organist and choir director in a Lutheran church in Tenafly, New Jersey. And I developed a piano studio. And then it was after that, that I was organist and choir director at another Lutheran church in Bogota, New Jersey. And there I--I was there for a number of years. I think perhaps eleven or twelve years. But in the--in 1963 this same Howard Foundation that sponsored my studying in France, said, "Okay. Now we've--we've trained you. Now we have to see if we can get you out there performing, to show the effect of your training." So they gave me another grant in which I gave debut recitals in London [England], Munich [Germany], Berlin [Germany], Stockholm [Sweden], Vienna [Austria], and Geneva [Switzerland]. And those were some of the most memorable experiences because European audiences are--they just are so enthusiastic. And enthusiastic when especially they sympathize with the black situation. They understood something that they just couldn't tolerate, in other words they--in France, it was like egalite, fraternite, you know, you are equal and you are--you are--we're in the same fraternity. Therefore you know we're all brothers, no matter what the color is. They couldn't understand why--why I wanted to go back to America after that. But nevertheless this was the kind of environment. You as a black--especially as a black pianist over there playing their music.
Story_ID: 127746
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Jackson, here you were in Europe doing all of these debut piano recitals in 1963. What happened in 1965?
Speaker 2: Well, before--if I can just backtrack a little bit.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: In 1963 when I was mentioning how audiences received me now and I would imagine other black artists as well, hopefully. But I--I can say in particular the audiences in the Germanic countries were absolutely enamored of black artists. Especially if they played or sang their music the way they liked to hear it played. And the reviews that I got, especially from Germany, from Munich [West Germany], and from Berlin, and from Vienna [Austria] were absolutely--they helped to make my career from that point on. They made me--they gave me the kind of headlines first of all, "Black Concert Pianist Raymond Jackson plays Beethoven." This is, you know, this is more than a curiosity to them. I mean it was a curiosity yes, but the audiences filled the halls. The management, they really worked to fill the halls to--to say we're--we're interested and we're curious at the same time. In Vienna especially, when I played Beethoven, when I played [Franz] Schubert, which is their music, and they gave me the kind of standing ovations and the kind of reviews in the newspapers that one would dream about getting. These people were something that was absolutely unforgettable. I received my first bouquet of flowers on stage in--in Vienna. And never having received flowers before I just felt like oh I was so awkward. You're presenting me with a bouquet of flowers. I tell you, oh my God. What--what'll I do with these, you know. It's almost like a--a father with a--a newborn baby. You know, you're so timid to hold--hold the child. And that's the way I felt about receiving flowers. But this was their gesture of saying we love what you did.
Speaker 1: And I was invited to homes afterwards. I was shown pianos that were period pianos from the eighteenth century. And I said, "Oh, now I understand what the original [Ludwig van] Beethoven or [Wolfgang] Mozart sound is."
Speaker 2: Mhm.
Speaker 1: Because the pianos in that era were not of the same sonority of our pianos. Our pianos are so much richer and--and powerful in--in sound and in resonance. But the pianos in that era, first of all the keys were more shallow. You didn't have to press down as--as hard or as far. The keys were more narrow. And so you could play much faster and much lighter. And I said, "Oh, now I understand how you can do this passage in Beethoven." Which I found very difficult in--with our modern pianos, well, but was so easy on their pianos. So it was an education from that standpoint. So I--I learned an awful lot from them. So 1963 was a very, very special year.
Speaker 2: Mhm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mhm.
Story_ID: 127747
Speaker 1: And what happened in 1965?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1965 the John Hay Whitney Foundation gave me a grant and I used that money to go to the, Marguerite Long Piano Competition, international piano competition in Paris [France] . And also too it--it sponsored a tour of Greece as well. But in Paris, I felt that I needed to go into this international piano competition. I think I was one of seventy pianists from all over the world. And I had worked very fiendishly for well over a year in preparing that repertoire for that competition. There were three rounds, the preliminary round in which everybody had to play one piece that were the same. And it was a piece that I had lived with and played in that 1963 tour. So I--I really felt very much at home in that piece. And then the other piece of my own choice. So that got me through the first round. And going into the semi-finals in which I played another set of pieces which included again the [Ludwig van] Beethoven, the Beethoven 'Waldstein' Sonata [Piano Sonata No. 21], and other major works. And after that I was selected, I was one of ten to be selected as a finalist to go into the finals to select the winner. And I would playing in the final, pieces that I absolutely adored. It was--the finals were held in two--in two different stages. One a solo stage in which you would perform as a solo artist. And the second part of this was to perform with the orchestra on the following day. playing in the first solo round of the finals I--I was--I felt that I was extremely well prepared. I was getting ready to go onstage, I was warming up and for about half an hour I was in this room and I said, "Well, you can either warmup too much and you can get tired by the time you go out or you cannot warmup enough and still have to warmup more when you get out on the stage." Something said to me, inwardly, "Play hymns." I said, "Oh, okay." So I played some of my favorite hymns. This was all in the practice area, practice room. And I improvised on those hymns and I would just play them like concert pieces. All--all of my favorite hymns.
Speaker 1: What it--what were some of your favorite hymns?
Speaker 2: These were some of the hymns from the "Christian Science Hymnal." And I had been an organist in the Christian Science church [Church of Christ, Scientist] for a number of years also. And some of them would be like "Shepherd Show Me How To Go" or "Old Gentle Presence," hymns like that. And I would play them like--like they were big concert masterpieces. And I felt so inspired from that. I said, "Oh, my goodness." I'm really, really feeling on a--on a high note, a high spiritual plane. Then just the inner voice said to me, "Now, go out there and--on that stage and play the music with that same spirit." I went out there and it was sort of like that divine aura was just over everything that I played. When I finished playing the [Frederic] Chopin Barcarolle [in F sharp major, Op. 60] which was the third of the three pieces that I was required to play, the audience went absolutely--they shot up to off the chart. They were so excited and the cheering and the stomping and the amazement that they felt and showed in their faces was something that one will never forget. And they were looking at each other as my wife told me they said, they would say, "What is this? I--I--I don't understand it." It was almost like the day of Pentecost you know when--when they said the spirit of God descended upon the people and they--they were all sort of caught up. They said, "I just--just don't understand this." And so right there on that--at that spot they had to declare a twenty-minute intermission for things to calm down. For twenty minutes before the next contestant could go on. And so that to me was the highlight of--of all performances. I've--I have never to this date been in a performance of mine at that level. And it--it's the kind of thing that you cannot--you would try to repeat it and you can't. Because each performance has to have its own inspiration. You cannot repeat inspiration. You have to have an inspiration for that particular moment with whatever you're doing. So that--that was--that was the highlight to me. I didn't in the next round of concertos, I didn't play the concerto as well. And so consequently what should have been or could have been the first prize was not mine at that time. But I'll never forget that experience. It was entirely a special moment.
Story_ID: 127748
Speaker 1: And Dr. Jackson, you began teaching on the college level in 1970 as an adjunct professor. Can you tell us a little bit about how that opportunity came about?
Speaker 2: I was , I think I was introduced to the director of the Mannes, M-A-double N-E-S [Mannes] College of Music. And that's in--on the East Side of Manhattan, New York. And they were looking for a professor to teach on Saturdays, teach in the preparatory school. So I was hired to teach and every Saturday for the next seven years, I believe, I was teaching on the preparatory faculty.
Speaker 1: And was it gratifying? Did you find it gratifying to be able to share your talent with-
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I've--I've always loved teaching. I--I had been teaching ever since I was a teenager. And I--even when I was a student at the conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] and at--in Providence [Rhode Island] , I was teaching private students. And I was either having them come to my home or I would be going to their home. And I--I was always a fine teacher. You learn a lot from teaching. You--you--you identify more clearly what you're doing when you have to explain to others. You find answers for and how to do things when you have to impart it to others. you make new discoveries. So teaching has always been something that I've--I've enjoyed doing. So teaching at Mannes was--was a very nice experience. At the same time I was attending in 1970, I was attending a recital by a faculty member at the Concordia College in Bronxville, New York, up in Westchester County. And the head of the music department, Dr. Ralph Schultz, was in the audience and we sat together. And so he asked me about teaching and I told him what I was doing and what are my interests were in teaching. He said, "Well, we'll be having an opening in our faculty and we'd like to consider you to--to join our faculty." So in that same year, 1970, I was appointed to two different colleges. And so from 1970 into 1977 I was teaching on the faculty at Concordia College in Bronxville as well, which was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Where-umm did you notice any differences in the students' work? Or were the students pretty much all the same, you know, very eager to learn and--and have a love for music?
Speaker 2: They certainly did have a love for music. They had a great respect for music. Concordia had a musical tradition. the Concordia choirs have traditionally been always outstanding for their choral work. And they produced wonderful teachers and--so I--I enjoyed the camaraderie. And I enjoyed the--the students who were very dedicated, very disciplined students. Talent comes at different levels you know. So you're going to always have some who, who are taking music because they have too, but they have to struggle and you have to struggle to teach them. But on the other hand you know--you know that they're doing the best they can and you would try to find ways to help them. And then you find sometimes there's a gem that comes in. And then you really put your every ounce of your--your energies into that person to help to develop them and expose them as much as possible.
Story_ID: 127749
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about how the opportunity at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] came about in 1977?
Speaker 2: Well, two years before that in '75 [1975] I had performed at the National Gallery in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: --in--here in Washington. And one of the faculty members of the music faculty at Howard, Dr. George Winfield, was in the audience and he remembered my performance and when there was opening at Howard in the music department, I think they were looking for not only a faculty member but a chairperson of the--of the Department of Music, he called me and asked if I would be interested. And at that time I--I was not. So it was two years later that he called and said that there was another opening, would I be interested. And at that time in 1977 I thought maybe it's the time to make a move because I felt that my career needed to be expanded. That Howard would provide a base for being introduced to a--a larger arena. Not the New York one, not the largest arena. But New York was--it was more difficult to--to establish certain expansive characteristics of your career. That would easier in um in--in Washington area where the competition was--was not quite as fierce. The opportunities--you could create more of your own opportunities, at least I felt that way in Washington. I could use a university as a base to branch out to touch other schools, to perform at other schools, to give lectures and recitals and--and master classes, things like that which ultimately did happen. So I--I would be invited to a number of schools throughout Virginia and North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Pennsylvania. So I--I played in a lot of those places. And so Howard was a good base for doing that.
Story_ID: 127750
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about what the students were like when you first got to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] in 1977 and kind of do a little comparison as to, you know, what they're like now, and--and how students and music has changed, if it has over the years.
Speaker 2: Well, there were opportunities and there were challenges. Some--sometimes you felt as if you would get maybe a diamond occasionally. But many of the students came from an environment that was not necessarily as well trained in their preparation or as well exposed. So it was more of a mentoring situation that you had to bring to each student. You were teaching them more about how to really bring about excellence, how to commit yourself to work. It was more of a social environment in many cases. Where in a conservatory environment you knew that students who were there, were there because they were going to make music a career, at Howard, there were those who knew they were gonna make music as a career, but the background might have been a little--a little less exposed. So you were teaching them many things. You were teaching them more of the work ethics. Exposing them more to the--to the to the literature of music.
Speaker 1: A lot of things that you had learned as a child.
Speaker 2: A lot of things that I would--I had learned as a child. If you--if you talk in terms of symphonic music, operatic music, all kinds of classical music which was my background and my training, it was not their background. Their background would be more from the vernacular, from--from the--from the more pop oriented, the jazz, the blues, the gospel, which is fine, you know. There--there's nothing wrong with that. But as a classical performer and as a teacher of classical music it--it created, it--it challenged me to be--to have to challenge them to have their--to change that exposure or to expand that exposure. And so that--that has been and perhaps still is the--the challenge. Today students are very creative. They are thinking more of how do I get out there and make a living before they even get a degree. They might be saying, "Well, you know, I'm going to make an album. I'm going to start my own studio. I'm--I'm going to get this group together and we're going to tour. We're going to make recordings and we're going to do this, that, and the other," before they even get a degree. That's totally different. It's--it's just a totally different focus. And--and I was thinking I would say to them, "But you have so much more to learn. But you know I've got to do this," they say. "We've--we've got to this. I--I--I hooked up with so and so. I know so and so from Hollywood. I know so and so from New York and he said this, and she's going to do this. And he or she is going to be my sponsor. Total--totally different kind of thinking." So the level of playing or the level of performing it may be okay for what they're doing, but it could be so much better if somehow the focus could be where it's supposed to be at that time. And at that time should be--be--develop your talent in the best way you possibly can while you are in school working with these professors and mentors who have been there and have had the exposure and the experience to make you the kind of a musician that you can be. But they're busy making a life for themselves. And a lot of it is survival because many of them don't come with much of an economic background. So they have to figure out how am I going to stay alive, to pay my rent, to buy my food, to be able to have--whether it's a car or whatever. So it's--it's a totally different thing.
Story_ID: 127751
Speaker 1: And do you find that like the classical music isn't as acceptable in the African American community or is that just a myth?
Speaker 2: Well, it's accepted. It's--it's admired. It's appreciated. It depends on where you are. If--if you're in New York I find the classical music is absolutely--it is exciting. And--and people in the black communities, in the churches, at least when I was there, they were--they were very supportive of--of classical music. Other areas perhaps less so, but it's still respected. You have--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is it as respected as you'd like for it to be?
Speaker 2: No (laughter). I--I would love for it to--to, but we're on a mission. I feel that when I'm out there on--on stage I am not just performing, I'm teaching. I want to be able to tell about the music. So that they can hear and have some mental, intellectual images going on to understand what makes this piece what it is. What is the background? What is the influence? And so you're--you're training. You're in a training environment even when you're going out there performing. So practically all of my recitals now, whether they be lecture recitals or formal recitals, I will always try to have something to say about the music because that in turn is what enlarges the listener and the listener's experience.
Story_ID: 127752
Speaker 1: And when you're about to perform for, you know for a, a--a big recital, can you kind of walk us through a little bit about how you prepare? Do you have like a--a ritual or things that you do to prepare you mentally as as--as well for the performance?
Speaker 2: Well, you--first of all, you choose a program that you feel is good for you, that you enjoy the music. That it has something to say that you feel will communicate your spirit, your thoughts, what you think will convey to your audience or may even in some cases educate your audience. And then you give yourself enough time to really prepare. Now if you're preparing for a major performance, I mean you're--you're talking, you should be talking about perhaps a year of preparation, really serious preparation. I mean that's when you're going to be playing at Carnegie Hall or Avery Fisher Hall or a Kennedy Center performance. If you doing that kind of performance you--you really--and because the pieces that you're working on usually are pieces that you have worked on over the years. So you're--you're refining them. You're expanding on them. But then when it comes time to perform I--I find that first of all, you must make sure that you have enough rest. Because when you're going out there performing you--you have to be physically and mentally strong and at ease and comfortable. And lots of times people when they're performing, they're on a schedule that is so harried or so stressed that it's--it's hard to really perform your best. And so I find that I must be sure to get enough rest before performing. , secondly, I try to mentally, sort of use the term spiritualize my thought. So that what I'm doing is not trying to say, "Well, I want you to come and hear how well I play." I want to be able to convey a message. Convey a spirit, a--an inspiration to you or something that will give you a higher experience in listening. Whether you come out and say, "Oh, I wasn't feeling very good before the concert but I came anyhow, but now I feel wonderful." Or, "Oh, I've learned so much from that." You know something that will elevate your audience. This is what my goal is.
Speaker 1: And is that something that you're taught or did your instructors teach you that or is that something that's just kind of innate?
Speaker 2: This--this--this has been something that has come to me through being involved in church for example. I've--all my life I've been involved in--in--in an aspect of religion. Playing the organ, playing the piano for churches, playing for the choir, seeing--feeling the inspiration of--of this spiritual aspect of--of--of music. This spirit--what the music generates from the spirit. And so to me when I listen to a performer and I--you can listen to good ones, good performers, and you can be left cold. You can say, "Oh, he played very well. Oh, sang very well." But tomorrow you've forgotten it. Or then you can listen to somebody and say, "God that performance really moved me. It's one that I will never forget." And usually when that happens, it's because this spirituality that enveloped that performance or that performer was so strong that it moved you and moved the listener. And to me, this is what makes a great performance.
Speaker 1: And when you're performing, are you aware of everything around you or are you just kind of lost in the music?
Speaker 2: You try to become totally involved in the music. You don't want to be aware of your audience or surrounding. You try to, before you perform become acquainted with the piano or the instrument that you're going to perform on. Get a feeling of the hall so that you can feel like, okay. The sound that you hear from one hall to another or from one move to another every time is different. Every piano is different. So consequently you're going to really be transferring everything that you prepared, you're going to be transferring it to a new environment. So you need to become acquainted with that environment before you play. And then when you go out there, it's not a surprise.
Story_ID: 127753
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Jackson, we were talking a little bit about how you mentally and physically prepare for a performance. And tell us a little bit more about that.
Speaker 2: I keep--my mother was a very spiritual woman. And she would always say quoting from the Bible, "I by myself can do nothing. It is the father that doeth it" [John 5:30]. And these kinds of things would just always in--in the--in my thought. You--you think in terms of are you doing it. In other words, the ego--so often we think of the ego as  as being out there in front rather than what you're doing. You--you feel like so much that the person is there, the person is showing their strength, their intellectual ability, whatever. But again, getting back to that spirit. Umm, one of the most telling things that was ever told to me and I'll never forget it, "When you go out to perform, do so not to impress, but to rather to express." And so that has always been in my thought. Go out there to express those qualities that will really bring whatever you're doing to the highest level. I mean people can be impressed with anything. You know, "Oh, gee you put a lot of work into that. Oh, that's--that's a lot of talent." But when you express something, that is when the whole thing becomes much larger.
Speaker 1: And, Dr. Jackson, how important do you think it is for a musician or a student of music to be able to read music? And we had kind of touched on that a little bit because there are some who--who don't and who can't. How important is that to you?
Speaker 2: It--it is so important. And it's important to--and in--it's really not difficult. But one had to really put one's effort to learning how to. Sometimes it may be in the--in the way in which music is taught.  Everything is that--is theoretical, is scientific and if you can understand the science or understand the theory, then you can do it. Sort of like my trying to do computer work. I find that I am not able to do this with the kind of facility that many of my students and I will take, "Well, you--you do this for me at the computer." And they'll (making sounds) it's all done. I said, "Now what do you do?" But--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You'll take the piano over e-mail any day, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Speaker 2: So--so it's the same thing. If you understand the theory behind it, then you can do it. But then you have to practice it, you know. You--you can't just say okay this is how it's done and you don't practice. You've got to practice. And this is something that I've always found easy for me. I can practice all day long. Somebody will ask, "Well how--how long did you practice?" And I'll say, "Well, I practiced maybe eight hours. What eight hours?!!  How can you do that?" If you go to the office you put an eight hour day in. All right. So that's my day when I'm working at the piano, working on a performance. I'm practicing maybe eight hours, sometimes ten, sometimes twelve.
Story_ID: 127754
Speaker 1: When we talked a little bit about your elementary [Doyle Avenue Elementary School, Providence, Rhode Island] and junior high school [Nathan Bishop Junior High School, Providence, Rhode Island] years, we--music was very much intertwined in your lessons and your curriculum and your education, but as we are seeing a lot of cuts in education, music and the arts are one of the first things to go in terms of public school education. How important do you think it is for children to be exposed to music at a very early age and to learn about it in  this school environment?
Speaker 2: This is such an important question because music and the arts help to enrich the spiritual nature of the individual. The sense of humanity, the sense of elevation, again of recognition of the higher qualities, the higher qualities of--of the creative spirit, of the creative thought. It to me, it's a greater tragedy when music and art is cut from the curriculum. Because you look at youngsters today they have knives, they have guns, they have other means of violence because they don't have anything else to do with their hand and with their spirit. And so consequently they resort to these other things that are the sub--subculture elements. If these same children were given instruments of music of creating, of--of painting or whatever and making it meaningful, recognizing what it is, creating from their minds and from their spirit, that would replace a gun or a knife. And not only that, it would enlarge their intellectual capacity. So I think it's the biggest mistake. I mean, of course, we see the studies done today where people are saying those who have had musical training do much better in math. I can say that my math is pretty good. And I would say that those who have had music, you know, they're--they're not only doing something that enriches their lives, but it makes them a whole person. And I would--I--I really think the greatest service that can be done for our youngsters today is to get music and art back into the schools.
Story_ID: 127755
Speaker 1: Dr. Jackson, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: I think the encouragement that I received all through my life. I've had some great people behind me. And I can say that I am really grateful for them. Most of them have been women (laughter). I've had--I had a great mother. I had a great father [Raymond Jackson, Sr.] too. My mother's sister [Margaret Mayo] was--she was a great aunt for me. My first two piano teachers and especially the first one, was a black woman.  The women--when I came back from--from winning that competition in Paris, and Providence [Rhode Island] was all aglow with a local boy who came back with an international award it was the women who said let's do something for him. I was nominated to be in the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame because of that. And unanimously accepted into it. The first black, the youngest person, and the first musician to have that honor. And again, it was a woman who, Helena Meaden [ph.], who has been since then always a wonderful--and even before then, a wonderful supporter. Providence to me, and then in New York with Josephine Heathman and--and other--other people. Then I have had two wonderful wives. My first wife who was also a musician. She passed away at a rather young age unfortunately, but she was an inspiration. She knew what it took to be a disciplined musician and she made sure that I did it. And she would let me know if I wasn't doing it right. my present wife who is a wonderful inspiration and also an artist, but in interior design, and she also is a wonderful inspiration. Through my first wife we have a wonderful daughter, Andrea [ph.], who aspired to be an actress. Right now she's working as a manager in a restaurant, but Andrea [ph.] is a very inspiring person. So  I've had some great people behind me. And throughout my career, from childhood right on through the churches, through the schools, through the conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], through the community, people have always rallied behind me. And--and so I'm grateful to my--my background that way.
Story_ID: 127756
Speaker 1: And, Dr. Jackson, what haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: I--when I was working on my doctorate at Julliard [The Julliard School, New York City, New York] and we had to find a particular topic that would--that you would do your dissertation on or write your doctoral document on, and I felt the black composers of piano music is something that very few people, if anyone knows anything about. And certainly my professors at Julliard they didn't know a thing about piano music of black composers. So that was the focus of my doctoral dissertation. And since then it has been something that I have been able to give recitals and lecture recitals and--and do some writing about. What I want to do next is to really get a publication of these works that either have been published or have not yet been published and get them out there so that the whole community will have access to them. I have started that work, it still needs to be put into its final stages, but that is a major focus. And then I want to record all of these pieces so that they will be available for listening and for training as well.
Speaker 1: Any regrets?
Speaker 2: Any regrets? I think the one regret I might have in my development as a pianist would be--see when you're growing up, you don't have the full scope of what you need to really make this thing work. I remember when I was at Julliard and the second teacher Sascha Gorodnitzki would say, "I have some students that fly up to me from--from Texas to take a lesson and pay a $150 an hour or $200 an hour." Fly up and then pay that. And I think "wow- that's a lot of money." But what are these people doing now? They are the major performances on the stage today. And what made them major or what makes them major is the fact that they were exposed at an early age to the best teaching possible. No matter what the cost. My parents were wonderful. They encouraged me. They gave me lessons. They sent me to Boston. On a mini-scale this was doing the same thing as far as they knew. If they knew more they probably would have said, "Put you on a train send you to--to New York. Where you can have even stronger training." And so I would say the one regret that I would have is that my limited vision at that time as a youngster would always say I can get by, by playing beautifully, by being musical, showing more of the musical aspect rather than the technical aspect. When you're performing or a performer you have to bring everything together. You bring the artistic and the technical. It has to be the science as well as the art. And I had the art, but I would say that this science of all of the technical discipline that came later. I didn't have the answers when I was younger and I was sometimes struggling for the answers and I didn't find those answers with the early teachers. Or maybe I was so successful in doing what I did well that that was what--what the focus was. And I missed the focus on the technical aspect. So I would say that the one regret would--is that I should have had a stronger technical background so that when you play anything, no matter what the difficulty is, your equipment is ready to handle it. And so my equipment musically was more than ready, but the other part of it had to catch up.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And so that would be the one thing I would say to anyone, make sure you get both sides, the science as well as the art.
Story_ID: 127757
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered, Dr. Jackson?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as one who inspired others, who helped others. I love people. I want to be able to help them have opportunities and to see things and--and be able to experience the best qualities that they can possibly have. I would say that as a pianist you play, you look at the keyboard and they're black and white keys. Perhaps I will say that, if they would say he brought harmony between blacks and whites that I think would sum it all up.
Story_ID: 127758
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Say that--
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: As one who in--in--inspired others, either through music or through words. And have them--have them feel as if I was able to communicate with them and that I would be somebody that they felt cared about them at whatever level. Whether it be in a classroom or in the audience or in the--in the concert hall.
Story_ID: 127759
Speaker 1: And for those who are interested in pursuing music as a career, what advice do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Prepare well. Prepare early. Don't wait. Don't compromise. Because today you look at those students and those young artists out there they are phenomenal. When I was youngster, the thought was when you're in your thirties and your forties then you really become a mature artist, or you're beginning to become a mature artist. You look at people today who are in their teens, they're not where they will be, but they're doing things in their teens and in their early twenties that when I was growing up people did in their forties and their fifties. So spare nothing, is my advice, to get to what you need to have the best. Because the arena is competitive, it is fierce, fierce in a healthy way because it brings out the best in people, but if you don't know what the best is, then you'd better find out because it's out there. And you--and that's what you--you're competing against.
Speaker 1: Okay. And which is your favorite? The piano or the organ?
Speaker 2: Piano. I love the organ because I--I like the--the varied sound of the organ. To me if I were an orchestral conductor I would just love to be able to sit and pull music from all of the different, the strings, the brass, the winds, and the percussion. But when I play the piano I want to be able to in my own ear and hopefully convey to the listener different colors. I want the piano to sound not as if it were a percussion instrument. It is a percussion instrument, but it also is something that you can bring out sonorities of of--of different sounds. And--and just to be equivalent to these things this is what I would like--I like to do as a pianist.
Speaker 1: And, Dr. Jackson, is there anything you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: I think we touched on a lot of things. And I really appreciate this opportunity to share my life and the experiences that I've had.
Speaker 1: And we'd like to thank you as well. And thank you for being so gracious with your time today.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 127760
Speaker 1: So just tell us what year that one was taken. Or you can guess if you don't know--
Speaker 2: This photograph was taken perhaps in the--in my first years at Julliard [The Julliard School, New York City, New York] in which I was beginning to develop some publicity materials and this is one of the shots that was taken.
Speaker 1: About what year would you say?
Speaker 2: Approximately--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): 1950.
Speaker 2: You want to say (unclear)
Speaker 1: I would say perhaps close to 1960 or early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Early '60s. No problem.
Speaker 1: And this was also around the same time. And this was a more formal--
Speaker 2: How is that shot (unclear). Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a more formal photograph taken in which I had used for a number of years from the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] and--
Speaker 2: Great photograph. Isn't that a great photograph? You should have that one here up here (unclear). Okay
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Okay. And here. Dr. Jackson is here, right Dr. Jackson?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay. So tell us who those--
Speaker 1: This was a piano octet which performed at concerts in my high school [Hope High School, Providence, Rhode Island] a number of years after I had graduated from high school. It was conducted by Alexander Peloquin. And we eight pianists performed arrangements of some of major works by [Johann Sebastian] Bach and other composers. And would always have a grand finale with the "Stars and Stripes Forever" and also the [George] Gershwin "Rhapsody in Blue". So I was invited to perform with seven other wonderful pianists also from Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 2: And what year?
Speaker 1: Approximately somewhere in--in the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a (unclear).
Speaker 2: It's upside down.
Speaker 1: That's---
Speaker 2: Let me see if I can--Carey can you get it like this?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): No. Yeah it was better (unclear)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in Symphony Hall in Boston [Massachusetts]. It was during a piano fair in which I was one of several hundred pianists who would perform in a two- or three-day fair in--in Boston.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: About 1954.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was my first piano recital which was in 1947, I believe. The lady on the left is Anna Strother who was a soprano and was a member of the church where I attended and I often would accompany her. And so she was one that provided the opportunity for me to play my first professional piano recital. So we shared that program together in Providence.
Speaker 2: This is the following year in which I gave in 1948--gave my first organ recital at St. Stephens Church in Providence which is in--that church is in the Brown University area.
Speaker 1: The young lady on the right is my sister Addie Mae Jackson. And this was taken I would say in the 1950s. And the young lady on the left is my mother's [Beulah Boyd Jackson's] godchild Catherine Mae Hill [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Remember (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) all set.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): If you could hold it on both sides.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So it's kind of on the right.
Speaker 2: How is that? (Unclear)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my first formal piano recital. Again taken at the program that I shared with Anna Strother in the Trinity Auditorium in Providence, Rhode Island in 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay. Great.
Speaker 2: This is Anna Strother, the soprano, that provided that opportunity for me to make my first public performance.
Speaker 1: And can you spell her name, Dr. Jackson?
Speaker 2: S-T-R-O-T-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my mother at the same event, having received a bouquet of flowers.
Speaker 1: And your mother's name again?
Speaker 2: My mother is Beulah, B-E-U-L-A-H, Boyd Jackson.
Speaker 1: And this is 1948?
Speaker 2: 1947.
Speaker 1: '47 [1947]. I'm sorry. Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken for the high school yearbook when I graduated from high school in 1951.
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken with my manager who is standing next to me on my right, Josephine Heathman, and she's the one that made it possible for me to compete in--for an organization called the JUGG Incorporated Award, J-U-G-G, which stood for Just Us Guys and Gals. And they presented artists through competition to give town hall debuts and this was taken at my town hall debut in 1960, I believe around 1960, '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was taken in a classroom at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston. An ensemble class. And the instructor was Ario Machado [ph.] who was an outstanding clarinetist in the Boston Symphony. And the clarinetist that is performing is John Handolphy [ph.] who was a student at the Conservatory and also one of my classmates in Providence.
Speaker 2: This one is a little tiny. (Unclear)
Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in my living room in--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Actually, take the back one out.
Speaker 1: Yes, no problem. Is that better?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. That's fine. I'm sorry, Doctor.
Speaker 1: This was taken in my living room in Providence where we lived at 424 Hope Street. It's the piano which stood right there in the corner of the living room and that was taken I would say perhaps in the '50s [1950s], mid-1950s.
Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear) Dr. Jackson since we have that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. That's it?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Actually what you see--can you see that? Can you--actually if you can hold it like this?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Dr. Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay. This photograph, again was a formal shot taken for publicity purposes around 2001.
