Story_ID: 339652
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Nathaniel R. Jones, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, the middle initial is R, but that's for Raphael, R-A-P-H-A-E-L, Jones, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story behind Raphael?  The name Raphael?
Speaker 2: I was named for my, for my uncle who wanted my mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] to name me for him.  His first name was Sam, Samuel Raphael Jones [ph.] and my mother did not want to have a Sam Jones.  She said she would go with the middle name.  So they compromised and I took his middle name and that, that was the compromise, but she wouldn't go with his first name.
Speaker 1: What was wrong with Sam as far as, she just didn't like it?
Speaker 2: Well she didn't like the idea of, she felt that would be too easy a target for, for people to, to poke fun.  She didn't want anyone calling, calling her baby, she said, she didn't want to call her little boy, Sam, Sam Jones.
Speaker 1: Was Sam kind of used like George is used in the Pullman porter thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she felt it would be used in a derogatory, cynical way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's May 13th, 1926, Youngstown, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a retired federal judge.  Currently I am serving as senior counsel in the law firm of Blank Rome [Blank Rome LLP].  That's a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] based law firm and I am in the Cincinnati [Ohio] office.
Speaker 1: Blank, Rome, how do you spell Blank?
Speaker 2: B-L-A-N-K, capital R-O-M-E.
Story_ID: 339653
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, you know, they, they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think that I do.  I, my reputation at home is that I will eat anything that my wife [Lillian Hawthorne Jones] places on the table and I can't say that I have a favorite food.  If, if there is a favorite, it'd probably be, perhaps chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Southern fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite color would be, would be a shade of blue, some shade of blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, that, that's, sayings and phrases sort of float, depending on the occasion.  I do a lot of speaking.  It depends on the, on the occasion as to what I would draw upon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I think if there's a, that gets into the question of philosophy and so forth and your, your sense of life and values and so forth, so I don't have a, I have a number of them that I would draw upon.  One I guess is that, I guess I have a, and this gets to, to philosophy again, I just think that a person must be, must, in the words of a song, "Must be a beacon, must be, must carry a light and be a light that will sort of illuminate dark places."  That's kind of the theme of, of my life.
Story_ID: 339654
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Nathaniel Jones] side but we're going to start with your mother's side.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lillian, Lillian Brown [Lillian Brown Rafe], that's L-I-L-L-I-A-N, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, that, Brown is her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lillian Brown Jones and she married after a divorce, and she was divorced then, name was Rafe, R-A-F-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Big Island, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name, Big Island, Virginia?  Is it actually an island or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, yeah, no, it's not a, it's located on the James River down in Virginia, in Bedford County [Virginia] and it's set at the foot of a mountain.  Her date of birth is, or was, February the 28th, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: Just back to my, to her parents.
Speaker 1: Did you know them, your grandparents on her side?
Speaker 2: I, I'm, I met them when I was very young.  I don't remember my grandfather, his name was Joseph Brown.  I remember my grandmother [Ellen Sledd Brown], who died when I was probably, oh, not yet ten, ten years of age.  I was quite young when she died.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was, oh, golly, you just caught me, it's right at the tip of my tongue, it'll come to me in a second.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you did know her and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what did your grandparents do?  Were they--
Speaker 2: They, they grew up on a farm and then my grandfather at some point worked in a lumber mill but my grandmother was a, was a homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: My grand--my grandmother was a, was a Sledd.  She came from her, her, on the maternal side of her family, were members, they bought a name Sledd, S-L-E-D-D.  That side of the family was extremely fair-skinned, blue eyes and my grandmother, according to stories that my mother passed on to me would, when she was a child, would recognize and knew that the, the owner of the property on which they lived and their farm, the owner of their farm was, was a father of a number of the siblings and, and her, my, this would be his, my great-grandmother [Leana Sledd] when she's growing up, when their efforts made to, to discipline her, she would, she oftentimes, and the kids oftentimes would run to the, to the person they knew to be their father for, for intervention and the disciplining.  So that was a side that, where there was very clear, been very, very clear, a degree of, of mixture, racial mix.  On my grandmother's paternal side, there was a mix of, of African blood and Indian [Native American], Indian intermixture.  That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know what, what Indian nation or group?
Speaker 2: No, no I never, I never, never learned that.
Story_ID: 339655
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family [Jones' maternal family]?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I guess largely and I, I often regretted that and I'm going to pursue that a bit with some of my, with some of my cousins who are still living who grew up there.  My parents [Lillian Brown Rafe and Nathaniel Jones] moved from Virginia prior to my birth.  My brother [Wellington Jones] and sister [Eleanor Jones Grove] were born there and about two years after, a year and a half or so afterwards they moved to Ohio, I was born and that's where it cut off a lot of interaction between, between me and my, my Virginia relatives.  Although my brother, who's older, he was two years older, he would get back to Virginia and he was much more familiar with, with our Virginia family, our roots, than I was.  I did not get to really know my, well I knew my uncles because they'd come to Ohio to visit and my cousins would come up and visit but I seldom, the transportation was not very easy in those days and it wasn't, it was, there was the Depression [Great Depression] during my early years.  I was virtually born into the Depression.  Just a few years after the, after my birth, the Depression hit and so the, the wherewithal to travel was very, very slim.  My folks didn't have a car and the transportation was usually by, by the bus, by Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.] or occasionally the train and that's what my grandmother [Ellen Sledd Brown] used when she came up to visit us or when my mother went, went back south.  I was taken back south, back to Virginia, when I was about eighteen months old and my grandfather [Joseph Brown] wanted my mother to leave me there because I was, as she said, I was very thin, very frail and he always wanted to, and he would try to prevail upon my mother to leave me there so his, so he could, as he says, fatten me up on the farm but she, she wouldn't do that and so I, as a result, I never, I did, just did not get back and meet my kin until I was well along in life when I began going back for funerals and I was always struck by the fact that I was meeting people whom I resembled.  That was always sort of fascinating.  I'd see my cousins and I'd see second cousins and see others who were the children of the offspring of the other kin and I was struck by the similarity and by the, and appearance but that's a part of my life that I've always regretted, that I did not get to know my, some of my relatives more intimately.
Story_ID: 339656
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] talk about growing up and did she tell any stories about growing up (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she talked about going to school and working the, working the farms and the, how they played and they had, the, the white persons who sort of oversaw them who were the, the people who controlled that whole environment, they were, obviously, very kind people.  And so she grew up with a very positive view of, of persons who were white.  She didn't harbor the, any, any serious negative feelings although she understood the rules, so to speak, but the people that she had interacted with and who influenced her and who had a degree of control over, over their family and their well-being, were not very mean people.  They were persons who were, they were the property people in the Big Island [Virginia] and in Lynchburg [Virginia] and Bedford County [Virginia] and that whole area.  So they had a very good relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the, but they lived in a totally segregated environment and they, the, as I said, the rules were there, and they understood the rules.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she have a chance to go to school or not?
Speaker 2: She, she went to, she obtained an elementary, what would be an elementary school education.  In fact the school that she attended [Sharon School, Big Island, Virginia] still stands, it's next door to the church which is still standing and when we go down to the Big Island, we often try to make it a point to, to attend church service at this church and this school now is, it's been, it's been preserved and it's sort of an educational center for the church and I'm always impressed with it.  I've taken pictures of it and down behind the church and the, and the school is a creek and that was a creek that the church used as a baptismal pool.  So that's where my mother was baptized and everybody's baptized in that creek.  And then up the hill that you take going up behind the church and on the other side of the creek, at the very top, is a cemetery, yeah, I should say is a cemetery and when I go there and I walk around, I see the names of all my relatives on tombstones.  So it was, it was sort of a defined and contained area, the school, the church, the cemetery.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school and the church?  What were the names?
Speaker 2: The school, I don't, I don't know the name of the school.  The church was Rose of--
Speaker 1: Rose of Sharon?
Speaker 2: Rose of Sharon, that's it.  Rose of Sharon Baptist Church [sic. Sharon Missionary Baptist Church, Big Island, Virginia].
Story_ID: 339657
Speaker 1: Let me turn to your father for a second.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel, B, B-A-C-O-N, Bacon Jones [Nathaniel Jones].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was January, I'm not sure of the date now, I'd have to check that, 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is a, that's the big city next to the Big Island [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the county seat.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 2: Very little.  My father was one of three boys and those uncles I did not know very well and he had two, he had two sisters, Irene [Irene Jones Lightford], and the other name I cannot recall, but I did not get to know that side of the family very well.  There were, they would visit in Youngstown [Ohio], the uncles and cousins, the children of those uncles would come and their name was, they were the children of my aunts, the name of Lightford, L-I-G-H-T-F-O-R-D, and there was a William Lightford and Edward Lightford and Irene.  So I, I knew them and this all took place when I was quite young, when they, on their visits, although Edward and William they ultimately moved to Youngstown.  William died.  They worked in the steel plants in Youngstown and William died when I was quite young and then Edward, his brother, younger brother, came up and worked and then he moved on to New Jersey, to Newark, New Jersey, Elizabeth, New Jersey, where he lived until just a couple of years ago and then he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I never knew my grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories, were they like basically farmers and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they'd come out of slavery or had they been free before the Civil War or--
Speaker 2: No, they were, my grandfather on my father's side, was not, had not been--
Speaker 1: Well they were probably too young to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but from the, the folklore is that my, my grandfather, on my father's side, was, was a slave, the Jones side, but he was very young at the time of slavery because slavery, the emancipation was in '63 [1863], '64 [1864] and my dad was born in '88 [sic.] so his father was in slavery and emerged from slavery just prior to the, to marrying and they launched their family.
Speaker 1: Now, now was your father born in 19--1898 or '88 [1888], which, which, because you said two different ones?
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was 1898.
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1898], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his father was, had, was very young when slavery was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, was over.
Story_ID: 339658
Speaker 1: There's no stories passed down about what that life was like or anything?  Did he talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, my father [Nathaniel Jones] didn't talk too much about that and my father, I never had a lot of conversation with my father about, about those years and about the past, that, that chapter.  I was just thinking the other day, I regret that I never had very many substantive conversations with my dad.  My mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] and dad divorced when I was about ten, although I continued to live with my, living with my dad, but it was a very sort of uneven existence.  We were back and forth and I guess I reached a point where I, my father and I, I had, I was making some decisions within my own self as to what I wanted to do, what I thought life was all about and what I wanted to pursue and they didn't square with what my father, my father's notion.  My father wanted me to be a carpenter or either a minister and his conversations would inevitably circle back to the Bible.  The Bible was the, that was the, that was the core of everything and all decisions and I, I wasn't able to agree and really embrace that, so our conversations were quite limited.  Rather than to express disagreement, I would listen as a kid but had developed some notions of my own as to what, what the world was about and what life was about and what I, the place I wanted to, to reach.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father have a chance to go to school in Lynchburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had very limited schooling, what would be comparable to elementary school education.
Speaker 1: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well in, in Virginia, he worked in the, well he farmed and then he also worked in the, in the sawmill and that they were, the, a lot of the lumber, a lot of lumber was processed down there and he worked in Lynchburg at the, in the lumber mill and they, and then he moved, after marrying and having two children, that's when they moved to the North, that's when they moved to Ohio.
Story_ID: 339659
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Lillian Brown Rafe and Nathaniel Jones] met?  Do they have a story about that?
Speaker 2: No, just met through the community, through church, through family, family interactions.  It's a very small community in Big Island [Virginia] and Lynchburg [Virginia] and it was just a case of young people getting together, families involved in churches and church, that was the social center of the, that formed the social meeting place for, for persons in that area.
Story_ID: 339660
Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' [Lillian Brown Rafe and Nathaniel Jones] per- personalities, which one do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why?
Speaker 2: My mother was, was always a very open person.  She, she was a very, very engaging and she aspired, she was always aspiring.  We had, we had a lot of issues growing up.  There was a Depression [Great Depression] and there was the matter of survival and my parents each had multiple jobs and my mother never gave up on education.  My father never pursued it after he was an adult and came to Ohio.  My mother enrolled in night school and would pursue education and she kept at it until she finally got her high school diploma at the age of about seventy-five and she would take a class or two at night and then when there was a crisis or she couldn't continue, she would drop out and then when things changed, she'd go back and that's, that's how she pursued it.  So I was, and then she had several jobs.  She sold products of a company, dry goods and how, and there's a company called Watkins, J.W. Watkins Company [sic. J.R. Watkins Medical Company; Watkins Incorporated] and she would have her list of customers and she would go to the wholesale distributing place and obtain what her customers wanted, whether, vanilla extract and liniment and spices and those things and she would, she would service the people who didn't have cars and they'd welcome the opportunity to have people come bring these, bring these orders to their house.  She didn't have a car either but she used the streetcars and the buses.  And then she, she worked as a matron in downtown theatres in the evenings and my dad also did that.  He, my dad worked as a janitor because when the steel mills were shut down, he would have jobs.  He was a, worked as a window washer for a company during the daytime and then in the evenings he would do his job at the, the theatres.
Story_ID: 339661
Speaker 1: We were talking about your, your parents [Lillian Brown Rafe and Nathaniel Jones] and their personalities and the kind of things they had to do during the Depression [Great Depression] and--
Speaker 2: Well, both of my parents were very, were very energetic.  They believed in, there was a strong work ethic in my family.  My mother, in addition to working as a matron and selling products [for J.R. Watkins Medical Company; Watkins Incorporated], and she served as a subscription manager for the black local newspaper called, the Buckeye Review, which I later came to work for and eventually became the editor of it but in addition to doing those things, she, she took in washing, took in laundry and I would go collect the, the laundry, the washing, primarily shirts from, of business people and I'd go to their offices and collect the shirts and bring them home and on, on a Monday, and she would soak them and wash them and then she'd iron them and then on Thursday and Friday we would deliver them back to, to the customers.  So she, she was always doing something to, to help sustain the family.  And my father, likewise, he would always work.  When the steel mills weren't up, he would be working two or three other jobs and when we got older, my brother [Wellington Jones] and I would go, we'd work with him at night when the theaters closed at eleven o'clock, we would then go and perform the janitorial services from two--twelve until five or six in the morning on weekends.  We did it on weekends but my father did it every, every night.
Story_ID: 339662
Speaker 1: Did you already have relatives in Youngstown [Ohio]?  Was that how they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --they wound up in Youngstown or what?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.  They just heard about Youngstown and they were the first of our relatives to wind up in Youngstown.  We had relatives in Cleveland [Ohio].  We weren't very, very close to them or they weren't very close to them but the steel mills, they wound up in Youngstown because of the steel mills.  The steel companies in Youngstown went south and did a lot of recruiting and they were doing the recruiting particularly around World War I [WWI] in 1916, 1917, 1918 and so forth.  Well my family, of course the word was out in the South that Youngstown is a city that, where there's employment and there are job opportunities.  So my family didn't move there until about 1920, but I guess it was about '22 [1922] when they moved there and upon moving there, other relatives would come up and stay with us and get jobs, some went back and some, some remained but there, but we had no, there was no presence of kin in Youngstown to draw us.  There was, there was economic, an economic consideration and educational consideration.  My mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] was concerned that we, the children, have a good education and that's why she wanted to move from Virginia, where she had grown up, to the North and particularly Youngstown because it combined with education and, and job opportunities.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how they moved up?  If they were on a bus or train or--
Speaker 2: Train and bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They came up through Washington [D.C.].  They took a train up into Washington and they, they eventually came through on a train into, from Washington into Youngstown but a lot of their, their going back and forth was on, on Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.], was on the buses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But their initial moves were on, on the train.
Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother [Wellington Jones] and two sisters [Eleanor Jones Grove and Allie Jones].  There are two of us left.  My younger sister is still living.  She lives in Youngstown yet.  My older brother and sister are deceased.
Story_ID: 339663
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I can't say that I do.  No, I can't say that I do.  I was born at home on Court Street [Youngstown, Ohio], which is on the, the east side, close to the downtown area in a house, in a rear house.  I vaguely remember the rear house because, but we moved from there when I was quite young and moved to another side of town on a street called, called at the time was called Garlock Street [ph.] and it was on a hill and it was a very muddy hill and then with the Depression [Great Depression] coming on, the WPA, the Works Progress Administration, provided the wherewithal for cities and the communities to, to do various things by way of public projects and public improvements and one of the projects was paving the street with cobblestone.  I remember that.  I remember very clearly the, the winters and I was always so impressed with these men who would be out there all day long on their knees paving the street.  And my mother [Lillian Brown Rafe], because a number of the, several of the persons were members of our church, would come in with their lunch pail and their thermos and she would warm up their, their thermos for them and they would sometimes would come and sit while they were eating their lunch.  So I have that memory and I guess other early memories I have were at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Third Baptist Church [Youngstown, Ohio] was a place that harbors a lot of memories for me.
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't go to Rose of Sharon [sic. Sharon Missionary Baptist Church, Big Island, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, no, that was in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Yeah, that's, okay, that's where you, okay.
Speaker 2: You see.
Speaker 1: So now you're in Youngstown [Ohio], Youngstown.
Speaker 2: And I wasn't born, I wasn't born there, I was--
Speaker 1: Right, you're absolutely right.
Speaker 2: --in Youngstown.
Speaker 1: You're absolutely right.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Third Baptist Church in Youngstown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the church we belonged to and so the memories in, the memories in Youngstown I guess would, would really come out of the church Sunday school, the neighborhood--
Story_ID: 339664
Speaker 1: What was Youngstown [Ohio] like in terms of, I know it's a medium size city, comparable to Akron [Ohio], Dayton [Ohio] and Toledo [Ohio] in some ways but, but what, what was it like in those days?  How many black people lived in Youngstown and did they, were they segregated on one side of town or were they scattered or what?
Speaker 2: They were scattered, scattered but yet segregated.  Youngstown has an interesting, Youngstown has a very interesting history.  It was, you know, it's northeast Ohio, it butts the Pennsylvania border, just seven miles from Sharon [Pennsylvania] and New Castle [Pennsylvania] and those cities and just about sixty miles from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  The first black families, in 1900, there were about six hundred black fam- black people in Youngstown.  Some of them had come from Pennsylvania on a canal and others had come up from the Columbus [Ohio] area.  These were persons who had, who had been part of the Underground Railroad, people who had gotten into the state and with the, with the slave catchers and all they were, they were put up by families along the way in the, during the, back during the period of slavery, they would get, they've gotten to Ohio and they'd settle around a city called, a community called Lisbon, Ohio and there was a great, a lot of abolitionist activity there but essentially there were, were in Youngstown, where Youngstown was concerned, there were, pre-1900, there were only about seventeen or eighteen, the last, the date I looked at, seventeen or eighteen black persons in Youngstown.  By 1900, there were, there were six hundred and by 1910, the number had gone up to about fourteen thousand and then by 1920, the number had gone up to about twenty-some thousand.  The reason for those jumps was the recruiting that took place by steel companies who'd gone south in search of labor and they, they attracted blacks to Youngstown to work in the mills and then after, after World War I [WWI], the job supply sort of froze and a number of blacks then went back south and that sort of leveled off the population and slowed down the, the migration.
Story_ID: 339665
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it being a steel town [Youngstown, Ohio], the steel plants, the smoke and the soot and the, but people didn't mind that because whenever there was smoke and soot and emission of substances from the steel plants, there was, it was called gold dust.  You know, that meant the economy was vibrant and people were working.  The city, black people, as I said the numbers increased around, and shortly after, World War I [WWI] and many of the blacks who came in were sort of ghettoized by the steel companies.  They were housed down near the plants.  About the same time, there was an increase in migration from, about the same time blacks were moving in from the South, there was an increase migration from, from Europe, persons from Eastern Europe and Southern Europe, Italians, Hungarians, Slovaks.
Speaker 1: How did they get along with the black people in town?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's an interesting story.  When they came, there was not a lot of great mixing.  The churches seemed to demark the pattern of housing and residences.  The, everybody sort of stayed, the whites who came in were, were ghettoized by the whites who were already there.  The early whites were the English and the Germans, Welsh, Scotch and Irish and when, the sort of unwashed began to come in, the Greeks and the Russians and the Italians, they were, they were viewed with some disapproval by the whites who had been there, the early settlers, and so they, when, with the wave of migration, the others who came in and, I might add, they came in under a quota system because the government had to place limits on the number of Italians and Greeks and Russians who had come in in any given year.
Speaker 1: There was no limit on Northern Europeans, right, at that time?
Speaker 2: No, no, they were, there was no quota for English or Germans.
Speaker 1: Or Scandinavians.
Speaker 2: Scandinavians, yeah.  And so, when, when these Southern Europeans came in, they did what, what I think has been pretty well documented by social sciences and all.  The only thing in common they had with the ruling powers and the people in power was skin color.  So there developed an affinity for, for whites and the stereotypes that were attributed to blacks, were accepted, and that's a notion of the inferior, because blacks were ghettoized and were poor and those who had come from the South were, many, in the case were lacking in education and skills, although some, some people who came from the South had skills.  There were some bricklayers and persons who knew farming and some people who could do ironwork but by and large there was a deficit in terms of skills whereas many of the Europeans who came in were persons who had some skills.  They were persons who had done ironwork.  They were mechanics and they were, they tended to look down upon, upon the blacks and so that ghettoization that took place was rather pronounced but even, even when there was a distribution of races, I know in my neighborhood, there was great mixture, neighbors on either side of us, across the street were white, the children played together--
Speaker 1: Did they actually work side by side in the factories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or did they demarcate the jobs in some sort of way?
Speaker 2: No, in the steel plants--
Speaker 1: In the steel plants, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the steel plants, they worked in the, in the open hearth and the blast furnace, blacks and whites worked together but you could rest assured that the dirtiest jobs is where you'd find the aggregation of many of the blacks and the lines of progression, promotion, were not opened to blacks and the, the better jobs were held by, were held by whites.
Story_ID: 339666
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the church.  You were going to talk about the Third Baptist Church [Youngstown, Ohio].  What effect did Third Baptist have on you?
Speaker 2: Third Baptist had a lot of effect because it was a, it was a center, not just for religion but it was also a social center and it was, and it was a center in which our education could be supplemented.  We had opportunity to, to sort of flex our, and expand our, the opportunities.  There were programs at church.  There were oratorical contests.  There were chances to speak and to take part and to expand your own, your own skills and then, of course the, you met people from outside your neighborhood.  You're able to, you received encouragement from adults and a degree of discipline but it was, I found, you know, the church was something you always looked forward to going to and because it was a chance to, to engage in some expansion.
Story_ID: 339667
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to school in Youngstown [Ohio].  We had--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was, my elementary school was West Side, West Side School [Youngstown, Ohio].  It was a grade one, from grade one to, one to six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One to, yeah, one to six.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then you would move to the, to the junior high school.
Speaker 1: Was that, was that a neighborhood school or was it a, West Side School was your neighborhood school?
Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood school.  The (unclear) area was pretty broad and then the junior high school was, you, it was a feeder school for a junior high school, that originally was going to be called Grant School [Grant Junior High School, Youngstown, Ohio], named for President Grant [President Ulysses S. Grant] and then it was substituted, it, then later became, became an elementary school [Ulysses S. Grant Elementary School, Youngstown, Ohio] and then they built a new junior high school named James Hillman Junior High [James Hillman Junior High School, Youngstown, Ohio].  James Hillman was a colonel in the, in the Civil War so they named this, this school for him and the area, the students who attended the school were from a much broader area but the schools were integrated.  The teachers were white.  I never had a, I never had a black teacher from, for the entire time I was in public schools.
Speaker 1: So the teaching, at the administrative level, it was all white?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then the students were integrated, though, right?
Speaker 2: The students were integrated, yeah, and, but even so, even though there was integration of the students, and we all had, you know, white playmates and yet we had our black playmates.  We, we played together in our neighborhoods, blacks and whites.  The parents, there was not a great deal of socializing between the black and white parents because it wasn't a lot of great socializing anyhow but what the socializing that did take place consisted of probably sitting on a front porch or parents would talk and sit on a white, sit on the steps, talk to white neighbors, or they would come over and sit and talk to our parents but that also happened with black families as well.  That was the kind of socializing that went on whereas the kids, we played in the street and then there was a playground nearby, located in a beautiful park which is still there called Mill Creek Park [Youngstown, Ohio] and that was a place where we spent our days during the summer months.  They had a very active recreational program there for the kids and it was, it was a, well let me just put it this way, I, you asked me about my earlier experience, earliest experience.  I guess one way to answer that is I, I can't remember the time when I was not conscious of race.  It just seemed like it was all around.  You knew the rules and even though we, the neighborhoods were, were integrated and our neighbors on either side of us were whites and they were very nice to us and we played together, there seemed to be, you know Dr. W.E.B. Du Bois talked about the veil behind which blacks had to function.  Well, there seemed to be a veil that, that was draped over every black kid and that veil followed you and even though, even in the most physically close encounters you would have with whites, there was that veil of consciousness that was surrounding you that caused you to realize that there's a difference.  And this veil, you felt it in school when you were sitting at your desk, you felt it virtually when you walked down the street.  You'd have some occasion, something would happen, either a truck driver or a guy would go by in a car and he'd yell a name at you as you went by.  There was always this conscious, but we never let it bother us because we were, and another thing, our parents did a great job of, was preparing us with coping skills.  How do you cope and you don't let other people define you and those were lessons that were very, very important to us because otherwise you would, you would go, you would be completely crushed but we just developed these coping skills and we were able to just, just move along and not let, and not let that, those, those incidents and those actions have, have an overpowering effect on us.  Some kids could handle it and, and, of course, others weren't able to handle it too well.
Story_ID: 339668
Speaker 1: How did you do in school?
Speaker 2: I was an average student.  I, I was one of, I guess I can, you can always say I was a victim.  When you were in a situation like that where, and the schools, as I say, schools were integrated, there were, there were no black classes as such.  You know, there would be three or four, five black kids in a class of twenty, twenty-five.  The teachers were white.  The principals were white.  The deans were white.  The secretaries in the schools were white.  The custodian was white, you know, everything, everything was white, all authority figures were white.
Speaker 1: So is that what you liked about the church [Third Baptist Church, Youngstown, Ohio] on some level and you could go there and black people would be in charge or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  You, that was a contrast; that was a difference in where you could kind of feel somewhat redeemed and kind of feel the sense of somebody nestling in you.  That, that supplement, the church played the role of reinforcing us to deal with what we would be dealing with in the course of the week and, but no matter how, how integrated, desegregated the facility seemed to be, none of these schools, there was that cloak that you felt around you and you just had to keep on stepping and not let that, not let that trip you and you approach it in different ways.  I for one had, had, and I don't know whether, whether resolve came from it, I guess it came primarily from my mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] who was constantly talking to us about being serious, working hard, yet we had these teachers who thought they were doing a favor, I guess, and now, I guess today, they call them social promotions but I was moved along without much problem simply because the teachers regarded that little Jones boy [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones] as being nice.  I wasn't disruptive.  If you were disruptive, then you were a bad kid and you were a troublemaker and you didn't, you didn't move along.
Story_ID: 339669
Speaker 1: What were you interested in, I mean when you were in school?  If it wasn't the class work, then what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, I was interested in class work.  I enjoyed, I enjoyed reading in the elementary grades [at West Side School, Youngstown, Ohio] and, of course, as kids are inclined, I enjoyed sports and enjoyed playing, playing baseball and doing that sort of thing that boys like to do.  And then when I got to junior high [James Hillman Junior High School, Youngstown, Ohio], I was, I continued my interest in sports but I had a fortuitous development that I think it made almost all the difference in my life.  My mother [Lillian Brown Rafe], among the things that she did was, have a subscription for this black newspaper that was published by a lawyer who had a printing company in his basement, printing shop in his basement.
Speaker 1: Now that's the Buckeye Review?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Who was the lawyer?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was J. Maynard Dickerson, it's listed in my, in my resume, and he was active in civil rights, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], president of the local branch and then became president of the State of Ohio, conference of branches, was a confidant and a friend of Thurgood Marshall and Walter White and nationally known people.  I began to, at his invitation, to hang out in his print shop which is in the basement of his house.  The way I met him is, during the winter months, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the segregated YMCA, would hold a series of forum meetings which would be addressed by nationally known speakers, the president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] or Dr. Benjamin Mays who was just the, who later became president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Mordecai Johnson who was president of Howard University and Walter White who was the preeminent civil rights leader and these people would come and they'd speak at these forum meetings and my mother would take me.  She was a member of the auxiliary of the YMC--of this branch of the YMCA and the women's auxiliary would host the reception following the meetings and they'd serve tea and cookies and candy and mints and peanuts, and all, and I always sat in the front row at these forums and I was one of just a few kids who attended these things, these were on Sunday afternoons, and following the, the meeting, I would beat it down to the reception and the first one to get my hands in the peanuts and the mints and my mother had to smack my hand but the adults who were there and notably the speakers would always be kind and sort of curious as to who is this kid, you know, and they'd talk with me and, you know, they'd ask you do you, and you'd say, and what do you want to be, what grade are you in and how old are you, and so forth.
Story_ID: 339670
Speaker 1: So here you are going to these meetings?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and they would, you know, ask me, you know, "What do you want to be?  What do you want to do," and so forth and I'd talk with them.  Though Mr. Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson] was very active in this, in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] forum activity, and he usually presided or he'd introduce the speaker or, and I was so impressed with this man who was, is this, you know, so important, he took an interest in me.  And then my mother [Lillian Brown Rafe], of course, was working for him on the paper [Buckeye Review], and he'd always say, "Come over and see me sometimes, sonny," and I'd say, "Okay."  And so when I was at the age that I kind of move around by myself, I would go over to the shop and I'd sit in the evenings and watch him work.  He would come in from these, from his office and he'd put on his work clothes and he, he did, not only did he do the paper but he did commercial printing, job printing, letterheads, tickets and so forth and I'd watch him run the press.  You know, he would just be putting stuff in the press, you know, printing, printing the jobs and so this went on for some time and then I would, and he would take me with him.  They would hold some meetings in his home.  If Thurgood Marshall was coming to town [Youngstown, Ohio] or some notable person would come in for a meeting, I would go with him and I'd just sit, go sit in the corner and listen to these, these people talk and strategize and I know one time I asked him if I could write a column for the paper.  This time I was probably in the, about the eighth grade and he said, "What do you want to write about?"  I said, "I want to write," 'cause I was into sports, you know, all kids are into the sports, I said, "I'd like to write about sports," and he said, "Well, okay."  So, I sat at a typewriter and I was hunting and pecking, you know.  I did this column called, Sports Shorts, and it was just a little aggregate, just a little culmination of little items of sports interest that I'd get out of newspapers and that I knew was going on.
Speaker 1: Now that was after the, that was after Jesse Owens ran in the Olympics [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany] and all that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the hottest thing that you were writing about in those days?
Speaker 2: Well it was usually the bowl games, you know, college football, high school, high school sports, putting names, he used to always say to me, "The important thing about a newspaper," you know, their paper was, "was names."  People like to see their names in print and so anything I knew that was going on that my peers were doing, I would just, you know, include that and then college players, because there were so few blacks playing college ball in those days, it was always a big thing and I would always try and track who the black players were and mention them.  But anyhow, the first column I did, I had it waiting for him when he came home and we sat in his breakfast nook and he had a ballpoint pen, a multi-color ballpoint pen, the first time I'd ever seen one with red, green and blue ink.  So he took the red ink and he went over this column, it was the very first one I--that I did and he corrected it and it looked like, when he got through with that, it looked like chickens had had a fight on it.  I mean, just red all over the thing and then he explained every correction and then he, he's a very direct person and very blunt and he said, "Now, what grade are you in?"  And I told him.  He said, "What do you do in school all day?"  I said, "Well I," you know, I was stumbling around.  He said, "But you're not learning anything."  And I looked at him, he says, "Now, you should know this, you should know, you should have learned this before, you should have learned this in grade school about how to spell and how to write and your grammar."  He said, "You don't have a foundation."  He said you, and he just told me what, you know, just really gave me down to, in the country, and he said, now, he says, "You want to learn?"  I said, "Yes sir, I do."  He said, "Okay.  If you want to learn, I'll work with you but you have to have a thick skin."  I said, "Yeah, I, I'm ready," you know.  So, from that point on he worked with me on all of my copy and he would correct and explain.  He got me a dictionary for my pocket.  We had a dictionary in the shop on one of these pedestals, one of these huge Webster dictionaries but he gave me one in my pocket to carry with me.
Story_ID: 339671
Speaker 1: And then he'd [J. Maynard Dickerson] bring home two newspapers, The New York Times and a paper called PM which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) PM, I'm not familiar with that one, that's--
Speaker 1: PM was a forerunner of the New York Post.  That was, that was, and they had columnists.  The New York Times had a columnist who was, his name was Arthur Krock.  He was the preeminent political commentator of the time and the, and the paper, PM--
Speaker 2: Arthur, Arthur Krock.
Speaker 1: Arthur Krock, K-R-O-C-K--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was like the guru, he was like the, he's the one that presidents listen to and all the, all of the political people.  When Arthur Krock said something that was it.  Well, he brought the, he wanted me to read that column because he was a good writer and then the PM, the newspaper PM had a columnist by the name of Max Lerner who was also a professor at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts].  He was a political scientist, Ph.D., brilliant thinker, writer and he wanted me to read those columns every day when they appeared, he said not for what they're talking about but for sentence structure, for spelling and vocabulary development and that's when he, of course, he'd give me this pocket dictionary.  He said, "Now when you see a word you don't, you don't understand, you don't know, look it up," and he, I say, he was very blunt, very direct and that was the, that was my emersion into the world of writing and reading and--
Speaker 2: Now, did he bring in any of the other black papers like the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, that was a regular, you know--
Speaker 2: Defender [Chicago Defender].
Speaker 1: --that part of the exchange, you know.  The Buckeye Review was on a, all the papers circulated among themselves.  There was a Defender, the Courier, the Cleveland--
Speaker 2: Gazette [Cleveland Gazette].
Speaker 1: --Call and Post.
Speaker 2: Call and Post.
Speaker 1: Call and Post, the Louisville Defender, the paper from Cincinnati [Ohio], the paper from Cincinnati here, called the, it wasn't the Herald [Cincinnati Herald] then, it was another name but all the, these papers all came in every week.  There would be these, well they'd come in on Fridays and Saturdays and they had the columns that Arthur, they had Mr. Prattis [P.L. Prattis], of the Courier, Pittsburgh Courier, and they had the sports column by the name of Smith [Wendell Smith] who, and they were, the big drum beat then was against Major League Baseball for not having blacks in Major League Baseball.  And so, yeah, all these papers were, were there but he, he felt those two columns would provide the platform for me to really deal with, with what he said to me was, my great shortcoming, my great deficit, that I had to do double-time to get caught up on and he said, he said, "You can't spell, you can't write."  He said, "You know, you've got to, you've got to deal with that situation or you're going to be terribly handicapped," and I did, and I worked with him, or he worked with me and he said at one point, long, long after we were, we maintained a relationship up until he died just before I was appointed to the Court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit] and he was a very significant person in my life but he had often, he'd take, he took great pride in my development and he would tell people, he would relate the story about my spelling and all and he'd say, "One thing I can say for Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones], that he never made the same mistake twice.  When you, when you pointed something out, and he worked on it, he never went back and repeated that mistake," and I often think I don't know what would have happened in my life if it had not been for him and I salute my mother [Lillian Brown Rafe] because she had the good sense of realizing that there was a point beyond which she would not be able to move me herself.
Story_ID: 339672
Speaker 1: Now the time that you, you started working with him [J. Maynard Dickerson], that's about the time that you and your, I mean your parents [Lillian Brown Rafe and Nathaniel Jones] split?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They split up?  There about ten, so.
Speaker 2: About ten, yeah.
Speaker 1: About 1936 or so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that they split and then you started working with him a little later, about '38 [1938] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I just owe him, you know, so much and, and that emphasis upon writing has been, has been just such a tremendous factor in my life.
Speaker 1: How did you feel when you saw your first story in print?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.  It was great when you, when the, you know, when you did the proofing and I, I mean, I worked at every stage of it.  I mean, I'd do the typing, composing, typing it and then we'd run the proof, the galley proofs and then you go through and you, you correct the proof and then you, you lock up the page and I worked with him on it until I learned how to run those huge prints.  We had a Miehle flat-bed press [Miehle Printing Press and Manufacturing Company] and then on the nights that we would go to press, I'd be there, this is after I got into high school [South High School, Youngstown, Ohio].  I would stay and work on the, on press night, and we would run them off and then we would, we'd mail them.  We had a large mailing list and then we also took them [Buckeye Review] around to newsstands and to, to little businesses and barbershops and beauty shops where we would, where we would sell them.  They were, that was our retail outlet and I'd do that on a Friday.  And, but then when you see your column in there, Sports Shorts, by Nathaniel Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones], you know, that was such a great, great feeling.  And so, then you'd get feedback on it, you'd get comment, you know.  People would see something that you've written and they would speak to you about it or they would, I found our folks, black people are not the great letter writers, you know, you don't get a lot of letters to the editor, you get some, but they'll comment to you.  If they see you, they'll tell you and then you know they read it.  And so that was always a very good feeling to, to know that you were impacting people in that way, at least by pointing out and feeding information and being a source of information to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you were following the news pretty close, all the way, everything that was going on pretty much (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You couldn't help but follow it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 339673
Speaker 1: Back to school now.  Did you have any teachers in school that were mentors to you, you know?
Speaker 2: No, well in high school, I was involved in athletics and the coaches, the football coach and the basketball coach became very, they were very kind to me and I became very good friends with them and I went to South High School in Youngstown [Ohio] and I, I was on a football team and we had a city championship team our last year.  The relationship between the coach and me was very good and then I was manager of the basketball team and that's the first time they had a black serving as manager.  That was a, sort of a position of trust where you were handling equipment and it was a very significant, in that world, it was a very significant position.  And these coaches were always very, very kind to me but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played left end--
Speaker 1: Left end, okay.
Speaker 2: --on the football team and it was while I was at South High that I met, first met Paul Brown, the, at the time he was coaching at Massillon High School [Massillon Washington High School, Massillon, Ohio] and he later went on to become coach of The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] team and then after he went to Great Lakes [Great Lakes Naval Training Station, Lake County, Illinois] and, the War [World War II, WWII], and coached that team, he then, he didn't go back to Ohio State.  As you know, he went to Cleveland [Ohio] where the founder of the professional franchise hired him and gave him the name of the team and that's how the Cleveland Browns came into, came into being.  And then I, I was still doing, I was still doing sports for the paper [Buckeye Review].  This is after I'd been in the [U.S. military] service and back and I would, the Cleveland Browns would have two banquets a year and they would invite sports reporters, sports writers, and I was part of the, I was part of the press corps and I would get these invitations, these tickets and I could go to these big events.  The same thing with the Cleveland Indians.  I was able to cover Indians' games.  That's how I met Satchel Paige when I was covering the Cleveland Indians in 1948, I believe it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's when he came--
Speaker 2: --the year they won the World Series.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I was, I had access to the dugout, the dressing room and I was sitting in the dressing room and I wanted to interview him and he was, he was a pretty gruff sort of a person, want to know where I, wanted to know what my name was again and I told him and he said, "Well, where you been?  How come you haven't been around here before?"  I said, well, I, you know, just, he was chastising me because I had been, you know, he felt, he's Satchel Paige and I should have been right there knocking at his door right away, first off, but he was an interesting person and he was very garrulous and he talked to me quite freely and so I had those opportunities to sort of move around and meet people like that but it goes back, again, to this wonderful relationship I had with Mr. Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson].  It just, it just sort of opened all kinds of opportunities and doors for me.
Story_ID: 339674
Speaker 1: Did your grades go up in South High School [Youngstown, Ohio] or--
Speaker 2: Yes, because you knew you had to stay eligible and so you had to work.  You had to, you just had to, if you wanted to stay, if you want to be active, the one to be, be able to participate, you had to, you had to do your homework and do your work and come up, I wasn't a stellar star.  I wasn't coming up with a whole bunch of A's.  I got some A's but I wasn't, I wasn't knocking the ball out of the park on grades.  The one thing I noticed, many of my black classmates and peers were far smarter than I was.  I mean, they were taking tough course, they were taking physics and chemistry, Latin and, you know, the college, the academic courses and they were very smart and many of them helped me but I often, even those who were academically superior and doing, you know who were, who could handle the work, I concluded that the system that we were functioning under was such that it really made them pay a price and those who didn't have a Maynard Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson] to do for them what he was doing for me, with all of their abilities and all of their, the opportunities they had to, I mean what they could do in school in mastering the courses, they, the, I think their aspirations were, were considerably, considerably limited.
Story_ID: 339675
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations in high school [South High School, Youngstown, Ohio] once you, you got your bearings there and you're being mentored by Mr. Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson]?  What did you, did you see yourself going to college or what did you or where (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I knew I was going to go to college.  I mean, that was just, I didn't know how but I knew I was going to college.  And then I went to the [U.S. military] service, just after graduating from high school, I graduated from high school, one month I went right into the service--
Speaker 1: When did you graduate?
Speaker 2: I graduated January of '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's right at the, basically the end of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --almost the end of the war, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: World War I, I mean II [World War II, WWII] and so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, II, yeah.  While the war was over, the war was still going on both in Europe and in, and in the Pacific.  Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died in May of '45 [sic. April 12, 1945], as I recall, because we were on a drill field down in Texas, Sheppard Field, Texas [Sheppard Air Force Base, Wichita County, Texas] and then Truman [President Harry S. Truman] became president and then he dropped the bomb, well then in May, Roosevelt died, Roosevelt died in March, I think it was, and, of '45 [1945], and then in May of '45 [1945], or maybe a few months later, Germany surrendered.  And after Germany surrendered, in August of '45 [1945], that's when Truman dropped the bomb on Hiroshima [Japan] and Japan then capitulated.  Well we were being prepared to go to the Pacific, that was, that was the nature of our training and with the, with that, that just changed the whole thing and we knew that the war was about to end on both, on both ends, both in the Pacific and, of course, after Germany surrendered.
Speaker 1: So you were drafted, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, when, so you did, you were sent to the Pacific, right?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't go, okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't go.  We were, we were getting our orders to go and we were training for it but, then I was transferred to New Jersey and that was a, that was great duty because just across the river from New York and on weekends my buddies and I could go into New York and went up to Harlem [New York, New York] and we could stay overnight in the facilities that they had for, for servicemen, free, and I would go up to Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and watch Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] preach and it was a great, a great time and then, of course, eventually I got discharged and then those G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], I then enrolled in college.
Story_ID: 339676
Speaker 1: Did you interact any with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I was, I interacted with NAACP, of course before I went to [U.S. military] service, in high school [South High School, Youngstown, Ohio].  I was active with NAACP and when I was in the service, I was stationed in Dayton [Ohio] for a while, that was at the air base--
Speaker 1: Wright-Patterson [Wright Field and Patterson Field; Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], right.
Speaker 2: Wright-Pat--yeah, they were a separate bases at the time and--
Speaker 1: You were in the [U.S.] Army Air Corps still?
Speaker 2: Army Air Corps, yeah, brown shoe army, brown shoe army, as they call it.  So, I was, the state NAACP was meeting in Dayton while I was stationed at the air base and Mr. Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson] and this lady I mentioned to you, Miley Williamson, were the top officers of the NAACP for the State of Ohio and they asked me, or Ms. Williamson asked me, would I give a talk while based at the base, would I give a talk to the convention on what the returning Negro serviceman expects and I put together a speech.  I still have it.  It's in the papers that I've given to the university, I've given all my papers to the College of Law [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], and I did this little speech on what G.I.s, what the Negro, what the Negro serviceman expected upon returning from the war [World War II, WWII].  And so my involvement with the NAACP goes back to my, you know, my earliest years.  And then when I, and then I helped form a college chapter at Youngstown College [Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio] and I, and so I attended a state conference meeting in Warren, Ohio and one of the other state college--one of the other college presi- college, youth council presidents, college chapter presidents who was attending that meeting, was a tall gangling guy with a heavy booming voice who had the name Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham] and we met and became friends and were friends until the day he died which is five, six years ago and, as you know, he became a federal judge and he was just a remarkable, remarkable person.
Speaker 1: Yeah, many thought he should have been appointed to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: Abso- absolutely.  Well, Leon and I became friends at that time and maintained this friendship but we met as presidents of our college chapters of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: And that meeting was in, you said--
Speaker 2: It was in Dayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, Jim McGee [James H. McGee] was there.  He was very active with the NAACP at the time.
Speaker 1: All right, James McGee became the mayor of Dayton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --later on.  So these are all--
Speaker 2: He was a good friend of, of Mr. Dickerson.  They were, in fact, that's how I met him, through, through Mr. Dickerson.  He was one of the lawyers that they would use when they had some big civil rights case around the state.
Story_ID: 339677
Speaker 1: Now you didn't tell us how you managed to, why you choose to go to Youngstown State [Youngstown College; Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio].  Were you, did you not want to leave town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Economics--
Speaker 1: Economics, okay.
Speaker 2: --economics primarily, and I had, I had the job with the paper [Buckeye Review].  I had the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] which, you know, that paid for everything and then, plus I got, and that check of seventy-five dollars a month which was huge at that time and so to be able to live at home and then work on the paper, it meant that I would be able to sustain myself so that's why I stayed in Youngstown [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I look back now and I, I mean I'm glad I did, I'm glad I, I think I benefitted from the combination of things that happened to me during that period of time, the rare opportunity to be under the influence and under the tutelage of Mr. Dickerson [J. Maynard Dickerson], working on the paper, being engaged in, in activities that allowed me to meet and sit at the feet of people like Thurgood Marshall and Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] and Constance Baker Motley and others but at the same time I've often wondered what would it have been like to have gone away, lived on a campus, live in a dorm, to me, I think, that would have been just wonderful but there are tradeoffs.  In doing that, I think the, that experience, what substituted for that experience I think was my time in the [U.S. military] service, when I went from high school [South High School, Youngstown, Ohio] directly into the service, where you, I mean where you just sort of, you're uprooted from your home and your environment and you're sent to a far off place, that was, my first base was rural tr- real base was Texas, Sheppard Field, Texas [Sheppard Air Force Base, Wichita County, Texas] and for an eighteen year old kid, you know, who had never been out of Youngstown, that was pretty, pretty traumatic, particularly around the holidays but yet you grew up real fast and I think sometimes, today, I think we've got to consider, not a draft necessarily, but some sort of opportunity for national service, for persons at that age who are unclear of what they want to do but to create a means by which they can move out into a--
Speaker 1: That was one of the Clinton administration's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] ideas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with national service with VISTA [AmeriCorps VISTA], AmeriCorps and all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --when he expanded all of that, I know that, but I think the Republican [U.S.] Congress, you know, never did like it--
Speaker 2: No, no they didn't.
Speaker 1: --and kept cutting it back, so. Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I think it helped say, it's so positive and it could, it really matures young people on an accelerated basis.
Speaker 1: And you take the idea of service and make it other than war.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, you came out in 1950?  Was that it?  Did you come out of the service in '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: No, I came out of service in '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], okay.  So you were only, two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Two years, all right.  Did you go immediately to Youngstown State?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your major in--
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Okay, political science.  That must have been really exciting.  Here you are participating in political science, with the paper, and in an active way meeting all of the black political and civil rights luminaries.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, and you know, it was sort of a matter of course.  I, you've probably heard Dr. Kenneth Clark.  Well, I met him, you know, in the living room of Mr. Dickerson's home.  He was there to speak at a Sunday afternoon meeting and of course in those days when they traveled, they usually had to come in the night before because there wasn't a lot of flying going on.  You came on trains and so the speakers would come in the night before and the hotels weren't that welcoming so the, you know, they'd be put up in homes and Dr. Clark was put up in Mr. Dickerson's home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, when Walter White would come to town, same thing, and I recall many Saturday night, many occasions on Saturday nights, we, they'd have dinner and they'd invite some people in and I'd sit there on a little ottoman and listen to Walter White talk.  He was a person who was very gregarious and garrulous and didn't suffer from any lack of self-esteem.
