Story_ID: 203092
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Leigh Jones, L-E-I-G-H J-O-N-E-S.  However, my legal name is Floyd Leigh-Vester Jones, and that's F-L-O-Y-D L-E-I-G-H hyphen V-E-S-T-E-R J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 22, 1944, Kansas City, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a cosmetologist.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 19, I believe, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time we're in my salon at 112 W. Oak Street in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 203093
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask.  And they only require a short answer.  In fact they only deserve a short answer actually.  And the first question is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well from a medical standpoint it's not a good thing, it's fried.  Anything--I mean my whole philosophy in life is if it's not fried it's not worth eating.  I like Mexican 'cause they fry ice cream.  Seriously.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: A favorite color?  I have two favorite colors, red and black.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time of the year, not particularly.  I like Chicago [Illinois] primarily because the seasons change and at any given moment, any given season, it can be rainy, it can be hot, it can be humid, it can be cold.  I just like the change of the seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: What's that?  A vacation I mean.  I don't really have a favorite vacation destination because I'm not a vacationer in the sense of the word that most people take a two week vacation every year.  I generally work five days a week, 352 days out of the year.  I take three day and four day vacations as a general rule.  I recently went--last month I went to Jamaica for a commercial job that I had to do and I was actually gone nine days.  I hadn't been away from my salon [Leigh Jones Coiffures, Chicago, Illinois] or away from my home for nine days in over twenty years.  So it was a pretty unique experience.  But if I have to say that I have a favorite place to go in the world, that place would--there are two places.  One is Toronto, Ontario, Canada and the other is Paris, France.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There are a lot of Leigh-isms, but I think probably and any of my clients can tell you, probably my most favorite expression is my updated version of the grass is greener which is they're all wonderful 'til they're yours.  And that means dogs, cats, men, women, children, husbands, wives, whatever, they're all great 'til they're in your house.
Story_ID: 203094
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family history.  I want to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Floyd Jones] side of the family.  And we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name to date Florence McDonald Jones Smith.  She was born Florence McDonald in West Memphis, Arkansas. I'm not sure of the date.
Speaker 1: Can you give us some idea maybe or--?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Can you give us some idea of what the--do you have any idea of when it might have been (unclear)?
Speaker 2: What her age is?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think she's seventy-four or seventy-five.  Sorry about that, mom.  I think she's seventy-four or seventy-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was born I believe when she was sixteen years old and I'm fifty-nine years old this year.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  Like a lot of African Americans, my family background is very diverse, my mother's side more so than my father's, in that her mother's mother is a white woman.  My grandmother [Lottie McDonald] says she's not white but she's certainly one of the fairer skinned black people you will ever see with straight hair.  My mother is one of thirteen or fourteen children.  I don't remember--they're all live births with the same father.  No twins or triplets, no multiple births.  My mother is a very strong-willed and very charismatic woman who until about four years ago was in perfect health, never having a cold, never having anything and then she had breast cancer.  And she had lost a sister, the next sister to her to breast cancer in 1960 and she was very much afraid when that happened.  But she's managed to pull through the whole thing great.  She had no problems.  Her doctor says that she's one of the best cancer patients he's ever had.  And I attribute a lot of that to the fact that medical science has improved incredibly since 1960 when her sister died and the fact that she has a loving, caring family, particularly myself who got very involved.  When my mother first said to me that she had cancer, I was packed to go to New York City [New York, New York] for a job.  And I was at the elevator and the phone range and of course like most people the phone rings you're outside the house.  You think do I want to answer that?  I went back, I answered the phone.  She said I have cancer and I said okay and I hung up.  And then I thought well that sounded like my mother but I don't really believe it was her.  So I called her right back and I said, "Hi mom."  She said, "Hi."  I said, "Did you just call me?"  She said, "Yes."  I said, "Did you say you have breast cancer?"  She said, "Yes I do, in the second stage."  I said, "And how do you feel about that?"  She said, "Well I'm very afraid."  And when she said I'm afraid something clicked in me and said well both of us can't be afraid here.  So I brought my bag back inside and I had a brand new computer that I had never used.  I'm really one of those people who are computer illiterate.  But thank god for computers.  I came back in my house, I got on the computer and by the next day which was Monday when I went with my mother to the doctor, one of the nurses actually asked me if I was in the medical profession or if I was a physician because I had so much knowledge and so much information that I had gotten off of the Internet that I was able to help my mother through this really difficult time.  My dad [stepfather, Leon Smith] was of very little use because I think he was very frightened as a lot of men are.  The idea that their wives might die, I think the thought had never occurred to him that she might, something might happen to her.  And I think he was very much taken aback by her illness as evidenced by every doctor appointment we went to, 'cause I went with them for every doctor's appointment.  He would fall asleep in the doctor's office while I went in with her to converse with the doctors.  And it was interesting because at one point the doctor said to me my mother was disrobing after her surgery for an examination.  The doctor said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Leigh] Jones you don't have to leave the room when I examine your wife."  And I said, "Oh yeah, I have to leave the room 'cause she's not my wife, she's my mother.  It's been a long time since I've seen that part of her body."  And he was kind of amazed because my mother's a very beautiful woman and she doesn't look anywhere near her seventy-four years or seventy-five years, whichever it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 203095
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] tell you anything about her growing up?  Did she grow up in West Memphis, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: My mother--when I--when my grandmother [Lottie McDonald] died, probably 1977, I asked my mother when I went to my grandmother's funeral, why did she never talk about her life as a child?  And she said to me because to her the South represented a lot of hard work with nothing to show for it.  And she told my father [Floyd Jones] she would marry him if she would--if he would take her away from the town they lived in which was West Memphis, Arkansas.  Ironically as I said my mother is one of many siblings.  Three of her sisters or possibly even four of them lived within a mile of where they were born and they were all born at home for their whole lives.  They never went anywhere.  But for my mother, just something compelled her to get out of that part of the country and she moved to Kansas City [Kansas] where my father's family was.  Tragically my father died in 1949.  I was four years old.  My mother I believe was somewhere around eighteen, nineteen and what might have been the worst or seemingly at that time a very horrible event, the death of my father, turned out to be one of the defining factors in my life because as a result of my father dying, my mother's sister and her brother, her older sister, one of her older sisters and brother-in-law said to her you come to Chicago [Illinois] and we'll help you raise your kids until you can get yourself in a better position.  And so we moved in Chicago.  Had I stayed in Kansas City, I'm not sure where my life would be, certainly would be a lot different than it is now.  Kansas City is a very different place than Chicago.  I go there regularly.  I went there on a regular basis from the time I was five when we left until I was eighteen.  I spent every summer with my grandparents.  So I knew there as people and not just as my grandparents that somebody talked about.  And Kansas City was a nice place, but obviously it wasn't the place for me.
Story_ID: 203096
Speaker 1: Now, do you know much about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well as I said I spent every summer--
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name and can you give us his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Floyd Jones and he had two brothers and five sisters, six sisters.  And he was I think the fourth from the oldest maybe.  He was four or five years older than my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith].  My mother never talked about my father very much so what I know about my father I know about him from his siblings.  And of course when somebody dies very young at twenty-two or twenty-three years old, they become a saint.  I mean they never did anything wrong.  They never you know, they were the perfect person.  I would like to think that my dad was such but I'm certain that he had his flaws as we all do.  As I said I don't have very many recollections of my father.  He died of something called Bright's disease which was, he was born with something wrong with every major organ of his body.  He was a very good looking man and certainly to look at him you would never know that there was anything physically wrong with him.  But he got a kidney infection and wasn't able to survive that and so he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was from West Memphis [Arkansas] originally too or--?
Speaker 2: From what I understand my mother, as in many families, you know you talk to your mother about your father's family.  One side of the family is different than the other side of the family.  I often would say to my mother, why do you think my father was so different than his brothers and sisters, because he was very different than they.  They smoked, they drank, they danced, they were people.  They had a good time.  My father was much quieter.  He didn't drink, he didn't smoke but he did like to dance and they liked to go out.  And he would dress my mother up every weekend after work and he would take her out on Friday night or Saturday night.  But he was different according from what I understand because he was born sick that at one point my grandmother was told that he was going to die.  The doctor said we can't do anything else for him.  And my paternal grandparents [Georgia Jones and Morris Jones], his grand--his mother was an Indian [Native American], grandmother was an Indian and she said if you give him to me, I can save him.  But you have to give him to me.  And so my father was raised by his paternal grandparents away from his brothers and sisters, which also endeared him even the more to him because they didn't see him that much or that often I guess as they were growing up.  And of course these are only the stories that I know because as a child you know people don't tell you a lot of things.  These are things that I sort of delved into since I've been an adult.  And I think that even in this juncture my mother never talks about my father very much because I think it's still very painful for her what she went through and he suffered a great deal before he died.  And his siblings, especially his sisters have a difficult time talking about it because I guess it's still just too much for them.  So there aren't a lot of details that I have.  It's very sketchy.  I would like sometimes I think to know more, but in the scheme of things, he died and that was the defining factor for my life at that point.  And so I tend to not delve into it too much.
Story_ID: 203097
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we know your mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] re-married a man named Smith, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Leon Smith.
Speaker 2: My mother married a man named Leon Smith who she dated for many, many years before she married.  I was told that she made a deathbed promise to my father [Floyd Jones] that there would be no other men in his children's lives, silly girl.  But she did that and she kept that promise.  My brother [Morris Jones], my sister [Conita Burton] and my mother all got married in the year of 1967.  My sister was married in June, my brother was married September and my mother married November 22nd I believe.  It was the weekend that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated [sic.].  And she married this man Leon Smith.  She had her own house and she called me on the phone and said, "Your mother got married today."  And I said, "Really?  To who?"  And she said, "The first guy that came along and asked."  I said, "And who was that, pray tell?"  And she said, "Leon Smith."  And it was pretty interesting because I at the time thought that my mother would never marry even though she was a very young woman at that time.  She was probably thirty-eight years old, thirty-nine years old.  So my first concern was, he's also the same age or maybe a few months younger.  My first concern was oh my god, she could have more kids.  I could have other brothers and sisters.  So as a wedding present I gave her a gift subscription to TV Guide and a portable TV set, didn't go over very well.  Didn't go over very well but I think at that point that was my very real concern because my mother did tell me that when she was young, she was told by a physician that my father could almost look at her and she could be pregnant and certainly that's evidenced by the fact that she had my brother, my sister and I, we're not three years apart at age.  And with her being one of thirteen or fourteen and my father being one of eleven, it was like do we really want to go down this road?  And I didn't, not that it was my concern and not that it was my business but it--at twenty or twenty-one years old, I don't remember what it was at the time, the idea of having a half-brother or sister just wasn't very appealing to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were--you were raised basically I guess in a household that consisted of your mother, your--
Speaker 2: My brother and my sister.
Speaker 1: --sisters and brothers.
Speaker 2: My brother is a year younger.  My sister is not quite two years younger.
Story_ID: 203098
Speaker 1: Did you live with your aunt and uncle or did you have a separate place?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Did you live with your aunt and uncle or did you, I mean the--well it's, maybe I've got it wrong.  But when you, you moved from Kansas City [Kansas] to Chicago [Illinois] right, when you--in 1949.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And did you all move into your own place when you got in Chicago or did you stay with relatives?
Speaker 2: No.  We moved with my mother's [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] husband--my mother's sister and her husband.
Speaker 1: Right, your aunt and uncle that's what I was--
Speaker 2: They had their own children.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: They had three children, the oldest of whom was probably oh, the oldest of whom was probably ten or eleven and the youngest was my sister's [Conita Burton] age.  So my cousin Delores [ph.] was probably just born or she was one.  But because my mother was only five years older or so than their oldest child, people assumed that the Benfords [ph.], my mother's sister and brother in law, William Benford [ph.] and Zelma Benford [ph.], they assumed in our neighborhood that the Benfords had a lot of kids and they didn't realize there were two families living in one household.  But that was common I think at the time.  Maybe it wasn't discussed as much, but we came and we lived with them and we lived as one family.  So I say that I have five brothers and sisters when actually I have two.  But it's more like five because we lived with them until 1960.  And through my formative years, this man was my father figure, Mose Benford [ph.] and he treated us all equally.  He was a very religious man as is most of my mother's family.  He was very much into the Bible.  He was not very much into organized churches but he had read in the Bible that if a man died that his brother was to take his widow and children and help them until such time as she remarried an so that's what he did.  And it was a fun life.  It was a good life.  I had a lot of people to interact with in one household and we were all very much close together in age except my cousin William who is almost 10 years older than I am.  But the other kids, we were you know 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 so we were very close together and had a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 203099
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what neighborhood did you live in, in Chicago [Illinois] when you got here?
Speaker 2: When we first moved to Chicago we were living in an area called Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] and that's 95th Street, just west of State Street.  I think the first grade school I went to in Chicago was Gillespie Elementary School [Gillespie Technology Magnet Cluster School, Chicago, Illinois].  And then in 1950 or 50--'51 [1951] or '52 [1952], we moved to 6954 S. Prairie [Avenue] which is in Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois].  It was an integrated neighborhood and mostly all single-family dwellings, no apartment buildings.  We had a yard and a garage and it was the normal childhood growing up.  I went to several elementary schools; to Park Manor Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], to St. Columbanus [School, Chicago, Illinois], which was a Catholic school because the teachers determined that I needed to be in a better school than public schools.  And my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] being widowed, I mean she worked every day.  She worked--my mother worked seven days a week, sometimes sixteen hours a day.  I owe so much or all of what I am really to my mother and her caring and her sacrifice that she made.
Story_ID: 203100
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a hairdresser or she became a hairdresser when she moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And then her brother who worked I believe as a waiter at the Palmer House [Chicago, Illinois], opened a restaurant.  So with her younger brother, herself, her older sister that we lived with and her brother who also, my Uncle Jim [ph.] was never married, he never married, he never dated, he never went out, his whole life was his business which was that restaurant.  And it was called the--at first it was called Jimmy's Restaurant [Chicago, Illinois].  It was at 1116 East 63rd Street.  And the interesting thing about that was that 63rd Street was the real hub of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] at that time.  There--it was a very busy street between Cottage Grove and--or between South Park and Stony Island.  There were great businesses and nightclubs and restaurants and floral businesses and it was an interesting life.  I met a lot of people, the Reverend [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur] Brazier who is now the head of Apostolic Church [of God, Chicago, Illinois] was involved with TWA [sic. TWO, The Woodlawn Organization] and it's inception of [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson and Muhammad Ali I would see on this street.  He would be walking along with his entourage.  The South Side was full of a lot of illustrious and colorful people.  I knew Mahalia Jackson as a child growing up.  She belonged to our church.  She was a member of our church which was Antioch [Missionary] Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  Before it split was the Salem Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] and then the two churches split and she stayed with the other factor.  But it was a great life living on the South Side in the '50s [1950s] and--growing up in the '60s [1960s].  63rd Street was a very diverse area.  It was whites, there were a lot of Cubans.  I couldn't understand how people as dark as me were speaking a foreign language.  I was like what are they talking?  They don't speak English.  I didn't understand what Cuban was.  And of course then after I studied and found out and I learned to speak Spanish.  I used to speak fluent Spanish but of course when you don't use it after a long period of time you lose it.  And now I'm in the process of trying to regain that.  I'm taking classes in Spanish.  But--
Speaker 1: Now I didn't know that, that there were a lot of Cubans on the South Side.
Speaker 2: Oh there were a lot of Cubans at 63rd Street.  I don't know why that was an area for them to come into.  But possibly it had something to do with the university because the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] is situated in the middle of that area.  Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]--Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] runs, goes into Hyde Park at about 59th Street I think or maybe 61st Street, somewhere in there.  But it was a very diverse, racially a very diverse area and my uncle owned this restaurant called Jimmy's Restaurant and all these people would come in.  And my mother worked there, it was open 24 hours a day.
Speaker 1: And that was like 63rd and what was the cross--?
Speaker 2: 1116 East 63rd Street.  It was between Greenwood [Avenue] and University [Avenue].  And directly across the street was a restaurant that people knew well.  It was called Alexander's.  They were Greek.  As a matter of fact, Demetri Alexander who was the younger son of the owner and I are friends today and it took us not too long to figure out that we had grown up working in restaurants right across the street, literally across the street from one another.
Speaker 1: Is that the same Alexander's that's now at 79th [Street] near the Lake [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: That was at 79th Street and he now owns a restaurant.  I think it's Butterfield 8 [Chicago, Illinois].  He's been a restaurateur all of his life.
Story_ID: 203101
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we always ask this question. What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of--?
Speaker 1: Growing up?
Speaker 2: Well sights and sounds and smells, that's--like most kids I was inquisitive.  I mean there were more smells probably because I, as soon as I got big enough to stand on Coke [Coca-Cola] crates, I wanted to work in the [Jimmy's] Restaurant.  I wanted to be where the adults were.  I always liked older people.  I always preferred to be with older people so the first chance I got, I was more than happy to go down there and be the dishwasher.  I had dishpan hands for a lot of years.  And the sounds were just the sounds of the city [Chicago, Illinois], the "L" [elevated train] track running overhead.  I recently went to 63rd Street and I was shocked.  The "L" now stops at South Park.  It doesn't go all the way to--or what was South Park is now [S] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive.  It doesn't run all the way to Stony Island anymore.  But there was a constant clacking of the "L" trains.  The streets were bustling with people every day of the week and certainly on the weekends between the movie theaters and the nightclubs and the restaurants and the shoe stores and the clothing stores and the fast food restaurants.  I remember one of the first White Castles I ever went to was on the corner of 63rd and [S] Evans [Avenue].  And a sack of hamburgers, I think eight were like 96 cents.  That really sticks in my head for some reason.  And the first McDonald's that was ever in the City of Chicago [Illinois] was actually on 71st [Street] and [S] Vincennes [Avenue] and my uncle wouldn't let us eat there because he was convinced that for 19 cents, it couldn't be real meat.  That it had to be something else.  So we were forbidden from eating in McDonald's and of course McDonald's was not too far from school and all the kids went there and that's where we wanted to go.  I think the interesting thing about growing up in the '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s], it's very strange when you talk about your past because you realize that life was very, very different than life is now.  There were no carry out restaurants.  There weren't pizza parlors.  There weren't--McDonald's was it for the franchises and White Castle was there.  But you know you didn't have all the other places that people now get food from, KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] and Burger King and you know all the different fast food restaurants.  They just, they didn't exist and so most people cooked.  Most people were home and so our house always smelled of food.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] is a great baker and she still bakes till this day.  She bakes here for the salon [Leigh Jones Coiffures, Chicago, Illinois].  We have cake here, homemade cakes every week and I have her baking cakes for other people to keep her busy and because people want the product that she makes.  But it was a very interesting.  It was a very interesting life, not like most of my friends because most of my friends didn't work.  I mean they went to school and they went home.  I went to school, I went home, did my homework and then went to the restaurant and they would let me stay there for a while.  And like I said I was happy to be there and happy to wash the dishes and happy to do whatever I had to do.  In the process I learned to cook and at that point everyone in our family worked in that restaurant.  I think there were only two people that worked there--and it was 24 hours a day--I think there were only two people that worked there who were not family members and one of them was the main cook.  Her name was Martha [ph.], but of course her name was Aunt Martha even though she wasn't really related to us.  And she was a phenomenal cook.  She could make anything.  And from her I learned to make I mean the staples of my life today, homemade biscuits and omelets and frying chicken and meatloaf and mashed potatoes, I mean basic foods I learned to make, cornbread.  I learned to do all those things as a child in this restaurant and I'm really grateful for that because it's--comfort food is just that, comfort and it's great to be able to take care of yourself.
Story_ID: 203102
Speaker 1: Sir, tell us about your childhood activities.  What did you like to do and what kind of a little boy were you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Mischievous.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] said if she could have just removed why from my vocabulary.  Everything with me was why, was very inquisitive.  I wanted to know why, everything.  And, but I was an artistic child.  I had an aunt, my mother's sister who died of cancer, her name was Annabelle Matlock [ph.].  And Annabelle was an extremely beautiful woman and she was an actress, aspiring actress and model but she was very, very fair skinned and she looked like--people compare her photograph to Lena Horne or Dorothy Dandridge.  She was much prettier.  But she was too light to really be identified as black and she was too--hear features were just too black to pass for white, which she never had any intentions of doing.  But she was the person who sought to elevate all the children and educate all the children in the family.  She had no children of her own.  And she had a [Cleo Johnson] School of Charm and Modeling [Chicago, Illinois] on East 71st Street and we went there every Saturday.  And we took classes in speaking and classes in walking and classes in manners, of course classes in modeling clothes.  And she was the one who deiced that she would mentor me.  That I was the artistic child out of the group that needed special mentoring if you will.  And so she took me to--it was her who took me to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  It was she who took me to Lyon & Healy [Chicago, Illinois] and, for my music lessons and paid for them and got me a piano.  She was the person who always pushed me and pushed me towards my artistic side more than the intellectual side.  As a child I was considered extremely bright at that time.  There weren't the accelerated schools and accelerated classes that there are now and so I ended up getting what they call double promotions and I ended up being in school in grades with kids that are older than myself.  Today I think most people realize that's not exactly a healthy thing because by the time I got to high school, I graduated high school [Westcott Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], I was fifteen.  At that age--
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: --other people were dating, they were going out.  I couldn't do those things because I was living at home with a younger brother [Morris Jones], a younger sister [Conita Burton] and a mother who was very strict about going out.  And because I was the older of the other two children, I always had to be there to take care of my brother and sister or to you know be the older person in the house.  It never occurred to me that that was, that I was repressed socially but in many ways I was because of the fact that as I said I was much younger than most of the people in my class.  And I was very lucky that there were people who took me under their wing and were kind to me, were benevolent to me and helped me get through those times because it was very difficult being younger than everyone else in the class, having people think you were an egghead, you know having people make fun or people not wanting to hang out with you so to speak.
Story_ID: 203103
Speaker 1: Did you read a lot?
Speaker 2: I read an awful lot, but I played sports even though I was too little to play sports.  I was, I--anyone who knows me now knows that my passion in life is football.  Nothing comes between me and a football game.  My Sundays are spent all day watching football.  I never leave the house except to walk the dog and many, many people have thought they could break that tradition only to find it doesn't happen under any circumstances.  My beloved Uncle Mose [ph.] died during a football game and my brother [Morris Jones] called me from the hospital and said you know our uncle has died.  You need to, you know we're meeting at the hospital.  And I said to him, okay.  And he said okay.  And I said yeah.  He said well aren't you coming here?  And I said, well I'll see you at home.  He said you can't stop watching the football game to come to the hospital?   I said but you just said he's dead so there's nothing I can do.  I'll see you at home.  That's maybe not something that I'm proud of, but the bottom line was, I was in the middle of a football game and I couldn't do anything to help him.  And why would I want to go hold hands with my family and cry?  I'd rather watch my football game and then go cry later and that's exactly what I did.
Speaker 1: Are you a [Chicago] Bears fan or it doesn't matter what--?
Speaker 2: I am a Bears fan.  I guess I'm a diehard Bears fan.  But for the sake of not being miserable for the last few seasons, I have other teams that get a little more of my loyalty than the Bears.  And we're not going to get into that because I have real ideas about why and the problem with the situation with the Bears.  But of course that's every Monday morning quarterback coach, whatever.
Speaker 1: Well maybe we can get into that later.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Maybe we can get into that later about the Bears, but--
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure.  But as I said I played football but they wouldn't let me play on any teams.  I played basketball.  I was really pretty good but I was much smaller than everybody else.
Story_ID: 203104
Speaker 1: And I had a terrible, terrible temper, terrible.  I mean I would fight at the drop of a hat.  I had an awful temper.  I really had to work very difficult--I had a very difficult time.  I had to work very hard at getting past my temper.  It was way, way, way out of control for a lot of years.  I didn't swear and I didn't--but I'd fight in a minute.  And I mean I'm lucky--
Speaker 2: You don't seem like a person who would--
Speaker 1: I'm lucky I didn't get my brains beat out or my face bashed in.  But I never did.  I mean I always managed to hold my own but--and I was usually the one that always started the fight.  It wasn't that somebody else started a fight with me.  I remember as a child I went to an elementary school.  When gangs first started on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] there was a gang called the Egyptian Cobras and they were in our school some of them.  I'm not going to mention the names of the people 'cause I still remember them very, very well.
Speaker 2: What school was this at?
Speaker 1: This was at Charles S. Deneen [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], which was, it was a very--it was probably the first of the magnet type schools in Chicago.  And the kids there would get beat up by the gang kids.  They would beat you up and take your lunch money.  Lunch money was like 37 cents or 45 cents or something like that you paid for lunch.  And I would never give them my lunch money and they would threaten to beat me up.  And I would, I just wouldn't give it to them.  And once they chased me home and I remember very calculatingly running towards my house knowing that our neighbor two houses down was about to install a new brick walk and she had a whole pile of bricks in front of her house.  So when I ran around the corner, they were chasing me, I ran behind the pile of bricks.  And when they came around the corner I started throwing bricks at them.  I think they finally decided that I was crazy and I was really nuts and I was a little too much to handle and so they never bothered me.  I'm one of the few kids who didn't give them their lunch money.  I was never accosted by them--
Story_ID: 203105
Speaker 1: Every summer my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] sent us to Kansas City [Kansas] as I said so we never had a chance, my brother [Morris Jones] and I, to get involved in any kind of gang activity or any kind of radical things that kids get into, young kids and teenagers get into because we weren't in Chicago [Illinois].  And Kansas City at that time was a very small town by comparison to Chicago.  It was a place that was more country like than it was urban and--
Speaker 2: So you'd stay with your paternal grandparents [Georgia Jones and Morris Jones] in Kansas City or--?
Speaker 1: Right.  And we stayed there, we went--my mother picked us up on the last day of school and it was usually a half-day of school.  She picked us up, put us on the Santa Fe train, our grandparents picked us up at the other end in Kansas City.  Sometimes she would go with us and she'd stay a week or so with my sister [Conita Burton].  She never allowed my sister to stay in Kansas City, but my brother and I stayed there every year.  And then she would come home and we would go, my grandparents would take us shopping for our school supplies and school clothes and then they'd send us home and the next day school started.  So literally there was never one minute that when school was out for the summer that my brother and I were available for anything.  We were in a small town.  Now unbeknown to my mother, a lot of things happened in that small town that she probably wouldn't have appreciated either.  I saw a couple of people murdered right in front of me.  A lot of people drank alcohol which was something I never saw at home because nobody in my mother's family drinks.  It was just--and we lived in a household--I sometimes tend to be amazed at how people run their homes today but I tend to run my business and try to run my life the same way.  There are some things that are just unspoken and in our house that's the way it was.  If you didn't see it happening you didn't do it and if you didn't see it done, not only did you not do it, you didn't ask about it.  So there was no smoking, there was no drinking, there was no swearing.  I remember at one point somebody commented about what kind of a family are you that nobody does anything?  But it just wasn't allowed.  It just--that wasn't--my mother even today if you were to start, if you were to swear in my mother's house she would go and open the front door.  She wouldn't say anything to you but she'd go and hold the front door open which means take it out of here.  And so our friends didn't smoke.  I have friends who smoked and I had friends who drank.  I never did.
Story_ID: 203106
Speaker 1: I was one of those people who when the expression came, the old expression, everybody else does it, that was absolutely--if you wanted me not to do something, if you really wanted me not to do it, tell me everybody else did and you could be sure it's the last thing that would ever happen.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] used to say to my brother [Morris Jones] and myself, if I ever have to come to the police station to get either one of you they'd better tell me that you were the ring leader, that you were not following somebody else 'cause if you follow somebody else and get in trouble you're in even bigger trouble.  If you get in trouble on your own that's okay, but if you follow somebody you're in big trouble when you get home.  And so I was always kind of not a follower ever.  I was always just sort of marching to my own drum and my brother is very much the same way, very much the same way.  He's a minister today.  He is a doctor of divinity.  And he is the vice president of a religious school in Indianapolis, Indiana.  He's a terrific guy, a really terrific guy.  He's got four kids and grandchildren and served in Vietnam [Vietnam War], three or four tours of duty in Vietnam.  By the time he got out of the service I was too old to go into the service.  I was actually drafted and I was real concerned about it 'cause I thought, "How am I going to tell my mother?  How am I going to deal with this?"  And my brother said to me, "Well you don't have to worry you're not going."  And I said, "What do you mean I don't have to worry, I'm not going?"  He said, "You're not going, trust me."  And I said, "Well what are you talking about?"  He says, "They aren't going to take you into the [U.S.] Army."  And I said, "Well why?"  He said, "Because I joined the [U.S.] Marines several months ago."  I'm like, "What do you mean you joined the Marines?"  At that time the Marines had a program, it was called the Buddy-Buddy program [sic. Buddy Deal].  And if you joined with your buddy, supposedly you stayed with them through basic training and you stayed with them you know you stayed as a unit when you went to the war.  So the whole wrestling team at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] where he went joined the Marines.  My brother, my--the man who became my sister's [Conita Burton] husband and several of their friends all joined the Marines together.  As a result of the Sole Surviving Son's Act, the two of us couldn't be in the service at the same time because we were the only two male members of the family.  So because he had been enlisted in the Marines my draft came after he had enlisted.  They rescinded my draft and I never went to the war.  It was a very disturbing part of my life because I don't often get into the older child syndrome, the big brother syndrome.  But I didn't want my little brother, my little brother a year younger than me, I didn't want my brother to go into the service.  I really didn't.  I was afraid for him.  I wasn't afraid for myself but I was afraid for him.  And I was always that kind of brother.  I was always that kind of person.  I'm still that kind of person.  If I can help someone avoid physical pain or emotional pain, I always tend to think that I can handle something better than maybe somebody else.  Not always the case because as I've learned now as I've grown older, people are capable of handling a lot of things that you sometimes think they're not.  So everybody has to pull their own load.  But when I was a child I always tried to protect my brother and protect my sister and protect my mother from harm of any kind.
Story_ID: 203107
Speaker 1: I was saying that when you were growing up in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], the Civil Rights Movement was starting to really rise you know with the activities in Alabama and Mississippi and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin] King [Jr.] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Council] and all--I mean how did that affect your family?  Did you have relatives down there that were involved in the struggle or did you--?
Speaker 2: Well I belonged to the Antioch [Missionary] Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] which was Reverend W.N. Daniel, Wilbur Nathan Daniel.  He was a black man who was the pastor of our church but he looked like a white man.  And I was very active in my church.  I was very active in the Northwood River District [Association].  I was very interested, active in all of the social aspects of the church.  The church was the place that we went to play.  The church was the place that taught us to pray.  The church was the place that taught us to be real people.  The church was the place where we learned to publicly speak and not be afraid.  I saw Martin Luther King.  I marched with Martin Luther King in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I'll never forget.  I went to a basically all white high school in Chicago [Illinois].  I was one of the first black people to go to what was Westcott Vocational High School and is now Simeon High School [sic. Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  And I had to walk down the alley to get to the school because the neighborhood was white.  And if I walked down the street people would throw rocks at me.  I never took offense to that so I went down the alley.  I just you know--I try to avoid trouble wherever I can and I went down the alley.  I never really can say that I had racial slurs.  I mean the kids in the school weren't a problem.  It were the people, it was the people in the neighborhood.  Nobody ever called me out of my name in school.  Nobody ever tried to beat me up because I was different than them.  That sort of thing just didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Was that the frontier then of the black community, like where Simeon is then?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: --going west was that like the western kind of boundary of the black community then, right across the Dan Ryan [Expressway]?
Speaker 2: I think it was.  The street is [S] Vincennes [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And once you got past oh, probably 75th Street, you were in a different neighborhood altogether.  West of Vincennes and south of 75th Street were sort of the boundaries.  But in the civil rights era, it was difficult to grow up.  Like most people one of the defining moments in my life and one of the things that I still have a problem with in race relations was the death of Emmett Till.  I was a very young boy.  Maybe I was 9, 8, 9 years old when he was murdered and like everyone I was shocked.  But when I saw what he looked like in the Jet magazine, it made me afraid of some people and I had never been afraid before.  It made me have a lot of anxiety about being around people that were different than I was.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] had always brought me up to believe that you didn't go where other people didn't want you.  And unfortunately for her that was never, that didn't really stick with me too well because my idea was I'm going where I want to go.  But the death of Emmett Till had a great impact on me as it did on a lot of other people.
Story_ID: 203108
Speaker 1: When I first came to work Near North [Chicago, Illinois] in the beauty salon I worked in, one of the beauty salons I worked in, the salons were privatized.  They had privatized booths and you had to go in this booth and close the curtain.  Well it never occurred to me when I came to work Near North the majority of women were white.  There weren't any black women working in there and--or coming in there as patrons.  That wasn't my concern even though I had gone to a beauty school [American School of Beauty Culture, Chicago, Illinois] where they told me initially they didn't want me because they didn't know why I would want to learn how to do hair in their school when no white woman would ever let me touch them.  And I said to them well obviously you don't know your history because hairdressers historically were the house slaves.  Those were black people.  So it means that you know back in the days of Scarlett O'Hara and all the others with the (unclear) curls and the--they were black people doing that, not white people.  So I had no concerns about what I wanted to do, but they didn't want me in that school.  And as a result, I went to the American School of Beauty Culture in Des Plaines [Illinois] because they wouldn't allow me to go to their school on Wabash Avenue.  And once I went to the Des Plaines school, I took a train there and three buses every day, one of the teachers finally said to me, this is ridiculous.  Transfer to the downtown school.  You're already now a part of our system and they can't throw you out.  And then that's what I did.  But as I started to say, when I first worked in the salon, Darrell Whitten [Inc., Chicago, Illinois], they had these privatized booths and you would go in there and close the curtain.  In the back of my mind was always Emmett Till and I just, I told them when I first came there and they offered me a job.  And I said but I can't go in one of those little rooms.  I want to work out in the front where everybody can see me and where I can see everybody.  And they said but you know this is how we do it.  I said well I really won't work like that.  I can't work like that.  And I lied.  I said I was claustrophobic.  I wasn't claustrophobic but what I was afraid of was going into a room with a white woman.  I was young and closing the curtains and god forbid she would say I did something and then I would have myself, find myself in trouble.
Story_ID: 203109
Speaker 1: Now you were about eleven I guess when--
Speaker 2: I was twenty.
Speaker 1: No, eleven when--
Speaker 2: I was twenty.
Speaker 1: --Emmett Till was killed in '55 [1955] I think.
Speaker 2: When Emmett Till was murdered I was--19 when, '55?
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], you would have been--
Speaker 2: I was ten.
Speaker 1: Okay, ten years old.
Speaker 2: I was ten.  I was ten.  I would have been eleven that, the end of that--yeah I was ten.
Speaker 1: Were you living--?
Speaker 2: It had a strong impact on, very strong like most people a very strong impact on me.  I couldn't believe that anybody could be so mean and so calloused and so evil as to do something like that to a child for something as simple as whistling at a white woman.
Speaker 1: Did you see the body?
Speaker 2: Did I see the actual physical body, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  But I saw it in the magazines.  I never actually saw the physical body.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] is one of those people who would not allow--she wouldn't allow that kind of thing.  I think she would have, I think if she could have kept the magazine from me she would have but it wasn't possible for her to do that.
Speaker 1: Was that Jet or--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I was an avid reader of Jet magazine so I read it in Jet.
Story_ID: 203110
Speaker 1: Now kind of walk us through, I want to take you back to grade school.  If you could just walk us through the school that--you started at Gillespie [Elementary School; Gillespie Technology Magnet Cluster School, Chicago, Illinois] on--out near Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Did you start at Gillespie School out near Princeton Park when you started grade school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then from there we moved to 69th and Prairie [Avenue] and I went to Park Manor [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] and then that's when they said you know he needs special education.  He needs to be in a better school than a public school.  And so I went to St. Columbanus [School, Chicago, Illinois].  Ironically after a couple of years there they kicked me out because my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] wouldn't--they wanted my mother to take catechism and the idea I guess was to--somebody in the family had to take really just instruction.  I think the idea was to try to convert some people to Catholicism and because my mother worked, the hours that she worked it wasn't possible.  So they kicked me out of Catholic School.  They kicked me out of Catholic School and I went to Charles S. Deneen [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where is Deneen at?
Speaker 2: Deneen School is at 72nd [Street] and Wabash Avenue.  And at that time the property behind there was just streets.  During the '50s [1950s] while I was going to school there, they built the Dan Ryan Expressway.  And then that became the great divide between you know one side of town to the other.
Speaker 1: Did that divide--
Speaker 2: For our neighborhood anyways.
Speaker 1: --black and white basically?
Speaker 2: Right.  Black people had just started to move on the other side of that particular point.  A couple of my friends lived there but that expressway became a big, I mean it was a big deal.  And it was a wide expressway so it literally was like a division.  The--ironically, the McDonald's was on the west side of the expressway on Vincennes [Avenue] and so you had to, I mean you had to go there.  Like I said I couldn't go there because my uncle strictly and very, he was very adamant about no, you may not go there and eat.
Speaker 1: Is that the McDonald's at 69th [Street] and, I guess right across on the west side of the Dan Ryan that you go through?
Speaker 2: It was 71st [Street] at that time.  I think they moved it.
Speaker 1: 71st Street, okay.
Speaker 2: They moved it I think afterwards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's one on 69th now.
Speaker 2: But that was the first one.  But--and they were immensely popular.  I mean they did a lot of business and of course here was a school there so there were a lot of kids.  And then close to there was also another school, Yale Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], there were a lot of kids there so it became a hangout for the kids to go to.  Like I said, I couldn't hang because I had to go home every day with my brother [Morris Jones] and sister [Conita Burton] and--
Story_ID: 203111
Speaker 1: Well that area has like a '50s [1950s] kind of demeanor about it.  There's like a Fred and Jack's [Chicago, Illinois] drive-in over there.  It looks like it's an old remnant or something from the '50s [1950s].  Do you remember that or I mean something from the other restaurants--?
Speaker 2: Well like I said, it's kind of interesting because when you think that you were--before all these franchises you know in your mind what was everybody, how, what were people eating?  How were people eating?  But in those days people cooked.  People cooked.  You had to be home for dinner at a certain time.  You had to be at the dinner table and there was no excuse for not being--I mean if you were supposed to be at home at 4:30, we're having dinner at 5:30, you were home at 5:30.  You were not calling home and saying--I laugh calling, everybody has a phone now.  My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith]--I had--I liked penny loafers or what they call penny loafers, they were loafers.  And everybody's loafers had pennies in them.  My loafers had dimes in them because my mother would say I don't want to hear any excuse that I didn't have a dime.  You didn't have a dime to call home.  So I had dimes in my shoes so I had no excuse for not being home and not being late because there were phones on the street and I could call and that was her way of making sure that I didn't say I didn't have a dime to make a phone call because you were in big trouble if you didn't get home by dinner time, big trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But dinners were great because we all talked about what we did and what our day was like.  And I never forget once I made the comment I was--the adults were talking about something and as I said I always liked being with older people.  So the adults were having a discussion and I chimed in with something and my uncle said to me, "You weren't asked for that opinion."  And I said, "But I have an opinion."  He said in this job, "When you have a job you have an opinion, not until."  And I never forgot that because I was the only kid who ever even attempted you know to do that.  He says, "When you have a job in this house, that's when you have an opinion, not until."
Story_ID: 203112
Speaker 1: Now through grade school, were there any teachers or mentors that emerged that helped you?
Speaker 2: Oh like most kids I remember certain teachers. I remember certain teachers who were--I mean high school--grade school but high school especially for most teens is a tumultuous time.  I mean it's a time of self-discovery.  It's a time of discovery of the others in the world around you.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Westcott [Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You went to Westcott High School?
Speaker 2: I went to Westcott Vocational High School.
Speaker 1: And that is now Simeon Vocational, right?
Speaker 2: Right, but I also went to Hirsch [Metropolitan] High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I went to two high schools at once.  I went to Hirsch in the summers and I went to Westcott Vocational High School during the school year.  And the reason for that was I was always good with my hands.  I was always able to do things.  If I saw somebody do something and I wanted to do it, I knew that I could.  I'm just, I'm ambidextrous.  I used to be a left-handed writer and that was very much discouraged when I was a child.  They didn't want anybody writing with their left hand.  I still can write with my left hand.  I still do a lot of things with my left hand.  But it was discouraged.  And I remember my third grade teacher, Ms. Grayson [ph.] especially, she was very determined that I was not going to be left-handed.  And then I remembered there was a teacher Ms. Tabman [ph.] in high school who had--who really didn't have a problem with it except she said I didn't write legibly.  I'd find she would, she could always tell and sometimes I would do it just to try to see if she could tell the difference and of course she always could.  But as I said it's a time of self-discovery.  There are so many things that go on in high school, so many things that you remember. I once went to a school, my most vivid memory of school.  I went to a school where there was a teacher who didn't like black children.  It was the [William G.] Beale Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].  And I'll never forget, we had just moved into a neighborhood where it was an integrated neighborhood.  And my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] moved into a building with another sister and her husband, Mildred [ph.] and James Hightower [ph.] and they had small children and we went to this Beale elementary school.  We lived in different apartments.  We lived on the second floor and they lived on the third or vice versa.  We went to this school.  We'd only been there a couple of days.  My mother was one of those people that even though she worked 12, 16 hours a day, 7 days a week, she came up to school on a regular basis.  She'd come home and you'd think she was going to bed.  You'd go to school and you look up and you'd see your mother in the doorway and go oh.  You know how kids do.  It's like oh god it's my mother again.  What does she want?  And so she came up to school one day and she was talking to the teacher and he was very abrupt with her. And she finally said to him, "Do you have a problem with my child?"  And he said to be quite frank, "I'd rather teach monkeys to teach your children."  And she said, "I see."  So the next thing I see is my mother--now she's a young woman.  My mother is making a motion at the door for me.  I come outside.  She said, "Do you know where your brother [Morris Jones] is?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "Do you know where your sister [Conita Burton] is?"  I said, "Yes." She went to my brother's room and my sister's room.  By this time the teacher had brought the principal up and the principal said to her, "What do you think you're doing?"  She said, "I'm taking my kids out of your school."  And he said, "You can't do that.  Your kids have to go to school."  She said, "Yeah they have to go to school but they don't have to go to this school."  And she removed us from that school and we moved.  I mean we moved, huge expense, we just moved--
Story_ID: 203156
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school [Westcott Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?  What was high school like for you?
Speaker 2: Well the other thing that happened in high school was in those days Chicago [Illinois] had boundaries for where you could go to school.  So my problem was I lived at 69th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue].  I lived on the wrong side of what was South Park, now [S] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive to go to the school I really wanted to go to which was Hirsch [Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  You could go to Parker [High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].  You could go to Chicago Vocational High School [Chicago Vocational Career Academy (CVS), Chicago, Illinois].  You could go to--I can't remember the other school.  But at any rate, my brother [Morris Jones] and sister [Conita Burton] both went to Parker and I wanted to go to vocational high school but I didn't want to go to CVS.  I wanted to go to a smaller school.  CVS was a huge school and it still is.  And so I chose to go to Westcott Vocational High School and as I said I went to Hirsch High School in the summers because I was told that if I went to a vocational high school I'd never get into college because I wouldn't have the college prerequisites.  So I went to Hirsch High School and took classes that I couldn't get at Westcott Vocational High School.  I did that for four years.  But I chose a vocational high school because as I said I was very handy with my hands and I liked to do things and I'm very grateful today for the education that I got in that high school because as a result I took print shop, I took auto shop, I took electric shop, I took architectural drafting which came in very handy at one point when my family was redoing the [Jimmy's] Restaurant.  I drafted all the plans for the new restaurant in scale because I took architectural drafting.  And so I--they let me do all of that stuff.  I can install lights and deal with electricity.  I'm not afraid of it 'cause I know the basics of electricity.  I can handle my car myself.  I mean there are a lot of things that are everyday people skills that you learn in those schools that you don't learn in other schools.  And so I'm very grateful for the education that I got there.  And as a result of going to Hirsch High School I had different groups of friends because there were people at Hirsch High School that I'd see you know they were in the neighborhood, I saw them.  I just didn't go to school with them during the regular school year.  Then the ones who went in the summer I went to summer school with and during the regular school year I went to Westcott Vocational High School.  And I didn't have a lot of--I made a couple of friends.  One of my friends Stephan Vaughn [ph.] is my lifelong friend.  I mean we've known each other since grade school.  He's the oldest friend I have in the world and I love him a lot.  He's a terrific guy.  He is also now a cosmetologist.  He owns a salon in the Loop.  But at one point I actually think my brother was almost jealous of my relationship with him because we were so close and we were so tight.  But in high school you know kids tend to gravitate to their own groups and subsequently you know your brother's friends usually are your friends and your sister's friends definitely are your friends.  So we all had our separate lives going as teenagers and it was as normal as you know as anybody's.  I remember my sixteenth birthday they wanted to surprise me with a birthday party or fifteenth birthday.  And we lived in a two story house.  Our bedrooms were on the second floor and we had what we called a rec [recreation] room in the basement.  It was a finished basement and it had a bar, not that there was ever any alcohol ever in there.  And it was all fixed up and there was a TV and there were places to sit and play you know games.  And my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] said to me, "I'm having a problem with the washing machine.  Would you go downstairs and help me out?"  So I went down the stairs and the basement was divided into two parts: one quarter was the utility room and then the other three quarters were the--was the rec room.  So I went down there to see what was going on with the washing machine and I heard a noise in the other room so I opened the door.  And when I opened the door all these people jumped up and yelled surprise.  I turned around, ran up the stairs, ran out the front door and I think I was on 71st Street by the time my brother caught me.  They scared the hell out of me.  And nobody's ever tried to surprise me since because I'm just--I say my motto now is the best surprise is no surprise.  I don't like surprises.  I like everything to be--of course that's when people say well you're a control freak.  You can call it whatever you want, I don't like to be surprised.  It's just not the way I like things to happen.  I want to know what's coming.  I want to know what's happening.  I want to know what my options are and what the possibilities are.  And if that doesn't happen, usually I don't get involved in something.
Story_ID: 203157
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in high school [Westcott Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] were you--I mean as a teenager what kind of music did you like or did you like music a lot or did you, or television--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I liked the music that most teenagers liked.  As I said my father [Floyd Jones], I was told would rather dance than eat and I was the same kind of kid.  I'd rather--I mean I knew every dance that was out.  I mean you know you did the Boogaloo and the Frog and the Jerk and the dances that we--The Four Corners, all the dances that the kids did, you know I knew all those dances.  We--Motown was the big influence of you know it was The Supremes and The O'Jays and the Commodores.  I mean it was all about music for me.  I played piano.  I played the organ.  I really enjoyed playing the organ more than I enjoyed playing the piano. My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] said it's 'cause I like anything that's noisy.
Speaker 1: Did you play in church at all?
Speaker 2: So I played in church [Antioch Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] but they stopped me from playing in church because they said I was giving them too much Jimmy Smith and I was kind of offended by that.  And actually they took me in the deacon's room and they got on their knees to pray for me, help this boy understand he's not supposed to be playing this kind of music in church.  And while they were on their knees, I got up and walked out of the room.  So I'm told they were quite surprised when they got up off their knees.  I mean that was the way they did things.  Here are twenty men on their knees around a table and a table with me sitting at the head of it and they're praying for me that I'm some demon because I'm playing this you know music that they think is too jazzy for church.  Hmm, you should see what goes on at my church now!  But then they didn't like it and I walked out of the room and I never played for church ever again since, ever.  And in a way I was annoyed and probably in the back of my mind I think had it not been for that, I might have been a musician because music was really my love when I was a teenager.  And I really, I was a good musician but they didn't like what I was playing and I did.  Actually at one point they put a lock on the church organ because they said we don't want that boy in there banging on the organ.  Antioch is a very large church in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  We don't want that boy banging on that church, banging on our church organ.  Well they didn't understand first of all an organ is not like a piano.  You can bang on it until it falls apart.  That has nothing to do with how it actually functions because an organ is an electronic instrument not like a piano with strings and whatever.  You can blow a bulb but you can't you know break the keys.  And so when they stopped me from--when they put the lock on it that was the recommendation of the trustee board after I walked out on them.  They were really, really hot.  My minister had a key made and gave it to me and said you can go in there and play whenever you want.  So they were really annoyed at that point cause as a result--
Speaker 1: Is that Reverend [Wilbur Nathan] Daniel?
Speaker 2: Reverend Daniel.  Reverend Daniel was a terrific minister and he was like a father to me also growing up.  I was in church all the time.  My mother is a very religious person.  She was then, she is now.  I'm a very religious person.  But church was where we went.  We stayed in church all day on Sunday.  You went to Sunday school, you went to Sunday service and you stayed around for lunch.  Then it was Baptist training union at night and by the time you went home you know it was dark.  You stayed in church almost all day on Sunday.  And when we got older you know kids want to do things, go to roller skating, go to the movies.  You weren't allowed to do any of those things if you didn't go to church first.  If you didn't go to church you didn't even ask if you could do any of the other things because the answer was automatically no.  So if you wanted to do anything you had to go to Sunday school first, then you could do it.  But if you didn't go to Sunday school you couldn't.  So church and religion were a very big part of my life as a teenager.
Story_ID: 203158
Speaker 1: And as I said I had a huge problem with the temper.  I prayed daily because I--my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] used to say, "You're going to be the kind of person that kills somebody and claims it was an accident."  And I used to think, "No, that's not going to happen because I'm going to get control of this somehow."  As I said, I didn't swear and I didn't curse but I could go into a rage and it was just maybe it was all--I don't know.  Maybe it was all that emotion from a teen.  Maybe it was a lot of frustration.  As a child I always, I didn't blame my mother but I was always on my mother about the fact that you know I couldn't do what other kids did 'cause I didn't have a father.  And why do I always have to take care of the kids.  And once my brother [Morris Jones] and I wanted to go on a father and son hike and so the scout master said well if you can convince your mother to go.  Well my mother was this beautiful twenty-something year old woman and she said to me I'm not going into the woods with a bunch of boys and some dirty old men by myself.  Are you crazy?  And I'm like but mom you have to go because it's a father and son hike.  She said right, and I'm your mother, not your father.  I'm not going.  So if they say you can't go without a father then you won't be going.  And we'd have these little conflicts from time to time.  And I remember she said she never remembers this but my brother does.  At one something else happened and my comment was always if I only had a father things would be different.  And my mother once said to me, first of all I'm tired of you saying that and I'd like you to stop.  She said because if your father [Floyd Jones] had lived there's no guarantee that you would like him and he would like you.  There's no guarantee that he would have stayed with me.  There's no guarantee that your life would be the way you think it would be because you don't have a father.  And she'd say, I didn't kill your father, he died so you can't blame me for that.  And I'm not going to try to be a man even though I do a lot of things that women, other women don't do.  My mother knew how to fix the plumbing.  My mother knew how to unplug the toilet.  But she said I'm not a man and I'm not going to try to be a man and so get over it.  Till this day she said she never said that and I never forgot those words.  I didn't kill your father, he died.  This has been as hard for me as it is for you but this is the way it is.  But always as a child I always thought if I only had a father.  Even as a young man when I first went into business I thought you know if I had a dad maybe there are a lot of things that would be different.  And yet I know what my mother says is true because I see a lot of people who don't get along with their fathers, who have fights with their fathers, who don't speak to their fathers for years, whose fathers just aren't there emotionally for them.  So again you know a physical father isn't a guarantee that there's going to be a lasting bond in a relationship but that was something I didn't understand as I was growing up.  And because I was so young when my father died nobody really explained--you know in those days people didn't explain to children you know your father died.  All I knew was one day I didn't have a father.  He was gone.  I didn't go to the funeral and yet I remember the day my dad died, I remember his funeral.  I remember standing in the yard and crying because I couldn't go with my mother.  I remember her getting into this black car and the other family members.  And in those days in Kansas City [Kansas], they used to put on the home of someone who died they would put a wreath of laurel leaves and they'd spray them black.  And I remember that that being on there.  And there's a certain kind of religious music I can't listen to even today, that four part male harmony like The Five Blind Boys.  The Five Blind Boys I think their name is.  I can't listen to that kind of music.  It tears me up on the in--I won't listen to it.  I forced myself over the years to do it because I know that it was the kind of music that my grandmother [Georgia Jones] played a lot of when my father died.  It's soulful, it's mourning.  It's, it's, it's hard for me to listen to.  And so I have forced myself to it but it does something to me when I hear it and I think it just takes me back to being four years old and my father dying and not understanding and not having anybody explain to me you know what happened or where he went or why he wasn't coming back.  And somehow maybe I, like most children try to accept responsibility for something that was going on that I couldn't control and I didn't you know have any understanding of.  So that part was difficult, very difficult.
Story_ID: 203159
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Westcott Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], nearing completion of high school, did you have--what were your aspirations or had you--did you have any idea at that time that you were going to become a cosmetologist?
Speaker 2: None whatsoever.  I wanted to be a teacher but I student-taught one semester and that told me I wasn't going to be a teacher.  I saw what students were--what parents were like.  I was in my second year of college I think.
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school?  Let's back up and get you in college.  How did you--now you had determined you were going to college, right by the time you were a senior?
Speaker 2: Well I had determined I was going to college.
Speaker 1: And you were fifteen, you're only fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: First of all they told me I wasn't going to graduate high school because I wasn't old enough.  That in the State of Illinois you had to be sixteen to graduate.  And there was a big problem about I was going to be sixteen just after the graduation or something.  But anyway, I'll never forget it.  And then the other controversy was that I had a mustache.  Now the joke was I had a mustache, I mean I was fifteen years old.  It was barely three hairs over my lip.  But the principal said if I didn't cut it off, I wasn't going to be able to graduate with the rest of my class.  So we got into a big thing about that.  And I said well then I guess I'm not graduating 'cause I'm not cutting it off.  And one of the teachers, Ms. Tadman [ph.], I'll never forget, Melissa Tadman, she went to the front for me and she talked to him and we got out of it.  But it was a big thing that I wasn't going to walk across the stage and graduate if I had this mustache.
Story_ID: 203160
Speaker 1: That was a frustrating thing for me because I didn't know what I wanted to do about college.  I knew I wanted to go to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] and my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] wouldn't let me go there because it was a huge party school.  And I wanted to go there because my--a girl I call my cousin Irene [ph.] went there and her sisters and it was--cause I thought well I'm going to go to college.  I'm going to have fun.  I don't want to go and study.  So instead I had to stay here in Chicago [Illinois] because I was told I'd have to live with my Aunt Helen [ph.], Aunt Bessie [ph.] and the two of them were like these two old maiden ladies and I would have been their snow shoveler and the leaf raker and no, I'm not going there and staying with them cause Irene had arranged that.  And I was like no I can't do that.  So I stayed home and I went to--well at that point I was offered a scholarship to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I went to University of Chicago for one semester, hated it, hated it, hated it.  Went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: What was the scholarship in?
Speaker 1: I didn't go with a scholarship but I went.
Speaker 2: University of Chicago?
Speaker 1: I didn't accept the scholarship.
Speaker 2: Oh you didn't, okay all right.
Speaker 1: And I went to--
Speaker 2: You said Roosevelt?
Speaker 1: There was a school called Loop Junior College which is now Harold Washington Junior College [sic. Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois].  I went there for a year and at the same time I was taking classes at Roosevelt.  Now I went there.  Why?  Because my friends from high school some of them went there.  And I was at that point where you know kids, you don't want to be separated from your friends and at my point I only had very few friends and I wasn't going to be able to go someplace totally different which was Southern Illinois where I wanted to go.  So it's like well then I got to stick with the people that I know and it was kind of strange.  I went to University of Illinois at [Chicago] Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] one year.  It was so cold out there the winters you could freak.  That was before they built [University of Illinois at Chicago] Circle Campus [Chicago, Illinois] and they had classes out there.  The wintertime it was, not only was it a long walk.  I mean you were worn out by the time you got to a classroom, but it was cold out there.  It wasn't a lot of heat.  And then I was still going to the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 203161
Speaker 1: --Sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What were you taking at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?  What were you studying?
Speaker 1: At the Art Institute I was taking design classes.  I wanted to be a fashion designer.
Speaker 2: And you started that when you were in--?
Speaker 1: And I started, well I started there going as a child in the Saturday classes.  They used to have Saturday classes for kids that my Aunt Annabelle [Matlock (ph.)] took me to.  But I left the Art Institute because I never--because I felt that I was becoming a product of the Art Institute, between the anatomy classes and the--I felt that I was losing whatever natural talent that I had because I wasn't being allowed to draw the way I wanted to draw and so that coupled with the fact that when they would do their shows I would do--help my friends who were older and again 'cause I said I always liked older people.  I always wanted to hang out with the older kids.  I would do the hair for some of the models that they, when they were showing their clothes for the--at the end of their senior year.  And somebody said, "You know you're really much better at this than you are at anything else.  You should really consider being a hairdresser."
Story_ID: 203162
Speaker 1: My mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] had been a hairdresser.  She worked on the Near North Side [Chicago, Illinois] as a shampoo person.  Not as a hairdresser, but a shampoo person but she had to be licensed.  And I was doing all of these in the '60s [1960s].  I mean hairdressing was really interesting 'cause you were doing beehives and you were doing you know banana curls, I mean things that people don't do anymore.  Hairdressing then was like a cross between architecture and hairdressing.  I mean you had these constructions that you did on people and they were big and they were wide and you had to figure out how to make these things all work.  And it wasn't an easy deal and you had to make it look you know really good like it belonged and it had to be perfect.  And I mean there was teasing hair and you had to learn how--there were a lot of different aspects to hairdressing and so I decided then I would go to beauty school.  Never even giving a thought to the fact that my mother was a hairdresser and then I later found out that many of my father's [Floyd Jones] relatives are barbers and hairdressers.  My Uncle Jim [ph.] recently told me of a man in my family whose name was Mallard Jones [ph.], I have no clue as to who this man is.  My uncle is now eighty-eight years old.  Every time he sees me he says ah, you look so much like Mallard Jones and I keep saying to my mother who the hell is this guy that he's talking about?  And it turns out he's an uncle but I never saw him.  I've never seen a photograph of him.  But my uncle in his old age I guess is beginning to think that I'm this uncle of his.  And I think it's kind of interesting.  But at any rate, that was how I got into hairdressing.  And so I went to beauty school as I said and I decided I didn't want to go where my mother went.  My mother went on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] to a beauty school called Lydia Adams [Beauty College, Chicago, Illinois] who was the big beauty school on the South Side.  And I decided that the best school in Chicago was the American School of Beauty Culture [Chicago, Illinois] downtown.  When I thought of that and because I live in an integrated neighborhood and I was never really taught to think in terms of black and white, I didn't think that it was a white school.  I didn't think it was any kind of school.  It was a school.  It was the best school and it never occurred to me that maybe there weren't any black people there.  It was just the best place to get the education that I wanted.  So when I went and applied and they said to me in a very nonchalant way, we really don't think this is the school for you.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is 1962 maybe, '61 [1961], '62 [1962].  They said we don't really think this is the school for you.  And of course because my mother always telling me you know don't go where you're not wanted--but then someone else told me that there was another branch of the school in Des Plaines [Illinois].  So it was on Lee Street right at the train station.  So I went to Des Plaines and they said sure you can come to our school.  I was happy.  So I'd take the bus and took I think three buses and a train and an "L" [elevated train] to get there and they had no problem taking me there.  The ironic thing there was in Des Plaines at that time there were no black people doing anything.  I mean I didn't see any black people working in stores or going working as domestics.  I'd be the only black person on the train going there and coming back.  But they didn't have a problem with me.  And then as I said finally one of the teachers said to me, "This is really ridiculous.  You're part of our system now.  Transfer to the downtown school.  They can't refuse to accept you."
Story_ID: 203163
Speaker 1: I had a teacher there [American School of Beauty Culture, Chicago, Illinois], her name was Bernice Van Dessel.  She really was a very special lady.  She was a very gifted teacher.  But from the very beginning we didn't hit it off at all.  And she ran within the school--there was something they called the model shop which is where the more talented people went to work.  And people paid a little more to get their hair done in there and the best people in the school were considered working there.  She told me I'd never work there and I never did.  But I remember what she didn't know was that when I was in college when I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  First year I had a roommate who was a German hairdresser.  His name was Adolf Brill [ph.].  And I met a lot of other hairdressers through him and one of the other hairdressers I met was a guy named Jean-Luc Vercammen who had just come to this country from Belgium.  And I became friends with these guys and I was running around with them and another guy named David Warner.  They were older and so this beauty school that I went to, the model school, Ms. Van Dessel would bring in what she considered the top people to teach a class once a month.  And so one month she brought in Jean-Luc Vercammen.  He walked in the door and he says hey, what's happening [HistoryMaker] Leigh [Jones]?  Hey what's happening Jean-Luc.  She's looking at him like how does this Belgium guy that I have all this respect for know this black guy over here?  The next month she invited David Warner.  David Warner walks in the school. Hey Leigh what's happening?  Hey David what's--and she's like wait a minute, what's going on here?  And I thought it was funny because as I said she was determined that I was not going to be one of her top people.  She was determined that I was not going to work in her model shop and yet I kind of beat her out because I knew all the people that she revered and that she respected and they knew me and they liked me and they helped me.  And when I first got out of school I actually worked for Jean-Luc as his assistant.  And that was almost too much for her.  When I first--
Speaker 2: Now when did you come out of the, this, it was the American Academy of--?
Speaker 1: The American School of Beauty Culture.
Speaker 2: American School of Beauty Culture, okay.
Speaker 1: And when I came out there I got a job working as Jean-Luc's assistant because I already knew him--
Story_ID: 203164
Speaker 1: --When was that when you came out [of American School of Beauty Culture, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: When did you come out of there or when did you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was probably 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably 19--I should have come out a year earlier but I didn't because I had a horrific car accident and I ended up in the hospital for a while.  I wasn't--it wasn't major injuries it was just that I was traumatized and shaken up by what had happened.  I remember my head being cut and I had bandages.  I came up off the expressway going to my mother's [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] house.  I had a--at that time I had a car.  It was--my first car was a Volkswagen but at this point I had another car.  I had a 1962 maybe Thunderbird which was a big wide car with a heavy steel construction.  I came off the expressway going to my mother's house and at 71st Street--the expressway is real big.  And at 71st Street when you turn left to go, there is State Street.  [S] Vincennes [Ave] is on the southbound and State Street is a one way street northbound.  I had gone across 71st Street and there were some big bushes where the--at the end of the intersection and the ramp up off the expressway.  The light turned green for me but there was some guy coming up off the expressway that I didn't see who was trying to beat the light.  He ran dead into the car from the passenger side.  The car turned over and I was thrown out of it because I wasn't wearing a seatbelt.  I mean the cars had seatbelts but I wasn't wearing mine.  And I'll never forget, I have a trouble--I have trouble wearing seatbelts today because they told me the only reason I was alive was because I was thrown out of the car.  The car burned.  The car was a mess.  I mean I remember--I was knocked unconscious and I didn't remember anything until I was coming into this little high--little hospital and it was a small Catholic hospital.  And I'll never forget this because again I'm young.  I'm on a gurney and I wake up and in order to get you into--the hospital was so small.  In order to get you into the elevator they had to sort of partially push you into the chapel first.  So when I opened my eyes and I looked up I see a crucifix and I'm going towards it and I'm thinking oh my God, I'm dead and it's my funeral.  And they're wheeling me in just so they could wheel me back out.  It was really very funny because for a couple of minutes I thought oh, boy I'm gone.  That's the end of that.
Speaker 1: Was that a--?
Speaker 2: But of course I wasn't and--
Speaker 1: Was that St. Benard's Hospital [St. Benard Hospital and Health Care Center, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think it was St. Benard's Hospital.  It was St. Bernard's Hospital.  I couldn't remember the name of it but it's right there--there was a pretty area there like a lake or a pool and a whole bunch of things and this--so they took me to that hospital.  It was quite traumatic because like I said I looked up and saw that crucifix and I thought oh boy I'm gone, but fortunately I wasn't.  I came back and it was cool but that was, that kept me from graduating from school when I was supposed to--
Story_ID: 203165
Speaker 1: --At that time, school was pretty expensive and I was still working.  And when I was in college, I worked at the post office.  I was one of the youngest people that would throw postal scheme 'cause I lied about my age.  I changed the year and nobody caught it.  And I was a clerk.  Of course in those days you threw two schemes, one was for a clerk and one was for a mail handler.  Mail handlers were paid a little less money and clerks were paid I remember--I'll never forget this cause I thought I was making really great money, $2.35 an hour.  And they put me--the supervisor that I had was really very nice to me because he knew I was going to school.  At the time I was still going to college and he put me on the dock where a clerk was supposed to watch the mail handlers. So you would sit in this booth and you were supposed to just kind of watch what the guys were doing, make sure they did their work and make sure they weren't goofing off.  Well of course I'd go down there and read.  I didn't care what they were doing.  They could do whatever they want.  I was putting in my eight hours.  It taught me a lesson. I never want to work where they are all men because guys are the worst when they get together when they're just you know like dock workers there.  They say all kinds of stuff, they do all kinds of stuff and especially about women.  And the dock was right on the, right at Harrison Street [Chicago, Illinois].  Sometimes the wives would come and some guy would say his that your wife?  Man.  Yeah that's my wife.  You need some help with that?  Well there would be a fight.  They're up in the truck fighting and of course as the clerk I'm supposed to go out there and do something, right?  They could have killed each other.  I wouldn't have known the difference 'cause I just turned my back and kept reading my books and did whatever I had to do.  So I never got myself involved in any of that and I never really had to work really hard at the post office in that I was a clerk.  I didn't have to throw all the mail which would have required that I concentrate and do that for eight hours.  As a result this person was benevolent enough that he put me down there and I worked there, I don't know probably worked there a year and a half.  And I was just, for eight hours I was just sitting in this room by myself that had glass walls on all sides and I was able to study and I was able to read and that was one of the--and I made good money while I was doing it.  And so I was able to get a car and it was a funny time.  When you try to think about things that happen in your life, sometimes it becomes segmentized and it's like it's somebody else's life.  Some of the things that happened you almost don't believe that they really happened to you.
Story_ID: 203166
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you said 1963 you started working for Jean Luc, what was his last name?
Speaker 2: Jean-Luc Vercammen.  Well actually before--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell his name for me?
Speaker 2: I really don't think I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jean-Luc Vercammen, J-E-A-N L-U-C V-E-R--these are all separate words--C-A-M-M-E-N.  He has since deceased.  He left Chicago [Illinois] and went to become the head stylist at Bergdorf Goodman in New York [New York] in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a good position then to have just coming out of school [American School of Beauty Culture, Chicago, Illinois] to work with--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone like him.
Speaker 2: Well I auditioned for another guy and that was Frederick Glaser.  And he hired me but I had been going to these seminars L'Oreal and Revlon and Roux had places where they taught hair color at 9 W. Washington [St.] and they taught every Monday.  And so you would go there and you'd learn to do problem hair color.  People from different salons--or if I had a problem I couldn't figure out, I'd bring that person with me down to a class and then they'd work on it collectively and teach you how to deal with whatever the problem was.  The other thing that the two companies also did because they were the major companies and they had a lot of shows and they did a lot of models, they gave free services to the models on Mondays if they would come.  So we always had these beautiful girls to work on and the training classes cause they got their hair color for free cause that was a big expense for a lot of models was--particularly if you were blonde because you had to be touched up like every two weeks.  So as a result I came to know a lot of models.  And when I went to audition for Fred Glaser, I took people to him that he already knew, people that he was using because they were coming down to the clinic.  And so when I'd show up with one of the girls that he knew, he would kind of look like how does this guy know this girl?  You know here is this young black kid coming in here with some model that I do jobs with.  I don't think he ever figured it out.  I don't think he ever figured out where I was, you know where I, how I knew these girls?  But--so I, somehow in life I always managed to get the upper hand so that the upper hand that I had in that situation.  I was bringing him people that he knew, people that he worked with.  So he knew firsthand what it was to do their hair, what it was like.  And so he had a greater appreciation for the things that I was able to do.
Story_ID: 203167
Speaker 1: And I think that in the scheme of things, one day I finally said to him [Fred Glaser] I'd auditioned like three times and at that time I had been working on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] at a place called Carrie's Chateau [ph.] on East 79th Street.  That was the first place that I worked.  The woman who owned it was Carrie Scott and her husband's family owned Ida Mae Scott Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] on the South Side.  She had the best equipped beauty salon in the City of Chicago [Illinois] save maybe Elizabeth Arden's downtown.  I mean she had facial equipment and the top of the line European equipment.  Back then early '60s [1960s] when it was just, skin care was even unheard of in most beauty salons.  And so I said to him I left my job there.  I only worked there for a very short time and said to him, "If you don't hire me, you know if I'm not talented enough, just tell me, I'll come back."  And he said, "Well if it means I don't get you, if I don't hire you, you can start tomorrow."  And I remember I ran around the corner because the salon was at 710 N. Rush Street and I ran around the corner to Holy Name Cathedral [Chicago, Illinois] and I was so happy that I got this job and that I was going to be able to work for this icon.  Fred Glaser was like the biggest hairdresser in Chicago [Illinois], one of the biggest hairdressers in the country.  He did Barbra Streisand, he did--and he's the one who designed almost all of her early hairdos, the swing line haircut and the little boy haircut and the things for the first movie, The Way--'Funny Girl.'  He was--
Speaker 2: Is this 1967 or so or--?
Speaker 1: Right.  He was an incredible, incredible hairdresser, he really was.  And I was fortunate enough to work for him.  It was a very strange situation because as I, again as I said I never thought color.  And when I want--when I'm going for this job I'm not thinking that there--are there any black people coming here, never even occurred to me that there might not be any.  The only black woman who actually came to the salon in those days was Joan Johnson who was the treasurer/secretary of Johnson Products Company, the wife of [HistoryMaker] George Johnson who I later did a lot of work for.  And not because of that relationship but she was the only black woman that I actually saw come in there.  It never occurred to me when I got the--when I went for this job.  All that occurred to me was I want to be in the best place that I can be and 79th Street is not it.  I want to be where I can get recognition and 79th Street's not it.  All the people that I saw that got public recognition, that got recognition through the media and in publications, were all down in the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois].  So I thought well I have to get down there because I'm just--my mother's [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] thing was whatever you're going to be, be the best.  If you're going to be a street sweeper, be the best street sweeper.  I wanted to be the best hairdresser and I wanted to be acknowledged as such and I knew that the only way I could do that was to get into that area.
Story_ID: 203168
Speaker 1: Now it never occurred to me there were no black people working there.  There were no black--I mean as stylists--there were black people working there.  There were women working there as shampoo girls or shampoo ladies, but no hairstylists.  It, but it never occurred to me because like I said I didn't think in those terms and it never occurred to me that there were no black customers.  I just assumed you know people went wherever they wanted to go.  In those days the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois] was, I mean when they say everything was of the carriage trait, that's exactly what they meant.  You see more people on Michigan Avenue on a Saturday now than you used to see in a whole month.  Correct that, probably in six months you wouldn't see as many people as you see now on a Saturday, on a single Saturday.  You wouldn't see that many people between the bridge and the Oak Street Beach in a month because there were no stores, there were no shops, there were no offices.  There were strictly you know--I mean when I say that, there was no Gap, there was no Gucci, there was no [John] Hancock Center, there was no--there Stanley Korshaks and Bramson's and Martha Weathered and a Scandinavian shop, Sidney Garber the jeweler, but there weren't a lot of other businesses.  And there were the major beauty salons, John Garrison, Bray Sabon [ph.], Kaye Pierre, Frederick Glaser, Shears and Shears, Maximo [Salon].  There were a lot of salons but as I said it just never occurred to me that there were no black customers and there were no black people working there.  And so when Fred [Glaser] hired me it was, I mean I was so happy I got this job, but then I was like wait a minute, who am I going to, you know whom am I doing for customers?  And fortunately for me--most people who are inclined to like artistic people don't care what color people are.  You could be pink with purple polka dots, if they think you're going to do something that's interesting or that's novel you get the job.  And so I worked there, then of course everybody wore a suit and a tie in those days because you were Mr. [HistoryMaker] Leigh [Jones], Mr. Fred, Mr. George, nobody called anybody by their first name.  It was Ms. Elizabeth.  Everybody was Mr. or Ms., it was all very proper, it was very high end.  And so at one point Fred decided that I should break the mold so he called me up to his office one day and said I think I've decided that you should look different than everybody else.  He said we're going to try to go into some more casual things.  So he had me take off my tie and unbutton my shirt and remove my jacket which was absolutely just not done.  If you took your jacket off, you had to put on a jacket you know like doctors work so that you looked professional.
Speaker 2: Smock or--?
Speaker 1: A smock right, so that you looked professional.  And here I am looking like [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte with my shirt open down to my waist.  And I'm young and, but it worked.  It got me business and then the rest was history.  Because when you acquire a clientele, you're able to take that clientele and go someplace else--
Story_ID: 203169
Speaker 1: I had a woman who is very dear to me even still.  I refer to her as my Jewish mother.  Her name was Meg Folk.  And this was a wealth--a woman [sic. wife] of a North Shore physician [Eugene R. Folk] and every year she would go to Palm Springs [California].  And when she would come back every year, Fred would do her in the--with a new hairdo and a, you know a makeover.  So the day that she was coming in, I didn't have a lot of customers that day.  She was coming in, he had one of his sort of--he didn't want to be bothered.  He'd had it up to here which you can get to when you're a hairdresser for too many years.  So he stormed out of the salon and said that's it.  I'm leaving for the day.  I'm not interested in anymore women today.  So this woman comes in and the receptionist Peggy [ph.] says to her, well I'm sorry but Mr. [Fred] Glaser left.  And this women said what do you mean he left?  Now the salon was very much like this salon I'm in now.  It was in a house at 710 N. Rush [St.] and it was three stories very much like this house is.  There was a photographer Wi Kazumi [ph.] who was on the fourth floor of the building--on the third floor of the building and there was a men's barber shop, Omar's [ph.] in the basement and then Fred had the other two floors for the beauty salon.  And we were lined up in rows like three or four.  You had John Goodman [ph.], Antonio Salvaldo [ph.], myself, Jerry [ph.].  At any rate, this woman comes in and she's, what do you mean he left?  She said he left.  He's--but he was supposed to do me today.  And she said--and she was getting very loud so people are kind of looking around like you know what's going on down there.  So finally Peggy said to her listen, I'll take you up the stairs and you can have anybody you want do you today.  So she walks to the stop of the stairs looks up and down the room, walks up and down and looks everybody up and down.  Here's everybody in their smocks or their jackets and here's me in [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte mode and she walks past me and she goes back to the door and announces in a very loud voice, I'll take the shvartza with the fat ass.  Well, I was hysterical because first I didn't know what shvartza meant and second, I had been a dancer at one point.  I didn't think I had a fat ass.  I was kind of annoyed.  So Peggy comes to me and says you have to do this woman.  And I said I don't think so.  She called me a name.  And she said no, you either do her or you leave.  You're fired.  I said then I guess I'm leaving 'cause I'm not doing anybody who's calling me a name.  In the meantime this woman comes back up the stairs and she says oh come with me honey.  She takes me by the arm, she takes me to the shampoo bowl.  She says first of all shvartza's not a bad name.  It's a Jewish word for black.  It's not a problem and you're going to do the best job I've ever had done.  She takes me to the back, we're washing her hair, we go to the front, we start talking.  She tells me all this stuff.  I fix her hair, cut it really short, used the curling iron which was something she'd never had.  And because that was something I learned from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] was curling irons, nobody was using curling irons and blow dryers.  Nobody knew what blown dry hair was in those days.  Everybody got under the dryer and got set.  And it was a natural, more natural looking thing.  She had this stick straight hair that she wanted to look naturally curly and the curling iron was the perfect thing for that.  When I got through she thought she was so terrific.  The next week she brings me a couple of her friends and the next week she brings me a couple more of her friends and the next thing you know, single handedly, this woman has built me a business.  And Fred is very upset because she won't go to him anymore.  And with that business I mean I established my clientele and you go shopping you know for your next job based on who you have for a clientele and what you can bring to a place and how much money you can bring--
Story_ID: 203170
Speaker 1: But I said shopping and that reminds me, in those days, women would--a lot of women bought their husband's clothes.  And so here I am this twenty-two, twenty-three-year-old young black man in a suit and I'd go with Meg [Folk] shopping for her husband 'cause if I didn't have a customer when I got through with her, she'd say oh come go with me to Saks [Fifth Avenue] to help me pick out something for Gene [Eugene R. Folk], her husband.  So we'd go and she'd say oh, do you like this?  Oh I like this and I like this.  Then her friend Gloria [ph.] would take me with her sometimes.  And I'd, oh I like this and I like that.  Never occurred to me that the shop people are thinking who is this guy?  Is he some kind of a gigolo?  He keeps coming in with all these white women.  They're buying them all this stuff.  It was so hysterical later when I found out that I had this reputation through all the stores cause of course there weren't that many people going to the stores, that I had this reputation for whatever I had that you know here these women are buying me all these things, when in fact they were buying them for their husbands.  It was kind of funny that all of a sudden, all these people want to know who is this black hair dresser that works on the avenue that all these women are taking out?  It was a very interesting part of my life.  But that was part of the legend that started with you know there's this real good looking young black guy.  He's a good hairdresser but these women all buy him all of these things.  It's funny because when I called Meg Folk's husband one night and told him that people were talking about us, she started to laugh and I hung up on her.  And a few minutes later her husband called me back and said could you please tell me why my wife is so hysterical.  And I said to him, well I can't.  But this time I knew him very well.  I stayed in their home.  I said I can't.  And he said what do you mean you can't?  He says, she can't and you won't.  He says what--so I told him what people were saying and he started laughing and I hung up on him.  He called me back in a few minutes and he apologized you know.  And he said well I know you're young and you don't--he says but that's just not something I would ever believe.  He says as bad as my wife wants something she wants at the time he says I know she's not buying anything for anybody else because she's saving all her money for whatever it was that she wanted.  So it was interesting.  It was very interesting cause like I said, I was afraid of white women, very much afraid when I was in that first situation with the booths because as I said what had happened to Emmett Till.  Meg Folk used to get very dark in the summer time, tan, and we'd go have lunch in places.  And once we went to the top of the, went to the Tip Top [Tap] Lounge Restaurant in the [Warwick] Allerton Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and we were sitting there and we were having lunch.  And she--Meg was a very astute person and she'd say to me, they're talking about us, those people.  And I'd say to her Meg, nobody's talking about us.  Don't look at them.  Just you know--and this woman comes over to the table and they had assumed that we were a black couple.  Well a black couple you just didn't see in a restaurant.  So this woman walks over from the table and says my friends and I were just discussing how interesting and how lovely it is to see a black, to see a couple in the restaurant.  And my friend Meg pulls her sunglasses down, she has these bright blue eyes making it very obvious that she's not a black woman and said thank you very much.  The woman almost recoiled in fear.  What had she done and we were constantly having these little episodes when we'd go--
Story_ID: 203171
Speaker 1: I remember once I went in Martha Weathered [Chicago, Illinois] with Meg [Folk] and her daughter Carla [Folk] was a--who's now an actress.  And Carla was a very gregarious little girl.  And all of them got dark, very, very dark.  She was almost as dark as I was.  And we're in this store and the sales ladies--now this is a store where there are two sales ladies for every customer in the store, very chichi.  And the sales lady must have said something to this child.  I was supposed to hold her hand while she--her mother was trying on the dress and somehow she got away from me.  And we hear in a very loud voice, what do you mean is he my father?  Of course he's not my father.  He's not old enough to be my father.  The poor sales lady I think wanted to die on the spot because everybody knew that she just asked her you know who I was?  And as I said, all these funny little things used to happen.  It's one of those things you, you know you don't stop and think about.  Well when you're one of the first people who comes into an area that you're always spotted wherever you go and you get a reputation whether you want one or not.  I have a friend who, Michael Clay [ph.], who moved to Sweden in 1977 and he's the only black person that lives in the town that he lives in.  And I said to him, "How do you do that?  I mean that's--how can you do that?"  He said, "Well I don't have a lot of choice."  I said, "But you can't even creep.  I mean if you want to go anywhere everybody knows it's you."  He said, "Yeah well it's kind of a problem."  He said, "But the bigger problem was," he said, "I'd stand on street corners."  He said, "There's me as black as I am and all these Swedish people in the street and everybody would walk up to me and ask for directions."  He said "I finally had to learn to speak Swedish in self-defense because I couldn't go on speaking English and them not be able to understand me."
Story_ID: 203172
Speaker 1: It was a different environment, the whole Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois] scene was a different scene in those days.  If you saw black people then, basically they were domestics.  They were working for someone.  But there were, as I said there were no sales people.  There was no Gucci, there was no Prada, there was no Gap, there was no Disney Store.  I mean there was no Nike, there was no iPod [sic. Apple] store.  I mean all the stores that go from the river now to the Oak Street Beach just weren't there and so the people weren't there and the sales forces weren't there.  With the sales forces came a lot of, and the offices came a lot of black women as sales force, as the sales force demanded and as secretaries and executives in companies.  But prior to that there was me and my cousin Emery [ph.] who is also a hairdresser and we both worked at Fred Glaser's at about the same time.
Speaker 2: Now this is from '67 [1967] to what, how long were you at Fred Glaser's?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: How long were you at Fred Glaser's?
Speaker 1: I can't remember.  I'd actually have to look at my resume to know that.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I didn't work there for a very long time.  I probably worked there a year and a half or two and then I worked at a place called Maximo [Salon, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 203173
Speaker 1: Now here's a question though too about being the only black in that environment.  Did you--Chicago [Illinois] police are you know famous for you know picking black folks up from places where think they don't belong, especially in those days.  I mean did you ever--were you ever harassed by the police department?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Were you ever harassed by the police department up there in the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: You don't even want to talk about that.  In this very building that I live in--that I'm in now, when I first moved to the Near North Side [Chicago, Illinois], I rented a room and a house, two houses from here.  And as I said in those days we all wore suits and ties to work.  I was coming home from Fred Glaser's which was at 710 N. Rush [St.] to here, 108 W. Oak [St.] and a police car pulled me over.  I'm by the park that's known as Bughouse Square [Washington Square Park, Chicago, Illinois].  And he pulls me over and he wants to see my I.D. [identification].  I'm carrying a valise and I'm wearing a three piece suit, Brogue shoes and a shirt and a tie.  I give him the valise and he looks at my I.D. and he wanted to know where I was going.  I said I'm going home.  I live at 108 W. Oak. Now mind you from here, two blocks is Cabrini Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] so I mean it shouldn't have been so unusual.  I think what was unusual was that I was in a suit carrying a valise and not many black men I guess from the ghetto would have been carrying a valise and wearing a suit by Bughouse Square.  Actually they didn't come to Bughouse Square.  The police intimidated the black people who lived in Cabrini Green to the point that you rarely ever saw them anywhere east of what is that street?
Speaker 1: On [N] Orchard [St]?
Speaker 2: I can't think at the moment, but at any rate, you just didn't see them in the area.  And the policeman pulls me over and I tell him I'm a hairdresser and I thought he was through with me so I started to walk off.  And he was on his phone, but I didn't know he was talking about me and I thought he was through so I started walking down the street.  All of a sudden I hear a siren.  Now mind you he's a half a block from me.  He turns on the siren.  He turns on the lights.  He comes down the street at top speed, pulls up on the sidewalk, cuts me off, jumps out of the car and says I wasn't through with you.  And I said what do you mean?  He said I wasn't through with you.  And I said well I thought you were.  I'm going home.  So he starts questioning me some more and I said to him, you know what, I've just moved into this neighborhood.  You're making me look really bad.  You know you can't harass me like this.  And he said I'm taking you to the station.  She he throws me in the car and takes me to the 18th District station which is here on Chicago Avenue.  Well now a whole bunch of people have to come out.  What is this guy doing here?  What's in the valise, blah-blah, blah-blah.  One point one of the guys says well what's he got in that valise?  So why do you have this razor?  I'm a hairdresser.  Why do you have these scissors?  Why do you have the--so finally one of the guys says to--we're taking the valise.  And I said no you're not take--'cause that's my equipment.  No you're not taking it.  So he pulls it, I pull it, he pulls it, I pull it.  Someone other officer grabs me from the back.  Now mind you, I'm not under arrest.  I'm in the front of the station on the other side of the counter and I've got three police officers jumping on me and we're fighting 'cause I'm, I told you I'm a scrappy person.  So I hauled off and kicked one his leg's bleeding and now they've grappled me, put me on the ground and they mace me.  They put me in jail.  They charge me with drunken disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, creating a disturbance in a public place, I mean a whole bunch of trumped up charges.  This is a funny story.  It's not funny now.  I mean it wasn't funny then, it's funny now.  They throw me in the cell so this police officer who's some--his name was Jones, comes by and goes Jones, Joneses don't go to jail.  What you doing in there?  So I told him the story.  He said did you get anything to eat?  I said no they you know didn't bring--so he went out and got me food.  So he tells me that if I stay in jail I'll go before the judge.  There's a courtroom upstairs.  I'll go before the judge the next day, but if I don't you know then it will take you know probably a month or six weeks until it comes up.  So I decided I'm staying in jail for the night.  Wrong decision.  They finally let me call my parents [Florence McDonald Jones Smith and Leon Smith].  This is about four o'clock in the afternoon they pick me up.  They let me call home at about eleven o'clock.  Now you have to know that in my mother's house, after ten o'clock nobody calls and I still live by that.  Decent people don't call each other after the news goes off unless it's a problem.
Story_ID: 203174
Speaker 1: So I call home and my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith], tell my mother that I'm in jail.  Now this is a woman to whom I have never lied.  I'm always upfront and I'm living on my own and her response was, "Do you want to tell me what you really did before we get there so I'm not embarrassed?"  And I think I said something, "What the hell do you mean what I really did?"  She dropped the phone.  My stepfather [Leon Smith] picks up the phone.  He says, "What did you just say to your mother?"  I said, "The hell with what I said to my mother, come and get me!"   So they come to the [18th District] station [Chicago, Illinois] to get me.  And by this time I have decided I'm spending the night and my mother's begging me, "Don't stay here."  And I went, "No I'm staying the night because I'm going to court tomorrow and I'm getting this police officer for what he did to me 'cause it wasn't right and I want to get this over with."  Like I said, wrong decision.  I was in this jail cell for four people.  It's the only time I've ever been in jail.  I pray to god it's the only time I will ever be in jail.  I was in a cell for four people and before the night was over there must have been twenty people in that cell.  There was a man having an epileptic seizure on the floor.  There was a person in drag.  There was, I mean there was just--and I'm standing in the corner in my suit, in my tie and I'm counting--I could tell you for the longest time how many nuts and bolts held that cell together.  But the next day we go before the judge and I didn't realize at the 18th District there were a bunch of newspaper people and photographers who used to hang out there because this being the Near North Side [Chicago, Illinois], if anything happened to somebody during the night, some celebrity well they were taken there.  So they would always hang around thinking they might get some good story.  So here I come, they make me the last person out.  So I come out and I see lo and behold there's a black man on the bench.  His name is Judge Ernie Jones [ph.] and I think, eureka, I'm really going to you know do a number here because I'm going to be able to convince this guy.  He knows what I'm talking about that this officer abused me.  So we go before the judge.  The man--the officer pulls up his pants and shows the judge where I kicked him and of course he throws out all the charges, the drunken disorderly conduct, this, that.  But he fined me $25.00 for assaulting the officer and I got really mad. I said, "What do you mean $25.00 for assaulting an officer?"  He said, "You assaulted the officer."  "You're paying $25.00."  I said, "Well if I pay you another $25.00 can I kick him again?"  He looked at my parents and he said and I want to see the two of you in my office, in my chambers.  So we go in there.  I was the last person and I'm fuming and my stepfather's mad you know.  "What are you doing here?  You know that he's telling the truth and that these guys"--and he's like, "what do you people expect me to do?  You know what--you can't get back at the police.  You aren't going to get anything from this situation.  Didn't you teach your son you know what he has to do?"
Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So my father says, "Yeah, but I taught him to hit anybody that hits him.  Hit back anybody that hits him."  And that was one of my first lessons in dealing with the police.
Story_ID: 203175
Speaker 1: Now afterwards, I lived at 111 E. Chestnut [St., Chicago, Illinois], above Magnan's [ph.].  I would go out at night because again I'm a visual person.  Sometimes I would go out at night and look in all the store windows at the displays.  And invariably I'd have a squad car pull up and they'd want to see my I.D.  I got followed through countless stores, I'll never forget.  Once I was followed through a store detective all over Lord & Taylor when they first moved to Water Tower [Place, Chicago, Illinois] in 1977.  And the officer, they followed me outside and then they said you know we want to see what you have in the bag.  And I'm like what?  And they identified themselves as police officers.  I said okay I'll show you what I have in the bag.  I said but let me just tell you this, if you go into this bag and you don't find receipts for everything that I have in--and you don't find receipts for everything I have in here, you're in big trouble cause I'm suing you, I'm suing the store.  I said if you followed me around the store and I know you did because every time I looked up--at first I couldn't figure out what they were doing because I noticed that there was some guy every place.  And I said I'm suing. So they said go on your way because they knew I hadn't done anything and they knew I didn't have anything in the bag they were just trying to intimidate me.
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll pause here.  Yeah, that's--I--that was a whole--
Speaker 1: That used to happen all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was a can of worms.  I said what did the police ever--well I knew they had to cause--
Speaker 1: Well I got in real trouble with the incident at--I mean I'm not telling what really happened at the incident at the station.  One of my best friends at that time was Jacqueline Jackson, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson's wife.  But Jesse Jackson was just, I mean at that point he was a theological student.  He was just starting to get involved in political activism.
Story_ID: 203133
Speaker 1: --Know, that one of the people you worked for left Chicago [Illinois] to go do Barbra Streisand's hair or something and left the clientele to you or something.  That's what I heard.
Speaker 2: Oh, after Fred [Frederick Glaser]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if that's Fred or who--
Speaker 2: Well ironically one of the things I did, I worked at a place called Maximo [Salon, Chicago, Illinois].  As I said you use your clientele to propel you into the next job.  And Maximo was called Maximo, the Look of Love Salon.  And they used to do--there was a woman on Chicago television in the morning who's named Ione [ph.] and then there was a show called Good Morning Amer--Good Morning--A.M. Chicago, I'm sorry 'A.M. Chicago.'  And so those women would get their hair done at this Maximo Salon.  And so there was a girl there named Jenny Cranley [ph.], I used to do her hair.  And then there was another girl there named Sandi Freeman from A.M. Chicago.  So it was ironic that when a black woman came into Chicago who was Oprah Winfrey, one of the people who lives in my building that I live in downtown--I have an apartment at 727 S. Dearborn [St.].  One of the guy that works there Richie Victor [ph.] was a technical director at the station [Channel 7, WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  He said to me oh you're going to love the new girl they hired and it never occurred to me you know why he thought that.  And then when I saw Oprah I thought oh, he thinks 'cause she's black and I'm black that they're going to give me this job.  Well that wasn't--you know I only did the other two women.  They were blonde but they came to me just because they liked me and they met me at the salon.  I had no connection to Channel 7.  I didn't know anybody down there.  But I just, ironically as I said I had been doing hair for that show for these women.  And so when she came to town, [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson, the PR [public relations] person who is my best friend called her up and after--she called me.  I'll never forget this.  It was New Year's Day and she called me up and said oh you got to see this new, the new girl who's coming into Chicago.  Well you know New Year's Day is a big football day.  I'm like I'm not interested, click.  She calls me back.  Turn on the TV, you've got to see her.  So I turn on the TV and here's Oprah Winfrey with some high school band coming down the street and she's got this little short afro hairdo and a fur coat and nobody can say Oprah.  They're saying "Ofuh" and "Ofra" and all kinds of other things.  And Dori says, we've got to help this girl.  I had just opened my new salon and I said you help her all you want, I'm busy.  I have other things to do.  And ultimately she called her up and they became friends and she brought her to the beauty salon and her hair was broken off.  And then she had run to a bunch of different hairdressers and can you do her hair, can't you do her hair?  You have to help us.  And so I started doing her hair.  I stood there, both of us stood there and cried.  I'm a sucker for tears.  Well I was then, not so much anymore 'cause now I cry.  But I did her hair for a couple of years for no money 'cause she didn't have any money then.  I got a credit from the station and then I finally said I can't do this anymore, it's too much.  One day I did like, I would do her hair and makeup and I'd have to get up--I mean I credit my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] for this because mothers know their children, even their adult children.  My mother knew I couldn't get up in the morning so she'd call me at 6:00 and then she'd call me again at 6:15 to make sure I really got up.  And then at 6:30 she'd call to make sure I was on my way out 'cause I'd go to the station every day and I'd do her hair.  Because initially it started I would do her hair on Monday, Wednesday and Friday at the salon and then she'd skip Wednesday because something happened.  She didn't get there so she looked like hell on Thursday.  And by Friday well at that point it was already in Cup's Column that I'm doing her hair.  And I said to her you know you can't do this because you're going to ruin my reputation.  If you're going to--if I'm going to do your hair then you have to do Monday, Wednesday and Friday like we agreed or I can't do this cause you can't look like hell on Wednesday--on Thursday and have me get the credit for it.  'Cause she doesn't know how to comb her own hair I think even now.  And the people at the station came to me and said well--Mary Kay, assistant came to me and said well how about if you came to the station every day and we'll give you a credit?  And I thought well okay, that will be good for the salon.  I'll get a credit and--wrong decision again.  But you work for credit or you work for money.  Either way you end up getting what you want.  If you work for credit ultimately you get the recognition, you'll get the money.  And so I did that for a couple of years, almost a couple of years.  Then I finally said to her one day, I can't continue to do this.
Speaker 1: So this is 1982?  This is '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: This is 1984.
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 2: Well it was '82 [1982] in the beginning and then '84 [1984] is when I left and I just said I can't continue to do this because it's a lot of work.
Story_ID: 203134
Speaker 1: One day they had me do her [Oprah Winfrey] hair and makeup and the makeup of eight or ten other people.  This is all before I went to work at my nine o'clock job.  And I said you know what, can't do this anymore.  And Tim Bennett was the station [Channel Seven, WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] manager at that--not the station manager but he was in charge of all of that stuff.  And I went to him and I said either I have to get paid which is what you agreed or I'm leaving.  And then he was saying well the station can't pay you because we're in the process of some kind of a takeover and this--and I said you know what, then you better know how to do hair 'cause I'm out of here.  And I remember the last day that I worked was a Friday and I told her what happened and I--like I said she didn't have money in those days and she was just starting to get known.  And I walked her through the station and she cried all day and I was unhappy about it but I just felt I couldn't do it anymore.  It was just too much work to do.  I was working on Monday, my day off.  I had a new business and I'm working like I said some days I did as many as eight, ten people before I went to work and I'm not getting paid for this.  So I just decided I can't do it anymore and so I walked away and that was then of that.  I never looked back.  And I'm not the kind of person that goes back and--I wouldn't let anybody else from my salon [Leigh Jones Coiffures, Chicago, Illinois] do it but Andre Walker turned out to be a young man that had train--one of his friends trained with me and he would come and they lived together and so I knew him very well and he knew through my salon that I wasn't going to allow any of them to do it.  So he wrote her a note I'm told, sent her some flowers after she looked like hell for a couple of weeks.  And said you know I've trained with [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones and I know how to do what he does and would you allow me to come in and the rest is history.  But he gave up his entire salon.  I think he was giving up all of his clientele and he works exclusively for her.  That wouldn't work for me.  That's not--I couldn't operate like that.  I enjoy all the people that I do, the socialites, the housewives, I mean everybody and I could never be a third arm to anybody.  So things worked out the way they were supposed to work out.
Story_ID: 203135
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me how long does it normally take to do someone's hair?
Speaker 2: How long?
Speaker 1: Yeah, how long does it normally take?
Speaker 2: To do someone's hair?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh it depends on the person.  It depends on--but as a general rule with blow dryers now which is what most people do do with their hair, you're talking anywhere, half an hour to an hour depending on who the person is and what they're actually doing.  Some people can be as little as fifteen minutes and other people can be almost an hour, depending on how much hair you have, the density of it, how much work you have to do to get it to look like you want it to look.  And the course of blowing it dry, doing a curling iron and then breaking that up it can take anywhere from fifteen minutes to forty-five minutes to an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you operate with assistants, right?  You have people assisting in other, in--like washing the hair and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Not really cause it takes two hands to do whatever it is you're doing so you don't really need an assistant for that.  When you need an assistant, like when I've had assistants and I've trained a lot of other people, I've trained a lot of other people because at one point I was looking behind me and thinking who else is back here?  You know you don't want to think you're the only person that's out there.  And unfortunately one of the last bastions of racism probably in this country is in beauty barber salons.  There are a lot of hairdressers in the area who would have been just as content at me had I failed.  But certainly they were not amused by the fact that now I start bringing in other young people and training them.  So now you don't only have one person which is sort of a phenomenon, but now you've got a bunch of people to contend with.  And so I haven't been very popular from a lot of standpoints from being one of the first with Emery Jones and then bringing in and training other people so that I'm not the only person who's out there.  Today there are a lot of black salon owners on the Near North Side of Chicago [Illinois].  But at one point as I said there were none.  And there are people who feel like well if he only did the black people they could live with that.  But the fact that you would do socialites like Joan Wagner or that you would do celebrities like Mary Ann Childers or--that's not acceptable because it's like, well that's our turf.  We should be doing that and you should be doing you know [HistoryMaker] Diann Burns and whoever else.  So there are still those people who still like for me not to be here in one way or another.  But needless to say I'm not going anywhere.  So--but I'm grateful that I had the opportunity, the determination and the upbringing that I had because as I said I was--I came from a family of people that just--if you want to see me make you out of a liar, tell me what I can't do.  And I will invariably no matter what it takes, I'll do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: That's just my nature.
Story_ID: 203136
Speaker 1: Okay now I've heard that you are basically noted for making a person look natural and high fashion at the same time.  That's what I've heard.
Speaker 2: Well the one thing that's happened, hairdressing has changed as I said tremendously over the years.  There were the days of beehives and curls where hairdos were architectural.  Then they went into the natural things.  Then we went into a phase of you know clean is sexy which was a bunch of bunk, you know where everybody washed their hair every single day in order to have that clean sexy look.  Bottom line, you wash your hair every day, but the time you get to a couple of weeks, your hair is all fly away 'cause it's too clean.  There is such a thing as having hair that's too clean because you can't do anything with it.  I mean that's the joke.  You come to a beauty salon, the irony you get your hair washed, you get in a chair and then you put all this product in it to make it stand out.  I mean especially today, the kids with the punk hair, sticking up hair and the spiky hair.  Hair doesn't do that stuff on its own.  You've got to put product in there to do it.  So you washed it to make it clean then you put all this stuff in it to make it dirty so that it will look like you want it to look, hello?  But that's the nature of you know, that's the nature of the beast.  It's interesting cause like I said hairdressing went from being architectural and all these other things to being natural and that's where a lot of people don't realize there are a lot of differences.  There are hairstylists, there are hairdressers, there are haircutters and they are three different things all together.  Hair cutters are sometimes a group of people who cut magnificent hair.  I mean some of them are great architects with the scissors.  But they don't style hair.  They can't, they couldn't do a French twist or they couldn't do an up do because that's not what they do.  Then you have hair stylists who are sort of you know they're, some of them aren't great hair cutters and they can cut hair and they can style hair.  But then you have hairdressers who are sort of trained in the European mode which has always been you know the fantasy things and you do whatever it takes to get the look that you want, regardless of what that is.  And also that it's a temporary thing--
Story_ID: 203137
Speaker 1: It's like you see I went--I remember once going to a salon a friend of mine owns, Seeley Ante [ph.] her name is, in Paris [France] and there was a woman who came in who was an ambassador's wife.  And she's a black woman.  And she is the top hairdresser in Paris.  But when the ambassador's wife came in and every person in the salon did this woman's hair.  She wasn't happy with what anybody was doing.  So she'd get out of one chair and get in another chair.  She'd get out of another chair and get in the next chair.  Finally the owner said, come here.  She gets in her chair, she goes to a drawer and--this woman had hair down her shoulders and she was going to wear an up do, thick, thick, heavy hair.  She went and found this huge hairpiece, stuck the hairpiece in the middle, pulled the hair up over the hairpiece in a huge ponytail, fanned it out.  The woman left and she was thrilled out of her socks.  And I sat there and I thought, I don't believe what I just saw.  This woman with enough hair for three people she put another hairpiece in there, made a huge ponytail, the woman loved it and she left.  And she was back the next day and had it taken out.  It was strictly temporary.  It was strictly for the night.  She only wanted a look and I laughed because I thought, in the [United] States if some woman got up out of one hairdresser's chair and got in the next hairdresser's chair, if she wasn't murdered by the time she got to the third person's chair, she certainly would have been by the time she got to the fourth person's chair.  But in Europe they have a different attitude about that.  They were all happy to do what they could for her and unhappy that they couldn't be the one to please her and then she left.  That would never happen here.  There's no salon I know that someone would get out of somebody's chair, get in somebody else's chair, get out of that chair and get in somebody else's chair cause they still weren't satisfied because by then all the egos would have been bruised and the woman would have been bruised, being thrown out the door.
Speaker 2: What accounts for that here in the States, 'cause the temperamental hairdresser type--?
Speaker 1: What accounts for that?  I don't really know--
Story_ID: 203138
Speaker 1: You know there, the ironic thing is there are some women who can't be satisfied no matter what's going on because it's not about their hair.  It's about a lot of other things.  And that's one of the reasons why again like I said I--my motto, my personal motto is the best surprise is no surprise.  I do consultations on many person before I ever see them professional in the salon.  I have a consultation because then I know if you're somebody I can deal with, if you're somebody I want to deal with.  Great thing about the consultation is, am I somebody you want to deal with?  It's a very personal kind of relationship.  I mean actually hairdressing is probably one of the last personal service businesses in the world that everyone affords themselves I mean from presidents to heads of state, senators, police chiefs, garbage guys, garbage men, waiter, waitresses. Everybody gets their hair done by somebody at some point.  But the bottom line is it's like in physics, the physical science, water seeks its own level and there are people that you initially connect with.  I mean most women will tell you they can get in the chair of a hairdresser that they've never been to and the minute he touches them they know whether it's going to be good or not.  It's like a massage.  I get massaged two, three times a week.  I can get on a massage table with somebody and the minute they touch me I know if I'm going to complete this massage cause if it's not going to be good, I get up.  Because when something's bad, all you get is agitated.  And there's just something that innately tells you this is or is not going to work and the same thing happens with women, the same thing happens in beauty salons.  You just know that there's some women--you get women who come in and they say oh I went to this person last week and I was with this person last month.  And I was with this person last month.  Red flag goes up.  I'm not even going to make an appointment with you.  Why would I?  So that I can be the next person, when you get in the next person's chair you can say, "Oh and I went to [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones last week and I didn't like what he did either."  Thanks but no thanks.  At no amount of money is it worth it for me to do that.  And so you know you have to make determinations about what you will and won't do, what you can and can't do.  And it has a lot to do with how you personally interact with another person.  Some people just do and some people just don't.  And believe me, more people get in trouble trying to do things with people they don't gel with knowing from the beginning it's not going to be right and you still insist on, well maybe I can work this out.  And it just never happens that way.  And then you end up with both parties being unhappy and upset and having a problem.
Story_ID: 203139
Speaker 1: It seems to me that success in this business--as in a lot of businesses--has to do with personal relationship and how you're able to build those relationships and network them.  Did you, do you think your upbringing prepared you for the kind of networking and relationship building that you need for this?
Speaker 2: I think caring about other people prepared me for it more than anything else.  You have to give a damn.  You really have to care about the person.  Again, I see some people once a week.  I have some clients in my clientele who are my age.  They're between fifty and sixty.  I've been seeing these people week in and week out unless they're on vacation for the last thirty-five or some of them almost forty years.  I have children, I have the children, I'm now cutting the children of children that weren't born when I started with their mothers.  It's such an interpersonal relationship that at some point it almost gets beyond what you're doing with somebody's hair.  I mean you're the part of some--I'm the part of so many other people's lives and their intricately tied to mine in so many ways that it's hard sometimes to know the difference.  As I said I have grandchildren of people that I started with.  I have a client, Marion Thayman [ph.], when she first got her--when she first got married I started doing her hair, when she was pregnant.  Now her daughter just had a baby, her daughter is thirty-one and she's saying you know you have to trim the baby's hair.  And you know you take pictures of me trimming the baby's hair 'cause I have pictures of me trimming her hair.  It kind of gets scary a little because you think you know this whole progression is just going along and I'm going along with it but now it seems like it's going a lot faster.  But you--but I can't deny that there's just this tremendous relationship there.  You also are physically touching somebody.  I mean that, in ways that are more than say a doctor that you'd see once a month or once a year but you're doing this every week.  And then psychologically you know you're on a level or a par with some of these people be they business people, housewives, working wives, wealthy people.  My clientele involves all kinds of people and yet we all get along.  Nobody's concerned about who's making what or who gets their money from where.  It's just like minds.  And that's really what that's about.  Even with the celebrities that I do, celebrities are another thing.  They only want to be treated like people.  They're not--I mean they don't expect--and the funny thing is people think well you know if you do Lainie Kazan, guess what, Lainie Kazan pays the same $55.00 for a wash and set that everybody else does.  Because she's Lainie Kazan, that doesn't give me the right to charge her $210.00 cause she's a celebrity and she's got the money.  I mean she wouldn't like being treated like that.  Nobody would like being treated like that.  And so you know people assume then because you do certain celebrities that you get a greater financial benefit from that.  No you don't, 'cause they don't want to be charged any more than anybody else wants.  And nobody wants to think they're being overcharged because they're special.  So the problem that some people have in not being able to deal with celebrities is they forget that they're real people.  They forget that they're just like you and me and they just want to be treated fairly and they want to be done the way they want to be done and that's the other thing.  Sometimes you know some people allow you to do anything you want and then there are other people who know how they want to look.  And if you can do that, that's fine.  If you can't, they move on.
Story_ID: 203140
Speaker 1: In terms of what your own, I guess, expression in terms of doing this work, what do you think is your, I guess, most important contribution to styling hair?  I mean do you have, is there a particular style that you're associated with or a particular technique that--?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I think I would have to say that there was no hair being blown dry until the '60s [1960s] and I'm part of that.  Nobody got credit for blowing hair, for starting the blown dry trend in the hair and the curling iron trend.  But clearly it came from us, from Emery [ph.], from myself and in Fred Glaser's salon because nobody was doing that prior to that except on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  You know people were always curling hair with curling irons but they weren't blowing it dry.  You know they were drying it and then pressing it and then curling.  Pressing it straight and then curling it.  Or if they were relaxing it, putting it under a dryer and then maybe smoothing it out with an iron afterwards.  But the idea of blowing hair dry from totally wet with a precision haircut and then curling it up afterwards and making it look natural was a concept that started in the early '60s [1960s] and it started in Frederick Glaser's salon.  And it was fostered in great part by myself and by Emery Jones.  But what would happen is at that time too as now, people travel so you do these models and you do something to them.  Models were very astute about what happened to them.  They could go someplace else and tell somebody hey listen, this guy did this and then he did that and I can show you how to do it.  And so that's basically how I think the blow drying trend got around the United States.  The Europeans were doing it long before we were, but not to the extent that we do it today.  So if I'm associated with anything, that would have been the thing I would have been most associated with but nobody got credit for that.  It was just something that evolved and something that happened and now everybody does it and that's it.
Story_ID: 203141
Speaker 1: Who do you think has had the greatest influence on you when you were you know coming along?  What hair--?
Speaker 2: With hair?
Speaker 1: Yes, right in terms of mentorship and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: There isn't really one single person.  As I said I was fortunate and blessed enough to work for Frederick Glaser who I really think was one of the geniuses of hairdressing.  But most hairdressers like most artists get their inspiration from the streets.  They get them from magazines, from publications.  You--I mean people think you kind of laugh sometimes when you--my friend [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice is about to go to the Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois] opening and she said to me before she left for Europe, now think of something really great for me to do for that.  Because what she wants to do, she wants to do some terrific hairdo to go with a terrific outfit that she's going to wear to a once in a lifetime opening and she wants it to be memorable.  I sleep on things and think about will I do this, will I do that, won't I do this, won't I do that?  And I'll eventually come up with something that I think is going to be unique for her as I did for her wedding a few months ago.  And because I'm a hairdresser and trained in European mode, she knows that it's not just going to be some simple nothing it's going to be something that's elaborate and something beautiful and something that she wants.  So like I said the inspiration comes from everywhere and the young people certainly are some of the greatest inspirations for a lot of it.
Story_ID: 203142
Speaker 1: A lot of hair--people don't realize hair is political.  I've been saying this for my whole life.  Hair is very political.  By your hair you define yourself, a lot of people do.  Some people would want to take argument with that but it really is the truth.  As the afro, short afro haircuts in the '60s [1960s] were for women considered militant, they still are by some people today considered militant, you go into natural hairstyles.  I mean I laugh, I see people like Snoop Dogg and I think when I was in high school [Westcott Vocational High School; Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] if somebody came in with hair like that, they would have been beat down to the ground and you sure couldn't survive with a name like Nelly.  You would have never made it to recess.  I mean come on, between these braids and these--I mean it wasn't a way to look.  I mean those were things that were associated with negative images like Buckwheat when I was a kid who was a little kid in 'Little Rascals.'  Buckwheat with the hair sticking out or the ribbons and the--that was a negative, most people that was considered a negative influence and now you got all these young guys running around with braids sticking out like Snoop Dogg or LL Cool J, you know and that's hip, it's with it, it's happening.  You've got all the hair color today.  I mean black women becoming blondes because Clairol sold the whole world on blondes have more fun.  And for some reason people really do believe that.  Personally I think any blonde that's having more fun than me I'm not going to worry about them.  They're not going to last too long anyway, so you know.  But people want that.  They really do think that it happens.  It's the same thing with--between long hair and short hair, with all the hair weaving and techniques that we do for that stuff today.  Hair is so political.  People think people with short hair--I have a woman recently who got angry.  She got a hair weave and she ended up with hair down on her shoulders and she had relatively short hair.  And it was beautifully done and you really couldn't detect it.  And she came back, she was mad as hell.  And I said what is wrong with her?  She said you cannot--she said I don't believe how people react to me, men particularly with this long hair in ways that they never did that I had short hair.  She said what is it with the damn hair?  It was the hair.  It was the hair.  A lot of people color their hair the colors that you know, they think are offensive to other people for example blonding.  Blonding's been around since the '50s [1950s] but everybody wanted to be an ash blonde which was that cool blonde with no gold and no--then here comes Madonna.  She's running around with two inch roots on blonde hair.  Why?  Because she was letting everybody know she was under thirty, she wasn't concerned that you thought this was her natural hair.  She wanted you to know it wasn't her natural hair.  And the other thing is she's separating herself from her mother's generation.  Because no self-respecting woman over thirty would walk around with an inch of outgrowth, much less two inches of outgrowth, just wouldn't happen.  It's a political statement.  It's saying I'm young.  I'm not old.  And with the coloring today blonde hair has gone to those gold tones, yellow tones, the tones that women who were over forty-five would never have wanted, would never have.  But they've been forced to go into them because they don't want people to think they're over forty-five too so you know now you go to the gold tone hair with the thing you abhorred because you don't want anybody to think that you're not with it, that you're not hip.  That you're not a part of today's generation.  And then you have the women who do the punker stuff or they do the biker stuff.  You know again it's political.  By merely wearing your hair in a punk haircut or something sticking on a mohawk, you have now eliminated all those guys that don't want to deal with a woman like you.  They aren't going to, no banker is going to talk to you and you're walking around with punked out hair.  They might take you out for whatever but he's not going to date you seriously.  So you've eliminated yourself, all of these people that are interested.  And the people that are interested you know are people that are really into what you're into.  And so you've just saved yourself a lot of aggravation.  And as I said a lot of people don't realize it, hair really is political in that sense.  That by merely by doing a particular thing with your hair you can set a tone, you can set a standard.  You can set yourself up for where you are and where you want to be which is why a lot of black women were disconnected with the idea of straightened hair or what some people would say, trying to be white and that's not really true.  Because certainly there are, among the race in America, there is none with more diverse hair than black people.  They're just different.  I mean because there are black people with stick straight hair just like there are black people with kinky hair and more so than there are white people on the other spectrum.  And so as I said the hair is a very political thing and people don't realize sometimes how much it is, but very much so.
Story_ID: 203143
Speaker 1: You were talking about the politics of hair and--but you've--some of your clients have been diverse and a lot of them are well known.  You've done everyone's hair from Phyllis Newman, Lainie Kazan and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll to Lena Horne.  Do you have any interesting stories about any of your clients that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: No.  See the one thing is you become the keeper of the flame too.  There are--for the most part, no.  I--you can get yourself in a lot of trouble because invariably sometimes when things happen there is no ultimate truth.  There is your side of a story.  There is their side of a story and then there is the truth which has no relevance to anything.  So I generally try to keep those stories certainly not where I'm being recorded.  There are some stories that I would tell but they're not the kinds of things that--because what happens is people assume then that if you would talk about one person then you're not a trustworthy person.  So if you're not a trustworthy person then we can't deal with you.  And unfortunately I mean that's the way it is in life.  You don't deal with your neighbors if you figure you know the expression the dog that carries the bone brings a bone.  So no there aren't a lot of--there have been a lot of funny things.  Once--there are a couple of cute stories.  Once we were in Detroit [Michigan], Lainie Kazan and I, and I've traveled all over the world with Lainie Kazan for the last thirty years.  I met her when I was working at Frederick Glaser's.  But on the road with the trials of 'Seesaw,' a Broadway show that she was starring in with [Kenneth Joseph] "Ken" Howard.  And we were in Detroit.  We got stuck--I got stuck in an elevator in the St. Regis Hotel [Hotel St. Regis, Detroit, Michigan] and she was panicking.  She was trying to get me out and she had her nails.  She was trying to claw through the rubber.  She thought I wasn't getting any air.  I don't remember how I got on the elevator alone but somehow they'd gotten off and I was on another elevator.
Story_ID: 203144
Speaker 1: And so it was during the run of the 'Seesaw' that Michael Bennett was brought in as the director over a guy who'd already been there.  And they were--you know off the road Broadway shows are always changing things all the time and moving things around.  It was a very traumatic time because in the process of what happened with the show of 'Seesaw' on the road, Michael Bennett came up with the idea of 'A Chorus Line' and 'A Chorus Line' came into being right after he directed 'Seesaw.'  And, but it was real trauma because at one point I met this hairdresser whose name was Ernie Adler [Ernest Adler] and I was very impressed with him because I had seen his credits from film for '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  And when he found out that she [Lainie Kazan] had brought in a personal hairdresser, he was really furious and he confronted me on the stairs.  And he said you--she brought you in over me?  Me?  Ernie Adler?  And he carried on so like it was--and I'm completely taken aback.  I'm--what's with this guy?  And the woman who was the wardrobe person for the show Ann Roth and she still does--she just won an academy award a couple of years ago.  She was so impressed she came to me, she said I'm so impressed with you and your professional attitude.  And I'm thinking professional attitude?  The guy's a Looney Tunes.  I'm not going to get myself involved with, I don't get myself involved with crazy people, I ignore.  So what she thought was my professional demeanor was really just my personal attitude of I don't deal with crazies.  So the guy could say anything he wanted, do anything he wanted.  It didn't matter to me because I don't get myself involved in situations like that.  The same thing happened once in New York [New York].  I went in to do a major promotion for a major, major company and this hairdresser--the artistic director had a friend he was involved with that when he found me there he was furious.  And they were using some black women and some white women.  Well as long as I was doing the black women he was cool with it.  But the sooner I started doing white women he was not happy with it.  So he came in and he insisted that he was going to do these white women.  He was a very prominent hairdresser in New York.  So I went and I'm looking out the window and one of the people from the company, vice president from the company comes to me and says Mr. [HistoryMaker Leigh] Jones I have to commend you on your professional attitude.  He said you know we think it's really great that you're able to handle this so well.  And I'm thinking to myself, handle it well.  What the hell do I care what he does?  Number one, I'm being paid.  Number two, I'm getting the credit.  So what he does I get paid for and I get credit for regardless of whether--so what am I going to be upset about, you know?  And people they assume that I'm a different kind of person because I'm a very emotional person for the most part.  I'm a yeller, I'm a screamer.  Correction, I was a yeller and a screamer.  At fifty-nine years old, I'm not having a heart attack over anybody's hair that's for sure.  I plan to be here for a long time if I have anything to say about it.  Of course I know I don't but in the event that I do and it's not going to be because I got myself upset about something which I have no control.  But funny stories, there have been stories that--but as I said, most of them can't be told and certainly not videotaped.
Speaker 2: Can you tell them anonymously?  I mean you know not giving the name of the person but (unclear) like a real--
Speaker 1: No, because there are too many people that would know the circumstances--
Story_ID: 203145
Speaker 1: Although when we were in Detroit [Michigan] still, Lainie Kazan, still back to Lainie Kazan, she--we would have this, all of this trauma going on because as I said 'A Chorus Line' came into being from what he saw happening at 'Seesaw,' Michael Bennett.  He would come between acts of a show that was actually being performed and fire people in the middle of a show.  Well you don't know what that does emotionally to people that in the show.  I mean they're freaking out.  Here you got you know fifty something actors on the road with one another who have done this show and then three of them get fired in the middle of the first act and the second act.  And they brought in Michele Lee to take over Lainie Kazan's place and she was desperate to keep her role.  And you have all of these things going on, all of this trauma and drama.  So we were having dinner in the restaurant and they started playing some music and we started dancing.  And we were dancing and we were having a nice time dancing, she and I.  And she said to me, "You know we've been through so many things together.  She, you know Barbra Streisand and her hairdresser are having a romantic affair."  And I kept dancing.  And she said, "Did you hear what I said?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well what do you think of that?"  I said, "Well quite frankly my dear you don't pay me enough money for that."  She was as amused as I was.  That was the end of that one.  When her daughter was born her daughter is very, very dark, as the expression goes in Yiddish.  A Sephardic Jew meaning a dark skinned person with this curly hair like a cherub.  And I was with her at the time she conceived this child.  We were in Los Angeles [California] doing some television special for something.  And because I'm not a member of the union I had to work out of a trailer and--'cause they wouldn't let me go on the set cause I'm not union.  And so when her child was born it was so dark people were like--and I'm like no, before anybody jumps to any conclusions I did a lot of things but I didn't do that, okay?
Speaker 2: Well people, a lot of people in the '70s [1970s] thought that Lainie Kazan might have been black when they first saw her on television cause she is dark and she has like kind of curly hair.
Speaker 1: But see when you travel, particularly when you travel with women and you're a hairdresser, you become a lot of other things.  I mean I always had a tuxedo so if they didn't have a date and nobody knows me from chop liver.  But at least you know you have somebody you can be with.  You become an extra arm.  You become extra legs, you become--if you're attached to the person you become a lot of other things other than just a hairdresser.  I mean those are relationships when you're part of somebody's entourage, you really do form some very strong bonds with people and there's no way that you can't.  I mean there's no way--when I was in beauty school [American School of Beauty Culture, Chicago, Illinois] I remember one of the first things they used to always tell us was don't be too intimate or don't get too involved with a customer.  How do you not get involved with somebody that you see every week?  Three hundred and sixty five you know days out of a year you're dealing with people and you see the same people all the time.  There's no way that you cannot be involved in the lives of those people and they in yours.  And that's at work and outside of work and everywhere else.
Story_ID: 203146
Speaker 1: What's the most rewarding aspect of your job?
Speaker 2: The most rewarding aspect of my job?  That's real simple.  I see hairdressing still as--some people think you know the idea is to look strange or the idea is to look different.  I still think most women want to look beautiful.  Most people want to be pretty.  Most people want to live and look better.  The fact that I can help someone achieve something that maybe they couldn't do themselves or the reason you go to a hairdresser is someone has a different vision of you than you have of yourself and they know what you're capabilities are maybe more than you do because of physically what your attributes are.  I mean this hair won't look like Johnny Mathis.  It's not that kind of hair.  You could straighten it all day long and it's not going to look like that because I don't have the density, I don't have the thickness.  Sure you could straighten it and I could put a curling iron in it and give it the Johnny Mathis kind of look.  But you stand me next to Johnny Mathis and trust me it's not the same thing.  So you go to a hairdresser because sometimes as I said that person has a vision of what, the reality of what you can be.  Some people have no idea of what their full potential is.  And so the most rewarding thing is when you do something for someone and they look in the mirror and they're really happy with what they see and you realize that you've helped somebody better themselves, that's the most rewarding feeling I think that comes out of what I do.  It's about helping.  If it were just about the hairdressing that would be the easiest part but how you perceive yourself is many times by what you see when you look in a mirror.  Some people are not visibly affected that way but most people are.  And the old expression of you'll never get a second chance to make a first impression is very true.  That's why we try to look our best on every occasion--
Story_ID: 203147
Speaker 1: But I mean I know people who really are--it's all about them.  I know people who dress for breakfast, lunch and dinner, who change their clothes two, three times a day.  But they're not doing it to impress other people, they're doing it because it makes them feel good.  They're doing it because it's a part of who they are.  Most of them are older people who grew up in a generation when that's when our society did.  People dressed for dinner.  People wore jackets and ties to dinner.  And they didn't just expect a pair of blue jeans to take them anywhere and everywhere.  I mean the society was not as casual as it is today and there are restrictions.  I recently went to the race track for the first time ever.  I've never been to a race track in my life and I went there for a benefit for a major benefit.  And I was surprised, I mean I saw all these people in shorts but I have been told that I had to wear a suit or a jacket.  And I was amazed at all the people that were there in shorts and I'm thinking what is this that all these people are here in these shorts and jeans and cutoffs up to the neck some of them and I'm standing, have me looking like an idiot in this jacket.  But when I got to the clubhouse all the women had hats on and they were in heels and dresses, there were no pants and all the men were wearing jackets.  So it was like I was in two different places and two different societies and it was kind of interesting.  And I do think that it's still great that there are places that demand that you can't just come as you are.  Men tend to do that.  We guys tend to do that more than women do.  I mean how often do you see a woman looking really beautiful and she got on a gorgeous gown and she's standing next to a guy with his shirt out and a pair of jeans?   I mean they don't really fit but what are the women to do?  I mean if you're stuck with a guy and that's how he dresses, then you either dress down or you never dress up if you're going to keep up with him.  And so it's interesting.  But our society I think is changing again and we're moving more towards being less formal into being more formal in certain situations.  We expect people to look a certain way and if they don't we make judgments about them.  I mean I had someone just telling me about the manager of a bank and casual Friday and how this guy came up to her and started talking and she was like he couldn't be the manager of the bank.  He didn't look like a bank manager.  He just looked like some guy.  And it turned out of course after she gave him all this grief, he was the bank manager.  And so we make decisions about other people based on dress and based on looks and I guess back into the politics of hair, you know how you wear your hair and how you present yourself to other people and it's real important.  And if it weren't I wouldn't be in business.  And as I said I'm in business because I like doing it.  After forty years, I still like women, I still like the business.  I still like the challenge.  I still like the idea that I can help someone do something for themselves that maybe they don't have the vision to see, and that gives me a great deal of pleasure and then the fact that I'm helping people in their lives.
Story_ID: 203148
Speaker 1: Just last weekend, I had a client pass away, someone very close to me and she suffered very much before she died of cancer.  And the husband called me and said, "Could you go to the funeral home?  We weren't going to show my wife but my son wants to say goodbye to his mother.  He wants to see her a final time," he said, "and so could you--I know I'm asking you a lot but could you do this?"  Well I was kind of put off because I had just seen the woman a couple of days before and as I said she's my friend, I was there.  Her face was all sunken in.  She dropped under a hundred pounds.  She was skinny.  She was pale.  She was all of these awful things and I'm thinking how am I going to be able to do this?  And I went to the funeral home and they'd done a pretty nice job of reconstructing her face and blowing it up without making her look you know like sometimes too puffy.  And I just went up as is my habit, I said a prayer and I said you know help me to do something good here and this is isn't about me.  This is about her.  And I made her up and I did hands and I did her hair and when I got through I looked at her and I thought, "My god you look beautiful."  And I thought, "Well are you just saying this because you want this to be good?"  So I walked out of the room and I walked back in.  And I looked at her, she looks pretty darn terrific.  I picked up the phone, I called her husband.  I said, "You can come and see your wife.  She really looks amazing."  And he went with his son.  And when I saw them the next day at the funeral, the son came up to me and put his arms around me and said in my ear, "Thank you for giving me my mother back."  And as a result the husband who was never going to open his wife's coffin decided his wife looks so beautiful that he would let he friends see her and so the coffin was open where he had originally planned for it to be closed.  You know the funeral home could have fixed her up but they wouldn't have fixed her up like I did.  I knew her.  I knew what she liked to look like.  I knew how much makeup she put on.  I knew you know where to put her hair and how she wore that hair.  And so when I got through she looked like she always looked.  She didn't look any different and it was enough so that her husband who was grieving and thinking that he could never let anyone see his wife in the terrible state she was in was more than comfortable to let her friends see her.  That made me feel good because that was the last thing that I could do for her, that only I could do for her and it gave me a great deal of satisfaction to do that.
Story_ID: 203149
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the black hair care industry and one of the last I guess places where black folks are self-employed are in you know--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, maybe I'm not getting--
Speaker 1: Now I'm saying one of the places that black folks have traditionally had their own businesses is in the hair care industry, black beauty shops, barber shops.
Speaker 2: Well it's interesting.  Here in Chicago [Illinois], all of the major beauty companies in the United States are worldwide, actually started here in Chicago.  [HistoryMaker] George Johnson was selling his product door to door from his car trunk, became the first black company sold on the New York Stock Exchange [NYSE].  Soft Sheen Corporation, [HistoryMaker] Ed [Edward] Gardner out of Chicago, Luster Corporation [Luster Products Inc.], out of Chicago, Dudley [Products Inc.] out of Chicago.  Chicago has been a real epicenter for the beauty business.  And it's interesting that today almost all of those companies have been taken over by other companies, L'Oreal and Procter & Gamble [Co.] practically own all of the--L'Oreal Paris now owns Johnson Products, Soft Sheen Corporation.  In a way I guess they have been benevolent in allowing these businesses to flourish for so many years.  It's like one day somebody woke up and said, "Hey wait a minute, you know these guys are making millions of dollars here."  And at any point that they choose they actually could you know put people out of business or take them over because they have all the distribution connections and rights.  They have marketing things already in place.  They have dollars that are earmarked.  It was interesting that the comedian Chris Rock said and we see you know these companies have become multimillion dollar companies as I said and they traded on the New York Stock Exchange.  But comedian Chris Rock said there are rich people and there are wealthy people.  There are rich black people but no wealthy black people.  And I was like, what is he talking about?  And then he said [Shaquille] Shaq O'Neal is rich, but the guy who gives him the check is wealthy.  That guy is not black.  And then you understand what that is.  These companies have made millions of dollars, Johnson Products, Soft Sheen Corporation, Dudley, Luster, M&M Products [ph.], they've all made millions of dollars but they've made nothing by comparison to what L'Oreal Paris.  I mean it's a drop in the--it's literally nothing by comparison.  And yet it's made a huge difference in our community.  And I think that black salons will flourish.  I mean there are--I shouldn't say black salons have--should flourish.  I have this global vision.  I, again as I said I wasn't brought up to think in terms of black and white so I don't see beauty as having a color.  And as a result I think you're going to see more and more with the way our society is moving towards oneness, you're going to see more and more less traditional beauty salons, black and white.  You know because when we talk about that we forget that three quarters of the world's people are colored people.  There are Asians, there are Hispanics, there are Iraqis and Muslims.  I mean people who are not white, but who are nonblack.  And we tend to think in this country in black and white and there's a whole world outside the United States.
Story_ID: 203150
Speaker 1: Now do you have any hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Any hopes and concerns for the black community?  That's a lot.  That's asking a lot because I have the hopes and aspirations that all black people have, that one day as [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] said, that we can all be equals.  That everybody can be judged by the content of their character.  That one day we can all live in this world in peace and we can all get along.  And I think that anybody that doesn't feel that way today it's socially not expedient to express those thought and yet there probably are some people who still are holding onto the idea that things are going to go back to the old way.  But I don't think so, not ever.
Story_ID: 203151
Speaker 1: So you don't think that the future of the black community has, is in--strengthening itself but in--rather in dispersing itself or is that what you mean?
Speaker 2: Meaning--?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just asking--
Speaker 2: I'm missing, I'm kind of missing what you're getting to here.
Speaker 1: No, I mean--well I guess the question would be do you see the future of the black community in--strengthening itself as a community or dispersing itself into a larger community basically?
Speaker 2: Have no choice.  You have to become a part of the larger community.  I mean all the flack that Bill Cosby just got for the comments that he made about education and people being educated in America.  You know we talk about black as if it's the Holy Grail.  Not.  I mean black universities, we talk about all the black universities [HBCU].  What is a black university?  It's a university that its curriculum is still based on the same as Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], the oldest white universities in America.  But they're just peopled and staffed by black people.  Does that make a black university?  I mean that's a question that I've always kind of asked.  Black people in the United States are a mirror reflection of white people because when we came or when we were brought to this country rather, from all parts of Africa, most of us forget, Africa was a large continent, not one country.  Many of the slaves who were brought here from different parts of Africa couldn't even converse with one another because they all spoke totally different languages.  They could no more converse with each other than they could converse with a slave master.  And as a result of that we all had different beginnings and diverse beginnings that are still interacting in our lives today I think.  And when people say you know they don't like what black people are in America, I say well if you don't like what black people are in America, then you don't like what white people are in America because we're a direct reflection of white people.  We're a direct reflection of what we were exposed to, what we were taught and what we were shown.  And as I said in that regard you know our blackness is strictly about our color and it's not about any--as far as I'm concerned because as I said there is--I believe it was 1977 during 'Roots' that the statement was made that one black person in ten could trace their ancestry directly to Africa.  I certainly cannot.  My mother's [Florence McDonald Jones Smith], on my mother's side of the family white people, my mother's mother, grandmother [Lottie McDonald].  On my father's [Floyd Jones] family, American Indians [Native American].  So--and if that were the case you know all the black people in the country in the United States today would be that, black.  All the slaves who were brought here from Africa were the color black.  They wouldn't be this color.  They wouldn't be yellow.  They wouldn't be half-white looking if we hadn't intermarried and--there are people who don't like these things but that's the way the history of our country has been.  Whether you like it or not is of no consequence.  That's the way it is.  That's the reality.  And statistics are telling you the intermarriage going the way that it is today, I mean you see people, you see East Indians with Mexicans or Puerto Ricans with Hawaiians.  I mean we always think in terms of black and white for most people in this country when we think you know ethnic things.  And yet we forget there are all these other people out there too who are intermingling and who are dispersing and the whole world is becoming more one.  Now in my lifetime I don't expect to see it, but certainly in my lifetime I know that it's going to--that it's happening.  It's moving in that direction.  People aren't so isolated.  People don't stay away from each other.  And that exposure is leading them to become more one race.
Story_ID: 203152
Speaker 1: When you look back on what you've been able to do, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: As my next--?
Speaker 1: No, as your legacy?  What would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy, that's--see I guess I don't think in those terms.  I mean I've known a lot of people that when they were doing what they were doing.  I mean when I was marching in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois] when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] wasn't Martin Luther King, I remember [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson when he was a theological student at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I often think when he was doing all the things he was doing did he know that he was becoming Jesse Jackson?  Would you have altered some of those things had you known?  I think that there's an expression with Jewish people that says it's born, when you're born it's written or it's written when you're born.  I think that certain things, that when you're born I do believe there are certain things that are laid out for you.  And you don't really have a lot of control over maybe all those things.  As I said the defining factor in my life was the death of my father [Floyd Jones].  What should have been the most tragic thing and yet had he not died I wouldn't have moved to Chicago [Illinois].  Had I not moved to Chicago, my Aunt Annabelle [Matlock (ph.)] wouldn't have had the influence that she had over me.  I might not be in the position that I'm in today.  But I certainly think that I have tried to help people better themselves and in the process have far bettered myself.  December 22, 1944 when I was born, if somebody had to predict what the life and legacy of [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones would be, it certainly wouldn't be what it is and what it has been.  There's no way.
Story_ID: 203153
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  Well I'm not gone yet.  How would I like to be remembered?  That's a deep question.  When my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith] became ill with the cancer I went and bought cemetery plots.  It was something I'd never thought about ever before.  And I think a lot of people don't think about that until they're faced with it but I thought well god forbid something happens to her, I'm going to be I can see in the shape my dad's [stepfather, Leon Smith] in, he's not going to be able to do anything.  And I have a single sister who has multiple sclerosis.  Her name is Conita Burton.  And I figured if something happens to me, my--I'm my mother's responsibility.  If something happens to her, she's my mother's responsibility.  There's my mother, there's my stepfather and there's my Uncle Jim who has never married, has no children, has a provision for her.  So I bought a space at Oak Woods Cemetery [Chicago, Illinois] that has six plots.  And that's the first time I ever thought about how do I want to be remembered?  And I thought I just want to be remembered as a person who cared and as a person who did the best that they could to try to help other people be better.  And as I said in the process became a better person as a result of all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 203154
Speaker 1: This is a photo of myself and the late great jazz pianist, Dorothy Donegan who is a native Chicagoan [Chicago, Illinois] after a performance at George's supper club on Kinzie Street probably in the middle '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Great.  And then I think on this one, the photo we're interested in is this one, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead and get this one for us.  And are you still rolling?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, you can start your description Mr. [HistoryMaker Leigh] Jones.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my sister's [Conita Burton] wedding in 1967, my mother [Florence McDonald Jones Smith], a couple of her sisters, all of my cousins--well not all of my cousins but a lot of my cousins.
Speaker 2: Keep going.  You can keep going.  Or did you--you got it all?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry I distracted you.  All right Mr. Jones.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my aunt, Annabelle Matlock [ph.] who was a model in the early '50s [1950s].  She ran a [Cleo Johnson] School of Charm and Modeling [Chicago, Illinois] and she's the person who saw the artistic side of me and pushed that as I was a child.  She bought my first piano and taught me piano, took me to piano lessons.  She was for all practical purposes my Auntie Mame and she was a great lady.  Unfortunately she died in 1961 at the age of thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you want to swing left then and get his mom.
Speaker 2: And this is a photograph of my mother taken about the same time as the picture of my aunt, middle '50s [1950s].  My mother is a terrific lady.  I think she's awfully pretty.  She's awfully nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, great, thanks.  Okay.  And did we already get this one of you?
Speaker 2: That's me.
Speaker 1: Did we do that one?
Speaker 2: A pretty strange picture, definitely '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: You can describe it.
Speaker 2: Speak up for us.
Speaker 1: You can describe it.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself taken in my aunt's home, obviously '60s [1960s], jumpsuit, chain link belt.  I think I had just begun working as a hairstylist that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  Thanks.
Speaker 2: This is a shot of myself taken by Victor Skrebneski after we were doing a fashion shoot.  And I said to him I really need a new publicity photo and he did this photo.  It was probably taken in the late '80s [1980s] and I recently tried to get him to do a new one and he said why?  Unless you're shaving your mustache it's going to look like the same photograph, maybe with a few bags and bags under the eyes but that's about it.  My mother always said that if I ever got lost this is the photograph she would show because for certain it's what I look like.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  Okay this one.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph that was taken at the annual Playboy Bunny of the Year contest and the girl I'm working on I can't remember her name but it was very odd because I--when she first came in, in jeans I didn't think that she was a very pretty girl and I thought she had a very flat shape until she put on that playboy bunny uniform.  And she ended up winning the contest as well.
Speaker 1: And what year do you think that was?
Speaker 2: And that would have been oh, late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself and my roommate, college, Mitchell Cook.  And it was taken probably 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Cook is spelled--?
Speaker 2: C-O-O-K.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself.  I was fifteen years old.  I graduated [Westcott Vocational] High School [Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and this is a photo I had given to my grandmother.  When she passed away I took it back.  In the early '60s [1960s] along with hairdressing I did some modeling and this was a shot that was taken by Chicago [Illinois] photographer [Richard] Dick Krueger and it's probably middle '70s [1970s], middle '70s [1970s] early '80s [1980s].  This is a photo of singer/actress Lainie Kazan probably taken in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] when the lion's mane hairdo was a big hairdo at the time.  She had a lot of hair.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a relatively new photograph, last year.  It was taken and used for a European magazine.  At this point in my career, I'm doing a lot of hair coloring and so that's what some of these photos that were taken for this shoot were about, were hair color.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And this is another photo taken from that same shooting that was done primarily to promote hair coloring that I've become involved in, in the last couple of years for a company here in Chicago called Avalon Industries [Inc., Melrose Park, Illinois].
Speaker 1: While you're on that subject we should probably go to this.
Speaker 2: Right.  This is a photograph of Camille Lewis who was the second runner up in the Miss America Pageant in 2003.  I had recommended her for this job 'cause I thought she was such a beautiful woman with beautiful hair.  And her hair had originally had been brown and we made it black for this photograph.  This is another photograph from a series of hair color ads that I've done.
Speaker 1: And this is the first panel of three panels.  We're going to the second panel now and these will be stitched together in post.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Again this is more of that same hair coloring.  The model in the forefront is Camille and interestingly enough, my mother who is seventy-four years old looked at this photograph and said, "Can you make my hair that color?"  I thought that was kind of interesting.
Story_ID: 203155
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough these photographs of these hair color ads for Avalon Industries [Inc., Melrose Park, Illinois] were shot by former Chicago [Illinois] hairstylist, Ernest Collins who has now become a photographer based out of Paris, France.
Speaker 2: Great.  Okay, that was the last panel.  Those three should be editorially put together.  That will give you a better looking image in the long run.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of then Chicago top model [HistoryMaker] Dori Wilson.  Now she is a top public relations person in Chicago.
Speaker 2: What vintage would you give this?
Speaker 1: And this photograph was probably taken in 1970.  This is a photograph of [HistoryMaker] Daphne Maxwell [Reid] who has become the actress Daphne Maxwell Reid taken in the, probably the late '70s [1970s] for the opening of the Ultra Sheen salons in Chicago.  Daphne was a model at that time and she was the first black Miss Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  She's now an actress in Hollywood.  This is a photograph of Lainie Kazan, singer/actress and her baby or then child/baby, her only child, Jennifer Daniel and it was taken probably in 1973 by a Chicago photographer, [Richard] Dick Krueger.  This is an Ebony magazine cover of 1979 of [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll shortly after the death of her husband.  We've been friends for a long time.  She's been my client for a long time.  She's a terrific lady and it's one of a couple of Ebony magazine shots.  This is a shot of, that was done in New York [New York] for I believe Clairol if I'm not mistaken, middle '70s [1970s] for hair color.  This is a fun photograph.  This photograph was taken for the opening of the Johnson Products [Company] prototype salon on West 95th Street in the middle '80s [1980s].  And I got to remember her name, can't remember her name.
Speaker 2: Okay, what else--?
Speaker 1: Mar, Marcella Tate.  This is a photographer, it was taken for Chicago Magazine of a young model whose name was Marcella Tate.
Speaker 2: Why do I feel we did this one?  Did we do this one?  We did, didn't we?
Speaker 1: I think we did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  We're almost done then.
Speaker 1: We just got the big one here.
Speaker 2: This photograph and the one on the next page were taken in New York for Clairol for a color photo--a color book that they put out called kaleidoscope and it was probably done in the middle '80s [1980s] to late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything to add for this one?  Got it?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're done!
Speaker 2: We're done?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Can I ask for one photograph that I'd like though?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The one of the Spiegel ad?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: (BRIEF DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember the date.  Okay, that's kind of a bummer.  Must have been middle '80s [1980s].  It was when Spiegel was trying to revamp their operations and change their fashion image.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: I believe it was middle '80s [1980s] but it's one of my favorite things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Big story went with that.  I was at a board meeting for something and Victor Skrebneski called and said help, help, help 'cause I had refused to do the job.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: And he called me and said I'll give you anything you want if you just come over here and do this.  And I was like I don't understand.  He said well I've got a young hairdresser over here who doesn't understand big hair and I want really big hair.  He said so I'll pay you, I'll give you a credit.  I'll do whatever, just show up.  So I left my board meeting and went to do this.  This was an ad for the new Spiegel.  It was at a time when Spiegel was trying to change their fashion image particularly, taken in the mid-'80s [1980s], to late '80s [1980s] by fashion photographer Victor Skrebneski here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: The model was Debra Larsen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think we're done.  Anything else?
Speaker 1: No, that's it.  Like I said if we couldn't get in those--those bigger ones are probably too--so I think that--
Speaker 2: (BRIEF PAUSE)
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was an ad done in 1975 by Johnsons Products Company.  It was actually, at that time I was pushing for an ad with a girl with short hair 'cause there had been very few ads done of black women with short hair.  The women in the photograph are Renee Prejean [ph.] with the short hair, Daphne Maxwell Reid with the base and Doreen Stern [ph.] in the back with the Grecian hairdo.
