Story_ID: 28472
Speaker 1: Alright.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Maam, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Marian Cecelia Johnson-Thompson.   M-A-R-I-A-N, C-E-C-I-L-I-A.  The last name is hyphenated, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, hyphen T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And Maam, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 9, 1946 in Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm retired, but I am Professor Emerita of Biology and Environmental Sciences at the University of the District of Columbia.  I'm also Adjunct Professor in the School of Public Health, Department of Maternal and Child Health at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  And in 19--, I'm sorry, in 2008, I retired from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences of the National Institutes of Health [NIH], as Director of Education and Biomedical Research Development.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 7, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At present you're in my home where I live with my husband.  My address is--
Speaker 1: You don't have to give your address if you don't want to, but--
Speaker 2: That's right, okay.
Speaker 1: But the town--
Speaker 2: In Durham, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: In Durham, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: In Durham, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 28473
Speaker 1: And alright, so before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food.  I really enjoy good food.  I really can't tell you one that is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Red is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say spring, before it gets too warm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is a warm place, probably Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There's various variations of it, but, "To whom much is given, much is expected."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28474
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side, but separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, and she's deceased, is Rose Mae Henderson Beavers, B-E-A-V-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 22, 1919, in Galveston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace her side?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can trace my mother's maternal side and her paternal side.  So, her maternal side are--her mother's name was Eula Chagois Henderson.
Speaker 1: Okay, you have to spell that.
Speaker 2: C-H-A-G-O-I-S.
Speaker 1: C-H-A...
Speaker 2: ...G-O-I-S.
Speaker 1: And Eula?
Speaker 2: E-U-L-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what kind of--is that French?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Creole.
Speaker 1: Creole, okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born 1898 in Maurice, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I've been able to trace her great-grandfather to a slave boy, at the age of eight.  And he was born to an African slave by the name of Lyse, L-Y-S-E, Pucelier (ph).  And his father was a slave master, Chagois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this slave boy was the--
Speaker 2: Father--
Speaker 1: The father of, no, the product of the relationship between?
Speaker 2: The slave master and slave woman.
Speaker 1: And he was the father of Eula?
Speaker 2: No, he was the, he was the grandfather.
Speaker 1: The grandfather of Eula, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And I have that specific date of the recording when he was nine years old.  I just can't remember it right now.  But he grew up, he grew up with the slave master's other two sons.  And at some point, I don't know where, he was considered freed.  But my mother's, that side of the family, has a very interesting history in which they always said there were no slaves in the family--that they had come directly from Lyon, France.  And we also received information about family reunions over there.  So, all along, they're thinking that they came directly from France.  So, I never had a chance to even tell my mother this, because she died before I found the information.
Story_ID: 28475
Speaker 1: So, your mother's [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] story is that she came directly from France?
Speaker 2: Her ancestors.
Speaker 1: You did say that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, well, now on her father's side, the most information we have is of his grandfather, who came from--The records show that he actually came from Virginia, I believe, in 1858 as a freed man.  And he was a carpet, I'm sorry, he was a carpenter.  Now, the interesting thing about that is we don't know if he, when he became freed, you know, was he born freed or did he buy his freedom?  We don't know that.  But the carpenter piece is very interesting, because my grandfather, who is my mother's father, built pianos before he passed, in Galveston, Texas.  And my uncles all make chairs, tables, as a hobby.  One uncle actually has a few pieces packed, that he had a special valet that he made.  So it's interesting that that followed.  But he came down from, the history says Virginia.  He was a Henderson, and bought land in Abbeville, Louisiana.  And we've had family reunions in Abbeville.  Sometimes later when I moved here to Durham [North Carolina], I heard about Henderson, North Carolina.  And I always wondered if he was, had been a slave in Henderson.  But I said, well he came from Virginia.  But more history showed me that back in that time, Henderson, North Carolina was really in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, it could have been.  I haven't done enough research to really find out.  There's so few leads.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean is there any, I mean what makes you think it would be Henderson?  I mean, that maybe he came from--because of the name?
Speaker 2: Because of the name Henderson.  And then by the mere fact that the history said he came from Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Henderson, North Carolina was in a part of Virginia back in that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also, there is a, his name was Littleton, Henderson.  There's also a Littleton--Henderson--Littleton, Virginia.  (laughter)  I found that, a Littleton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your mother's parents do?
Speaker 2: My, as I said, my grandfather was a carpenter, and he made pianos.  He died very early.  He died when my mother was sixteen [years old], from Hodgkin's disease.  And before that time, my grandmother didn't work.  But when he died, she got a job at what was then John Sealy Hospital in Galveston, Texas.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?  That's John Sealy--
Speaker 2: J-O-H-N, S-E-A-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had a home right there on Sealy Avenue.  The hospital has since been changed to University of Texas Medical Branch Hospital, UTMB.  But the interesting thing about my grandmother is that she went there to work, washing test tubes.  And she moved up to a, to a phlebotomist.  She would take blood.  And that was pretty unusual for a black woman back in the day.  But as I'm thinking about it, she was very, very fair.  I'm sure they knew she was black, because I understand that back in those days, if she had to take off from work, she could send her daughter up there to work for her, and that was accepted.  And of course, her daughter was dark-complexioned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and your grandfather made pianos.  Was he working for a company, or was he doing this--
Speaker 2: See, I don't know, I'm not--
Speaker 1: --custom making himself?
Speaker 2: I never heard, I think he, I'm almost certain he was working for a company.  Yeah, he was definitely working for a company.  And I don't have that information.  I need to ask my uncle, who is still living, about who he actually worked for.  That would be interesting to know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28476
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] say about growing up?  Did she have any stories that she shared with you about--
Speaker 2: Well, there were nine of them.  You know, Catholic families.  I remember my grandmother, I guess at the age of when I was four or five [years old] and I was in Texas.  I can see her--every morning she would get up and pray, you know, kneel and pray.  And it was also known that she went to Mass everyday.  They belonged to the black Catholic church there.  So, a lot of life centered around the church.  My mother, growing up she was the oldest, and she talked often about, you know, being responsible for the other children in the family.  They lived in walking distance from the beach, and they used to walk to the beach a lot.  That was a lot of the activity.  In later years my mother used to always talk about the Catholic school that she went to.  And I think it was run by the Little Sisters of the Poor.  But I was always amazed at my mother's knowledge.  She didn't go to college, but she was a very, very, bright woman and just knew so much about everything, especially internationally.  And when I would ask her something, or she would tell me something that I didn't know about, she would say, "You mean you don't know?"  And what it boiled down to was that she just got a very good education at this Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Now you--
Speaker 2: She also talked about her father, too, how, you know, her father--her father was such a strong force in the family.  And apparently when he died, everything just changed so drastically, in terms of the family unit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did your mother have an occupation that she--or aspiration that she dreamt about, you know, fulfilling when she was young?
Speaker 2: The only thing that I remember that she really liked to do, she was a great cook.  And for a while when she was in Boston [Massachusetts], she worked as a cook on the Cape [Cod].  And she used to talk about that all the time.  And then when we moved to Florida, she didn't work until my father died.  And then she started working as a housekeeper.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a chance to graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Little Sisters of the Poor.  What was the name of the church and school?  Was the church and school combined?
Speaker 2: The church was Holy Rosary Catholic Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was the school attached to the church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And her name was Rose?
Speaker 2: Rose, but everybody called her Mae.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was Mae.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, okay, so born in 1919.  So, she would have been coming into adulthood around the time of World War II, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And actually, now that you say that, I do remember her speaking about--in fact I know who he is--one of her cousins who apparently he was a Communist.  And he came to Galveston [Texas] with a lot of Communist information, left things there at the house.  And they ended up burying it in the backyard.  And--
Speaker 1: They were kind of, yeah, it was tense, too tense around there to be a Communist.
Speaker 2: (laughter)  I just, I mean I'm just remembering it as you said it.  But the interesting thing about--oh, the other thing I should tell you that was very interesting about her growing up.  It's that before her father died, they would, they would go to Louisiana, to Abbeville, and visit his siblings.  And they had a car, which was very unusual in that day, in those days.  And my grandfather--they also, my grandfather also bought a home. It was a small place.  It was right on Sealy Avenue.  And when my grandmother died, the house sort of became abandoned, it was sort of abandoned.  Nobody was living there, and they finally tore it down.  But in later years I wish I had, you know, really realized--I would have bought it.  Because apparently--just to keep it for the family, because I do believe in land now.  You know, I believe that.  And so, I was sort of disappointed nobody in the family thought about pooling money to keep it.  So they sold it to a church, and the church is on that site now.
Story_ID: 28477
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Edwin, E-D-W-I-N, Saint Aloyious.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a mouthful.
Speaker 2: A-L-O-Y-I-O-U-S, Johnson.  So, so, in Jamaica, you know, when you're Catholic, you take on a Saint name when you're baptized.  Usually you are--you have to say Saint.  In fact, we did that to my second son, Emil, because his name was Christopher.  So very early on, his name was Emil Saint Christopher Thompson.  But somehow or another, I guess he didn't like writing all of that.  But he probably got teased, so it's sort of, (laughter), it's sort of forgotten now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so and what is your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born 1908 in Kingston, Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not much.  Nothing, really.  His mom--apparently, he came to this country either late 30s [1930s] or early 40s [1940s].  He always says that when he came, he only had a dollar in his shoe.  He had a brother whose name was Canute, C-A-N-U-T-E.  And apparently he and his brother had some big disagreement during those early days, and they lost contact.  One of my sisters has recently found information--I think it was on the--Staten Island [New York] where they immigrants would come in--of a Canute Johnson born in Jamaica who came in 1911.  But we haven't been able to find any follow-up on that.  So, I don't know anything about--I know his mother's name was Mary Dakkar, D-A-K-K-A-R.  And his father's name was John Johnson.  I also know through my stepmother that his mother was from Haiti and his father was from Cuba.  Back in those days, you know, before the Bay of Pigs and things, there was a lot of going back and forth to the islands, very common.  And Cuba is very close to Jamaica.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: So, that's all, you know, I know about him, you know, his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, once he got here, he didn't have really contact with the rest of them?
Speaker 2: No.  Apparently, from--my stepmother told me that his mother, he would write his mother.  And that when he heard that his mother had died, when he got the letter, it was, you know, she'd been dead and buried for like months.
Story_ID: 28478
Speaker 1: Now, did he [Johnson-Thompson's father, Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] have a chance to finish school in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: He finished, yeah, he finished school in Jamaica.  And, you know, he used to always talk about, you know, he went to school under the British system, a very, very strict and very advanced form of education.  And he too, was very, very bright.  I can remember as a child that he would go through learning all these languages.  You know, he would have these records, where he was teaching himself Italian, French, and Portuguese as well as Spanish.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, my father came here and he went to Columbia University [New York, New York].  He got a master's [degree].  I can't remember what year that was.  I remember seeing in my earlier days, I remember seeing the diploma in his office.  And then he went to Boston City College [Boston, Massachusetts].  But let me step back and say, before that, he actually, and I don't know a whole lot, I found a little bit of information.  He went to, before he went to school, before he went to medical school he worked for the USO in Galveston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how he met my mother.
Speaker 1: Is this during the war period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right before the, yeah, right before the war, I guess.  Well, when did the war start?
Speaker 1: Nineteen Forty One [1941], for the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Well, it was, yeah, it was during that time.  So, it was probably--I think-- because I do have some information that I got from the USO. I happened to find this on-line.  And they had records, the history of the USO in Galveston [Texas] between '41 [1941], '42 [1942] or whatever.  And I sent for it, because I wanted to see if they had any records of his name.  The only thing that I could find was an announcement that Mr. Edwin Johnson was coming to head up the colored USO, because the USO wasn't integrated.
Speaker 1: Right, segregated [U.S.] Army and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, segregated--
Speaker 1: And the entertainment was segregated, too.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And I hadn't realized that until I saw that written (laughter) in this announcement.  So, he went there to do that, and that's how my parents met.
Speaker 1: Now, did the [U.S.] Navy have a big installation there in Galveston, I guess?
Speaker 2: The Navy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking that--
Speaker 2: Because there's a--see, I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering.
Speaker 2: Maybe they did.
Speaker 1: They were entertaining, you know, servicemen, so, I'm thinking--
Speaker 2: Right, they must have, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that they probably did.
Speaker 2: They must have, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some strategic base or something there.
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28479
Speaker 1: So, he [Johnson-Thompson's father, Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] left there [Galveston, Texas] and went to Boston [Massachusetts], to medical school.  And what was--and it's a very interesting issue here, which was--and I always knew that it was Boston City College Medical School, because I saw his diploma.  And then I've also, I--you know, in later years I saw the directory of physicians and, you know, what school they went to.  But when I went--you know, I guess in the past twenty years when I just started doing a lot of general history, I found out there's no Boston City College Medical School.  But I was also able to talk to one of his friends and classmate who died a couple years ago, Dr. Shirley, Calvin Shirley, in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  And he told me he also graduated from that school.  And he told me that there was a class action suit brought against Boston City College Medical School back in the early forties, a discrimination suit.  And it was won, and they took in a lot of blacks, and a lot of them were West Indian.  And soon after that, the school closed and most of it evolved, well, it sort of dissolved into Tufts Medical School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, he worked, he finished Boston City College.  He came, actually, down here to Fayetteville, North Carolina.  No, to Wilmington, North Carolina, and interned under a very notable physician who did a lot in Wilmington, North Carolina to integrate the hospitals.  His name was Dr. Gray.  I can't, I think it's Bill Gray.  So, he interned here and then he went down to Clewiston, Florida to work.
Speaker 2: Dr. Bill Gray is African American?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Dr. Bill Gray, there's a lot of history about Dr. Bill Gray.  He and another physician, I can't think of his name.  He's actually--he went to Howard's [University, Washington, District of Columbia] medical school.  They actually integrated the hospital in Wilmington.  When I say integrate--well, both.  First of all, they couldn't be on, they couldn't have positions at the hospital, as well as blacks couldn't attend.  So, they fought, fought with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  My father was not a part of that though, because this happened in the '50s [1950s].  And by that time, my father was in Florida.
Story_ID: 28480
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now was your father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] a general practitioner, or did he--
Speaker 2: He was--his sign in his office was "Physician and Surgeon."  Now, the other thing--I mean, it's very interesting, I think, to bring in the racial piece here.  The reason why he was recruited to Clewiston, Florida--Do you know anything about Clewiston, Florida?  It's around Lake Okeechobee, and it was the site of the United States Sugar Corporation.  That's where all the sugar was produced back in the day.  And during those days, sugar cane was manually harvested.  And so, they would recruit West Indians from Jamaica, Trinidad and Barbados.  And so, as you can imagine with that kind of work--and they used, oh gosh, what's the name of those?  My husband and I were talking--They used the--
Speaker 1: Machete?
Speaker 2: Machetes.  So, you can imagine, there were a lot of accidents.  But the white doctors would not treat the people, the blacks.
Speaker 1: The black workers.
Speaker 2: So, my father was recruited to, you know, treat.  And of course because he was Jamaican, you know, it was the idea that he could relate.  So, that's where he worked, but for a very short period because he died in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Now, the name of this town again?
Speaker 2: Clewiston, C-L-E-W-I-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: Florida.  Is it run by, it was a town run by the United States Sugar--
Speaker 2: Corporation.  At that time, okay, everybody worked for, you know, either the Sugar Corporation--or the people who worked for the Sugar Corporation, in terms of domestic employees, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but your father worked for them just a short period of time, and then--
Speaker 2: Well, he died in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he, so that ended obviously his service.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But he also had a private practice there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now are there any stories that your father passed on to you about growing up, or about--
Speaker 2: Not really.  My father was such a jokester, as is my brother.  So, sometimes when people joke so much, you don't know if they're telling you the truth or they're making it up, right?  But, not really.  He talked about, you know, going to school and, you know, really adhering to his lessons, and really being quiet and never dating any girls until he got to the United States.  And his friend, who was my godfather, corroborates that story.  He remembered my father.
Speaker 1: Is this Dr. Bill Gray?
Speaker 2: No, no, not him.  This was, and this is an important person in my life.  This was Herbert Schaeffer, S-C-H-A-E-F-F-E-R.  So, when I would be out, my brother and I, Tony--when we would be with my father, you know, on short spurts in Clewiston, Herbert Schaeffer, my godfather--he wasn't my godfather at that point--used to always tell my daddy that I was such a lovely little girl, you know, and couldn't he share me?  And my father would say, and I can remember this.  My father said, "Over my dead body."  And so, it just so happened that after he died and I was living with my stepmother--and I just, you know, with my best girlfriend--we just planned to go to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].  I just basically followed behind her, and I thought I was going.  And then my stepmother told me, "Oh, no, you have to just get that out of your mind.  You know, you can go to the junior college here.  And maybe after you go to junior college, you know, maybe you can go to Howard."  And, of course, I was devastated.  And when I told the Schaeffers that--at that time I just called them, Mr. and Mrs. Schaeffer.  They said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.  We'll send you to college."  Which they did.   And so, I'm forever grateful to them.  I mean, they sent me lock, stock and barrel that first year.  I can remember it so well.  They bought everything that I needed, and they would call me every week.  You know, back in the day, a telephone call was a big thing, in the '60s [1960s].  They called me every Sunday, and wanted to make sure that there was nothing that somebody had that I wanted, because they didn't want anything to interfere with my schooling, just let them know what it was.  Luckily, and I can look back on it and see that I was very mature--and so I never took advantage of all that they offered.  But--and he died, he died my senior year, just a few months before I graduated from Howard.  But the whole idea was that--and he would say it sometime, too, that my father said only over my dead body can you have her, you know.  And they did take care of me very well.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 28481
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson and Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] met?
Speaker 2: No, not other than the USO [at Galveston, Texas].  My mother went there, you know, I guess to meet up with the servicemen, and she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then obviously she followed him up to Boston [Massachusetts].  That's where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said they really never got married.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But your mother went to Boston with him?  Or you said she followed him.  Now is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't think she went with him.  I think he went--
Speaker 1: And then she came later?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And so, this is after the war and he's working on his degree?
Speaker 2: M.D., yeah.  I was born in '46 [1946].  I think he started medical school [at Boston City College] in '45 [1945].  He finished in '49 [1949].
Story_ID: 28482
Speaker 1: So, when you think about your parents' [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers and Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm a very good combination of both.  I think I got a lot of my self-confidence from my mother.  And then I got a lot of my ability--not ability--my eagerness for learning and education from my father.   My mother believed in education, but she didn't, she didn't really just talk about it all the time, like my father.  My father wanted me to be a doctor.  In fact, I remember one of my close girlfriends when I was in the seventh grade, had a serious accident.  And so, he let me come into the hospital and watch the surgery.  Which as I look back on it, it's very, very unusual, because he was the only black doctor at this small white hospital.  And I mean today, you couldn't do anything like that at all, because it would be, you know, unethical, for one thing.  But--
Speaker 1: So, he put you in a surgical outfit with the mask and everything?
Speaker 2: And I was sitting up in the thing looking down.
Speaker 1: That's something.  I have never heard a story like that before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, they probably didn't know who was in the gallery.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But you know, and when we would go places--I mean when we would be in town, and he'd have to go in and see patients, we'd be right there with him.  And, you know, go into his office and he'd be talking to patients.  We'd be right there.  One of the things, too, that I remember was that he smoked a lot.  And I can remember him just smoking over the patients, you know.  He'd be talking, with just a cigarette in his mouth.  But I think that was common back in the day, you know.
Speaker 1: That's true, that's true.  It's amazing now that we don't see it as much, but it was everywhere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 28483
Speaker 1: You have, you've got a brother, you mentioned.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] had six children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And five of them were with my father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson], one of them wasn't, my baby sister.  But my--I was the oldest.  And my brother Tony who's right after me, a year and a half younger--my father would always have us back and forth to Clewiston [Florida], so we were always together.  And then I have two other brothers and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there were six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Total.
Speaker 1: But the two of you were always--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would be just--me and Tony, we would go back and forth with my father to Clewiston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess because we were older.  So, as I told you, I started first grade in Clewiston, Florida, living with my father.  Actually living with my father and a friend of his, a female friend, who was his nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother and father, they didn't get married, but they were together for a while?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Apparently.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what, you know, was it the nurse that broke up the marriage?
Speaker 2: Well, no, he was married, too.
Speaker 1: He was already married?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he never lived with, he never lived with a wife.  He didn't live with the nurse.  He lived by himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the first, my first grade, I lived with her.  And guess what?  She was from Durham, North Carolina.  And we came up--I guess maybe when I was about fifth grade, we drove up to North Carolina, drove up here and spent a week or so here.  So, it's very interesting, that I would end up in Durham, North Carolina.  She has since died, but her daughter comes back and forth, and we often get together.  Her daughter was five years older than I, and she used to call me her little sister, even though we weren't.  So, when we met up forty years later, you know, she said, "Oh, I always wondered what happened to my little sister."  So, that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28484
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory that I have?  I can tell you one of the earliest childhood memories I have.  I must have been four or five [years old].  And we, my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] was going up to Boston [Massachusetts].  And it was my mother, my brother Tony, and my brother Gerard, who had to be no more than two.  And I can remember being in Texas, getting up early in the morning with my grandmother.  She was saying her prayers.  And it was dark, and we left to go get the train, and we went up to Boston.  It was probably one of my earliest memories.  Now, the interesting thing about that--when I think about it now, I think of my mother with a five year old, a three and a half or four year old, and a two year old, traveling up to Boston on the train.  And I often wonder how did she go to the bathroom?  I guess back in the day, you would just tell somebody to watch your children.  And then I remember stopping in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] because we had to transfer.
Speaker 1: And that's a long train ride.
Speaker 2: That's a long train ride.
Speaker 1: From Galveston [Texas] to Boston?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, so that's probably one of my earliest--And actually even earlier than that, I can remember living--the three of us living with a woman.  Because apparently my grandmother had said she wasn't going to take care of us.  And I imagine it was one of those kinds of things where my mother was just a rebel.  She just went off about her business, and they probably knew that she was following this married man, and they just- So, we stayed, we actually lived with a lady by the name of Mrs. Reed.  I'll always remember her name.  And gosh, we were probably one, three and four [years old].  And then my mother came and got us and took us up to Boston.  And she was working for--this was when she was working on the Cape, as a cook.  And when we went to Boston we stayed with someone, because she worked continuously on the Cape.  And she would come in on a Wednesday.  And Wednesday was our fun day.
Story_ID: 28485
Speaker 1: And this is interesting.  I know you're not writing this, it's not important.  But this is very interesting.  So, she [Johnson-Thompson's mother, Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] had a friend who I used to call Aunt Margie.  And I remember this Aunt Margie lady was very nice to us.  She was tall, and I always thought, so very pretty.  And she worked at a funeral home, because we would go to the funeral home.  But right before my mother died, I asked, I said, "Mama, why didn't you ever get back in touch with Aunt Margie?"  She said, "Oh, I don't know, I don't know." I said,  "Didn't she used to work at a funeral home?"  And she said, "You remember that?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "She owned that funeral home."  And I said, "Really?"  So, about fifteen years ago--about fifteen years ago--maybe 12, 13 years ago, I was in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] at the Marriot Wardman [hotel] at a meeting.  And I ran into some people.  They said they were from Boston [Massachusetts].  I said, "Oh, I was born there."  "Oh, you were?  Where did you live?  You know, who were your parents?" I said, "Well, they're not there."  They said, "Well, don't you know anybody?"  And I said "Oh."  I said, "I remember one lady.  I don't know her last name, but she owned a funeral home.  Her name was Margie."  And they said, "Oh, you mean Margie?  Yes, she owns, she's still working.  She's ninety, and she's still running that funeral home."  So, I was able to get in touch with her, go up to Boston, meet her.  And she told me some things about me when I was two or three, and it was just very, very interesting.  She never knew what had happened to my mother, but a very lovely lady.  And she passed about two years ago.  So, I've been on this journey of research, professionally, on people but also on myself, you know.
Speaker 2: Because this is an unusual story from the usual family stories we hear.
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: You know, because that seemed like it would be a time when people got married and stayed together a long time, and stuff.  This is very unusual--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in a sense that it's just so much going on here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I told you.  Didn't I tell you it was very complex?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was complicated, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you're born in Boston, you go back to Galveston [Texas], then come back to Boston again.  And then--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I don't know how many trips it was.  I would assume--I was born in Boston--Texas, then to Boston.  I don't think there was another trip...  And then from Boston to Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: So, you didn't go back to Galveston for--
Speaker 1: I did not go back to Galveston until I was an adult, you know.  I went there when an aunt passed, probably in the late seventies.  Yeah, probably in the late seventies, because I had a chance--my grandmother was still living, and then she died a couple of years later.  But that was the first time I had gone back.  And my mother had only gone back about a year before then, because she just never went back, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I imagine it was, had a lot to do with, you know--But she would write her family and she would talk about her family all the time, just so many different stories.  She would talk about her family, yeah.  So, they did get back together before she passed.
Speaker 2: Her family and?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know--a lot of back and forth visiting.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And now we stay pretty close with them.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're about five in Boston when--is that when your father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] got the job in Florida and went to--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.  My father--so, when I was in Boston--when I went back it had to be around '53 [1953], '54 [1954].  But he had finished medical school in '49 [1949].  And you know what?  See, you're making me think of a whole lot of stuff.  Because my mother also came to Fayetteville [North Carolina].  So, and I don't believe I was, in fact I'm almost certain I wasn't with her.  So, maybe I was with relatives or somebody else during that time.  Because my father finished in '49 [1949], right.  And he did an internship, I guess from '40 [1940] to maybe '51 [1951], '52 [1952] and then he went to Florida.
Speaker 2: And the internship was in?
Speaker 1: Fayetteville--I mean in Wilmington, Wilmington [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: In Wilmington, okay.
Speaker 1: With Dr. [Bill] Gray.
Speaker 2: And then he went to Florida in, you said, in 50--
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s], yeah.  But before '53 [1953] because that's, I remember, I think I started--I started first grade in '53 [1953].  But I had also started in Boston, and I can't remember if it was that year or the year before.  Because I was late--you know, when I finally went to the first grade in Clewiston [Florida], I was already seven [years old].  You know, I started school late.  And, you know, I never had any kindergarten or anything like that.  (laughter) But I often wonder, you know, even as I do all my history on these scientists, you know, these microbiologists--boy, what more could you have done had you, you know, had more opportunities?  You know, I look at my, our sons, now.  They just had so many opportunities.  And we always made sure that they had, you know, everything they needed, you know.  But anyway, I made it.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I made it.
Speaker 2: You did.  And--
Speaker 1: With the help of so many people.
Story_ID: 28486
Speaker 1: So, you started first grade in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went for the--seems like I went for maybe just a few weeks.  I just can remember going up the stairs to the school, and feeling like everybody was so big and, you know, I was kind of scared, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, then to Clewiston [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Then to Clewiston.
Speaker 1: Now, so your mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] went with you to Clewiston, or did--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: So they had--
Speaker 2: She was in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was in Miami with my younger brother, who was born in 1950.  So, it was just Tony, my second brother, my brother next to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, you and your brother stayed with your father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson]?
Speaker 2: In Clewiston.
Speaker 1: And your mother was in Miami, Florida?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was she, had she re-married or something, or she was down there--
Speaker 2: No, no, she was just there.
Speaker 1: With your other two--
Speaker 2: With the other one, at that time.
Speaker 1: The other one, yeah, at that time, okay.  So they still had a relationship, but it wasn't a--
Speaker 2: They still had a relationship, because after I finished the first grade, he moved us up to Jacksonville, Florida.  And we drove up to Jacksonville, Florida, and she was pregnant at the time.  So, my next brother was born in November of that year.  Then we went back down to Florida, to Miami.  And my sister was born the next November.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this takes us to around 1956, or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you're changing schools.  You're going from Clewiston, to Miami to--
Speaker 2: Jacksonville.
Speaker 1: Jacksonville.
Story_ID: 28487
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, and I'd better ask it now before you get too far along.  But, what were some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  In particular, in Clewiston [Florida], which was a country town, very small--when we would go there, people would--well, they always knew that we were Dr. Johnson's children.  They would always like inquisitively ask, "How do you like it here?"  And we loved being there.  You know, we always loved being there.  It was the smell of sugar cane burning, you know, when they were making the sugar.  Perhaps we loved it so much because when we were with my father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson], we--even though he was very vigilant, he was not, he didn't spend a lot of money, he lived very modestly.  The only thing is that he liked cars.  But he lived very modestly.  But it was like we got so much more when we were with him.  And then I guess it was also the notoriety, too.  People knew who you were.  So, it was always fun going there, we enjoyed that.  The other sounds would be the children, a lot of migrant workers, a lot of migrant workers.  And by the time I got to the seventh grade, fifth and seventh grade, the kids would often be out of school a lot.  They would be picking beans.  And they would come back and talk about it.  And I just, that was, I just wanted to go and pick beans.  And I can remember asking my father could I go pick beans?  And he was just--he just couldn't believe why would I want to pick beans.  But, you know, that's the way it is, right?  It's what everybody else is doing, you know.  And he would say, "Are you crazy?  No you can't pick beans." (laughter)  So, that was, you know, those were some--even though mixed with the fact that you weren't with your mother and father, and you knew that there was a dichotomy of relationships there, it was still a fun time, still fun time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28488
Speaker 1: I wondered about that.  So, as a kid, you really didn't worry as much about that as you--
Speaker 2: Well, I had a problem.  I had a problem when I was with my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers].  And in a way, I guess I really didn't really fully understand what was going on.  My mother had been married.  My mother did get married for a short period.  And apparently it was somebody in the service.  And I don't know if it was before--I think it must have been before she met my father, I'm not certain.  I have to ask my uncle that.  He would be able to tell me.  It had to be--And his name was Beavers, that's where the Beavers name--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she always had that Beavers name, and I couldn't--I never liked, as a child I never liked that Beavers name.  And especially when I would bring my report cards home, and she had to write Beavers.  And I can remember asking her one time, "Can you just write Johnson?"  And she--and it seemed like she said yes, and did it for that time, you know.  So, I had that feeling, you know, I did have those feelings.
Story_ID: 28489
Speaker 1: But I guess because I was always an excellent student, for some reason, my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] didn't press me about studying.  My father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson], you know, pressed me about reading.  He would always bring books for me to read. But I was always a very good student, and the teachers always liked me.  And so, I guess that buffered (laughter), you know--I guess if I had had a difficult time in school, I would have, you know-- But I'll tell you one thing that happened to me in school, which was a good lesson for me to observe.  I was in the fourth grade--
Speaker 2: Now, where are we?
Speaker 1: This is in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: I was in the fourth grade, and I had a teacher, her name was Naomi Elizabeth Ward Simonett (ph).  And the reason why I remember that name so well was because she would always say, "My abbreviations--north, east, south, west."  The north, east, west, south.  And she, I liked her very much.  And there was a spelling bee, and somehow or another I'd made it to be the, representing our class.  And the day before the spelling bee, she, we were at the school.  She says, she told me, "I'm going to give you the spelling words we're going to use."  And at that age, I was just so devastated.  I knew it was wrong.  But you know, you're a child.  So, she goes over these spelling words with me.  She said, "Now do you have them?  Now, you have to win tomorrow."  I said "Okay".  The next day, the spelling bee--the first word they called, I can't remember what it was, but I think it was a simple word.  I misspelled it, misspelled it.
Speaker 2: Are these one of the ones that you had gone over?
Speaker 1: Yes!  And she never said a word.  You know, it was--you know, she never--I mean it was sort of like--I always think that she knew she shouldn't have done it.  You know, it was wrong, and it was like bad luck to do it.  But she never said a word about it.  But it sort of dampened--even as a child in the fourth grade it dampened my respect for her.  Yeah.  So, it was a good lesson that you--just try to do stuff the right way, you know.  You can't go wrong.
Story_ID: 28490
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: So my father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] was, you know, a doctor, black doctor, respected by everybody.  And school, when I was in the fifth grade, I was in school in Clewiston [Florida].  And by this time it was obvious that I was behind a year, based on my grades.  So, he wanted me to push up.  He wanted me to go to the next grade.  So, he had to go to the superintendent.  I think he talked with the principal, who was black.  The principal said he couldn't do anything about it.  So, he went to the superintendent.  This man's name was Mr. Bible.  And so, Mr. Bible said, "Okay, we can give her an exam."  So, for the next month, my father had me studying all this math, you know.  And he was just so--he wanted me, you know, he wanted me to go to the next grade.  So, you know, I studied and studied.  And sometimes I did get a little tired of it, but I didn't let him know.  And the day came for the test.  And I took the test, and I found it very easy, you know--very, very easy.  And when I came home and told my father, I said, "Oh, it was easy."  And he said, "Okay."  He said, "Well, we'll find out soon, you know.  You'll be in the next grade."  So, it was a long time before he would say anything to me.  And so finally I said, "Dad, what happened?"  He said, "Oh, you didn't pass it.  You can't go to the next grade."  And I was wondering why he didn't get upset with me, you know, because he would get upset if you didn't do what you were supposed to do.  I was wondering.  And the only thing I could think years later, that, you know, this man just said, "I'm not going to do that, you know.  She doesn't deserve to go to the next grade."  So, I just thought that was very interesting, you know, that that happened.  Because all along I'd always scored really, you know--like on tests, achievement tests, further than my grade.  But I know he, I could tell he was very, very hurt about it.  But he just never discussed it anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now in grade school, was there any special teachers?  Now, you named the one that you kind of lost respect for, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were there any other special teachers of interest?
Speaker 2: In grade school?  Do you mean like before sixth grade, or do you mean straight through?
Speaker 1: I guess through--now, did you go to a middle school or something?
Speaker 2: No, I just went to--
Speaker 1: Okay, just went to first through eighth?
Speaker 2: First through sixth was what it was, and it--
Speaker 1: First through sixth?  Well, first through sixth, then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can remember my first grade teacher, Mrs. McCray, a very nice lady.  I cannot say that there was ever a teacher I really didn't like, or I thought didn't like me, until I was in high school.  And this lady who was in charge of cheerleaders didn't like me for whatever reason.  I don't know.  And I didn't like her.  But all of my teachers--I had--particularly, there was Miss Jefferson when I was in high school, who I really, not only did I like her, but I had so much respect for her.  And she developed my writing skills.  She just thought I wrote very well, and would always challenge me.  And to this day, I have some of the essays that I wrote, and that she graded.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is high school, when--
Speaker 2: That was in high school.
Speaker 1: You went to high school in--
Speaker 2: I started, well, I started in seventh grade in Clewiston.  Then I went to eighth grade in Riviera [Beach, Florida], and I started ninth grade in Riviera--no, went to eighth grade in Riviera and had a break, and went to Miami [Florida] in the middle, and then came back to Riviera and finished the eighth grade.  And then from that point on, I finished there in Riviera.
Story_ID: 28491
Speaker 1: So all this moving was due to the fluctuations in the relationship between your mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] and father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, through--yeah, issues--because what happened in eighth grade is I went back to my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] for Christmas.  And then after Christmas, my father told my mother he didn't want me to go back to my stepmother.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, where is your father at this point?  He was--
Speaker 2: He was still living in Clewiston.
Speaker 1: And he was with--
Speaker 2: And my stepmother lived in Riviera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Riviera Beach.
Speaker 1: So, they were--so, the stepmother wasn't with your father, either?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And so, (laughter), okay, so--
Speaker 2: So, what happened to her too--which she was married to him.  She had four children--five children.  She had the last one right before he died.  But when my brother and I went to live with her--my brother didn't stay any time at all, because she was a mean lady.  She wasn't really mean to me, but she was mean to her own children, very badly, and she was mean to Tony, my brother.  And the story goes that my father was driving down the highway from Clewiston to Belle Glade one morning, and saw this little boy hitchhiking, trying to get to Clewiston.  And he said, "Oh, my God.  What's that little boy out there hitchhiking for?"  And he stopped to see what was going on, and it was my brother Tony.  So, he had just left my stepmother's place.  But when we went there, they had two additions put on the house.  So, I guess that was--And then I found out later that with us coming there, and the two additions on the house, that he had decided he was going to come to Riviera Beach and set up a practice.  And so, and she got pregnant at the same time (laughter).  So, I think the idea was that she was, you know, that he had convinced her that it was going to be a family, but he never did do that.  And that was in, when I went there it was 1960.  And in fact, when he took me there, he told me we were just going for a visit.  And he actually left me there, and I didn't even know it.  I was horrified.  Left me there for the entire summer.  And before I knew it, I was supposed to be going to school.  And I was just, you know, I was at a loss.  But he died in December, '61 [1961].  So, that was how close I went there--and he--you know, until he died.
Speaker 1: So, when your father died, then--so, who did you stay with?
Speaker 2: With my stepmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you went to high school and stayed--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I finished there.
Speaker 1: Finished there?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason why you didn't go back to your mother's?
Speaker 2: Well, I think at the time, you know, I had settled, I had settled in at school and everything there.  Even as a young child, the opportunities for me were better there than Miami.  So, and I guess my mother felt the same way.  Our stepmother--I'm not certain to this day why she, you know, agreed to that, other than maybe she thought it looked good.  And I was, I was always a very good child.  In fact, I treated her better than her children did.  So, and I loved to cook.  So, I cooked dinner all the time.  She had three children under me.  And so, I was helpful there.  Because her daughter, my half sister, went to college in '62 [1962].  So, I was the oldest one there.  So, I guess it was, you know, mutually beneficial.  I never asked her that question.  She's very, very ill right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've never asked her why did she--I don't even really want to know, you know.  You know, it doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 28492
Speaker 1: What's the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: At the time, it was John F. Kennedy [High School, Riviera Beach, Florida].  When he [Johnson-Thompson's father, Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] passed, that was one of the things that happened during my high school.  When he passed, they were building a new, a high school.  So, they were separating the seventh, eighth and--you know, to the tenth, eleventh and twelfth.  So, they were building a new high school.  And when the high school was--wait a minute.  Did they build it before?  Seems like they changed the name before he died.  I'll have to look back on that.  But anyway, so I graduated from John F. Kennedy High School.  But since that time, and with the integration, it's no longer there as John F. Kennedy High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You graduated in 60--
Speaker 2: '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: 65, [1965], okay.  Now, okay, so this is, these are a lot of distractions for someone, you know, a young person in school.  But you did have your last--was it like the last three years of high school at the same school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, last--yeah.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ninth through the twelfth, which were important years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I enjoyed them, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now were you interested in science at all, at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was always interested in science.  And as I said, my father had always talked about me as being a doctor.  You know, I was going to be a doctor.  And I was, well, let me say this.  I was good for the environment.  I was, you know--but of course when I went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] I learned that, you know, that that wasn't the case (laughter).  But I was good for the environment, and I guess to the extent of what my school could offer.  So, for example, we didn't even have a course in calculus.  Didn't even have a course in calculus.  Didn't have a course in physics.  But there was a teacher who said we were, what we would--in some courses--she said, "This is physics, but you're not in a course--but this is physics."  So, you know, but for whatever we had, I was probably the best student in science.  But I was not valedictorian of my class.  That went to my best friend, the one that I said I followed up to Howard.  And the sad story there is that she has Alzheimer's today.  And she's the one who knew me most, who went through all of that high school years with me, and my father dying.  And so, she knows so--she knew so much, and she was my person who I could always talk to.  And now, she's gone for all of that.
Story_ID: 28493
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] have a microscope, through all of this?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he did.  And I don't know what happened to that microscope.
Speaker 1: Did you have access to it as a young person?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember looking in it.  But I do remember it.  You know, and I remember he had this heart, as well.  I used to play with that.  It was a heart.
Speaker 1: A plastic heart, or wooden--
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't plastic.  It was made out of something more durable.
Speaker 1: Wood or something, or--
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it was on a wood--but it was more--maybe a mixture of plastic and wood.  And I used to go through the chambers, you know.  That was fun, yeah.  But for some reason, I don't remember ever looking in the microscope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was there any indication that you would be interested in microbiology?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't even know what microbiology was.  I never heard of it until I went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  I went to Howard majoring in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now let's, before we get you out of high school--now, did you, were you involved in high school activities?
Speaker 2: Lots, yeah, lots, lots.
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of things did you do?
Speaker 2: Lots.  I was, first of all, I was Miss Homecoming.  I was Miss Homecoming.  I was a cheerleader.  I played basketball a little bit.  This teacher--because I was tall, this teacher knew I could play basketball.  I told her I didn't want to play basketball.  She said, "Oh yeah, you can play basketball."  She put me on the team.  I was on the varsity team, and it was a disaster.  Then she finally let me go (laughter).  So, I did that.  I was in the choir--
Speaker 1: So you were a cheerleader, too?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, a cheerleader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the choir.  And I was president--you know, I know it's president of Red Cross.  We had a very active high school Red Cross.  And I was president of--because I ended up being president of the President's Club.
Speaker 1: President of the President's Club?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: President of the President's Club.  So, I'm trying to remember what else I was president of.
Speaker 1: Well, the president--was the President's Club the club of all the other presidents?
Speaker 2: All the presidents, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Seems like I was president of something else, but I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were really busy in high school then?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: In addition, you know, you said you did a lot of things around the house in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --taking care of the younger siblings--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: But I never felt over-burdened, you know.  Never felt--in fact, you know, in taking care of the kids, I never--like some people say--I never felt like I was over-burdened.  It sort of came naturally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you time to go to the movies, or that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had boyfriends, you know. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a--now, this is an all black high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all black.
Speaker 1: Okay, John F. Kennedy High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, John F. Kennedy [High School].
Story_ID: 28494
Speaker 1: So in 1965, you, did you have any counseling about college or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, we had counseling, you know, we had counseling.  And I can remember--you know, I can remember writing the application to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] myself.  And I can remember being accepted.  And that was when--you know, I think I--you know, went--I guess I was just kind of like, sort of in my own world, with going to college.  And I never really--well, I never really discussed it with my stepmother.  It was just sort of like a natural--because my half sister had finished high school in '62' [1962].  And she went to Xavier [University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And then--
Speaker 1: In New Orleans, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  And then my brother, half brother, he finished in '63 [1963].  And he was supposed to be going to the University of Washington.  I can't remember why he chose that.  And he left with money and everything, to go there.  And nobody heard from him until December of that year.  So, and then the other thing that I don't want to go into a lot of detail about.  But when my father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] died, I was at his house when we went back in to go through things.  And there was a lot of cash money that was left--lots and lots, in a box.  And I don't know what that was all about.  But in any event--
Speaker 1: Do you know what happened to it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my stepmother had it.  And so, I was there.  My brother Tony was there to see it, and her son Johnny was there to see it, along with my godparents.  So, my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] actually went to court.  My mother had to go to court to fight for some inheritance, you know, with her children.  But the court only accepted the fact that me and my brother were his children.  And that was primarily because he had enrolled us in school, in Clewiston [Florida], and had signed as our father.  But she denied--and maybe that was another reason why she allowed me to stay there.  She denied this money, that the money was there.  And she denied that, and said--Because I've since seen the--My sister is a lawyer, and she has, she requested the entire court documents, which is about this high.  And so, I didn't even know she had done that.  Now, she's not my father's child, but she was really eager to know what this crazy relationship--what was all this about?  So, on her own, she requested the papers.  And she had them for a long time.  And one time I was visiting her, she told me she had them.  So, I read through them.  But anyway, so my stepmother said that, you know, that there was no such thing as all this money, and in fact, by the time she finished paying all of his bills, there was nothing.  So, technically, so we didn't get anything--my mother--except Social Security.  So, but now that I think about it, that was probably maybe a guilt thing, that she allowed me to stay there.  And she was pretty decent to me, up until it was time for me to go to college.  So, with the knowledge that there was all this money, and everybody else was doing whatever they wanted to do, I just thought, well, the same would happen for me, the same thing would happen to me.  And I had filled out the papers.  I mean today, nowadays, you know, parents write applications out for the kids and everything.  But I had filled them all out myself, and sent them in.  And once I got them back and said, "Oh, I've been accepted," that's when she told me there was no way I was going.
Speaker 1: Well, do you suspect the money, your father's money, was used to send her--the other son, to school?
Speaker 2: Of course, of course.  Because the other thing that happened, too, is my younger sister, who was my younger half sister--who was probably maybe seven years younger, six or seven years younger than I was--we were in church.  We went to this little black mission Catholic church, because we couldn't go to the white church.  And one of my, one of the girls at the Sunday School said, "You know, your sister's giving out twenty dollar bills."  This was back--(laughter), it was back in the early '60s [1960s].  I said, "What!"  She said, "Yeah, she's just passing out twenty dollar bills to people, you know, to kids."
Speaker 1: Twenty dollars was like a hundred dollars now.
Speaker 2: Tell me about it.  Or even more.  So, anyway I went, you know, I went and told my stepmother.  I said, "So and so said that Kathy was passing out twenty dollar bills."  She said, "What!"  She never said anything else to me more about it.  I'm sure she went and moved her money, or did whatever.  And then from time to time, when, you know, she'd give me money to go somewhere to buy something, I could smell old money, you know.  So I knew it was there, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting.  This is a--
Speaker 2: So, it lasted for a while, but she's destitute right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she had been your father's nurse at one--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's not--this was a different one?
Speaker 2: She was his wife, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, she was his wife.
Speaker 1: This wasn't the one that was his nurse?
Speaker 2: No, uh uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, this was his wife.  And in these papers, which is, this--she's a very mean, accusatory lady.  And she was always talking about people having children out of wedlock, which her two daughters did, and her niece.  And just very, very anti-that.  Not in the way that we would say you shouldn't do it, but just in a very derogatory way.  So, come to find out, these papers that she and my father--when she got married--and I don't know how they got to Arlington, Virginia.  They got married in Arlington, Virginia in August of the same year that her first, her daughter was born in November.  So, that means she got pregnant before she was married.  (laughter).  But she doesn't, I don't think she--well, I'm sure she has no idea that I know that.
Speaker 1: Now, was she, is a Catholic, too?
Speaker 2: She's a convert.  She became a Catholic--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after she married my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your father was a Catholic?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Well, alright.  Okay.
Story_ID: 28495
Speaker 1: So--anyway, Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] then?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Did you--now, did you do anything special over the summer between high school and--
Speaker 2: No, I spent a lot of time with my godparents.  I went out to Clewiston [Florida].  But nothing, nothing in particular, you know.  Just graduation, and that was it, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, these godparents really lived up to the name.  And so, these are the Schaeffers, right?
Speaker 2: These are the Schaeffers.  That's why their pictures are up there with my mother [Rose Mae Henderson Beavers] and father [Edwin Saint Aloyious Johnson] (laughter) in the room.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you were lucky to have them.
Speaker 2: I was very blessed, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Howard--did they have a connection to Howard?
Speaker 2: No.  No, in fact my father, my step--my godfather had the highest education that he could get, I guess, in Jamaica.  But it wasn't college, but he went to private schools.  And he was very--another very, very well-respected person in the community.  My godmother was not, if I can say, on the same order as he.  In fact, she was his second wife that (laughter) I found out much later, she didn't get married to him until I was finishing college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they had lived together for a good fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, before they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was apparently because his wife in Jamaica wouldn't give him a divorce.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, Howard University, 1965.  Now this is when the civil rights movement was being--one of the leaders, or one of the most prominent leaders of the civil rights movement was Stokely Carmichael, who was going to school at Howard--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --another West Indian from Trinidad.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: You know, and so--did you--well, tell us about Howard.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, so going to Howard, it was, oh gosh, it was such a turning point in my life.  And of course, I didn't have anything else to compare it with.  I mean, I can look back on it now and just say oh, my God, what, you know, what an opportunity.  So, I went to Howard and I immediately realized, you know, how deficient my background was, you know.
Speaker 1: Your educational background?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I didn't do extremely well.   Well, the first semester, you know, and my god--I think my godparents didn't realize this, but they were just so proud.  Oh, the one thing I should say to you, too.  My father had a white, it was a white doctor, Dr. Shoop, who was in Clewiston also.  And so, when my father--when I got ready to go to school, my godparents borrowed some money from him.  Because I remember they told me they borrowed two hundred dollars from him, to help me.  Now, why did I start back on that?  So, anyway, he did that.  So, when I got to Howard, you know, things--Oh, I was saying about the grades, because I remember her telling me that she took Dr. Shoop my grades to see.  But I didn't really--I had a biology course--no, I had a physical science course, that I made a 'C' in, and--Well, I was taking German.  I really liked German, and I made a 'B' in that.  But I made an 'A' in freshman orientation, and an 'A' in physical education.  No, it was body aesthetics.  So, my godparents, all they saw were two As, and they just thought those were good grades.  (laughter)  And so, when they told me they took it to Dr. Shoop at Howard, they were so--I said, "Oh, those grades weren't that good, you know."  And they said, "Oh, shut up.  Of course, they were good."  (laughter)  They were very proud, you know.  So, that's what I was, I just wanted to say they took it to him.  I'm sure he looked at it and said, "Well, this is a one-hour course, body aesthetics, you know.  Look what she did in physical science.  She made a 'C'."  But anyway, so by the time I got to my senior year, junior, senior--after I pledged Delta, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now, did you--
Speaker 2: --I started doing better, yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you pledge your freshman year?
Speaker 2: No, sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Sophomore year, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  And so, I was--
Speaker 1: Your freshman year, your grades were just okay?
Speaker 2: Well, they were always just okay, you know.  They, I mean by the time I got my--because I had a hard time in organic chemistry, a very hard time.
Story_ID: 28496
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your teachers [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia] in--
Speaker 2: Okay.  My teacher, one of my advisors, Marie Clark Taylor, who did her Ph.D. at Fordham University [New York, New York]. She was the first black to come out of Fordham University.  But she was really a botanist.  And when I, I have an endowed scholarship at Howard, a Johnson-Thompson Taylor Fund.  So, I did it in honor of her name, Taylor.  So she was, she was a favorite.  And the other teacher, Dr. Rear, John Rear.  He taught biology.  I think he was a Harvard-trained Ph.D. as well, John Rear.  He's since passed.  Marie Taylor has passed, of course.  Those are the two teachers in my major that I can really remember.  Did you ever know Andress Taylor?  Andress Taylor?  No?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He taught English.  But he was very active in the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Andress is A-N--
Speaker 2: A-N-D-R-E-S-S.  He taught me English.  But I just wondered if you ever knew him.
Speaker 1: No, I never--
Speaker 2: But you know, I don't really remember the other--I tell you.  Another physics--my physics instructor--oh gosh, what was his--was Harold Eagleson.  He was--I mean if look his name up in the history books, you know--At that time, you know, the black scholars, they were still at Howard.
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: I mean, you still have some black scholars at Howard.  But because, you know, the white institutions now are trying to get the best scholars out there.
Speaker 1: You say the best black scholars in those days were at Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Because they couldn't get--you know--your John Hope Franklins, your Ernest [Everett] Justs.  One exception is LaSalle Leffall.  I know you know him, do you know LaSalle?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, he stayed.  I mean, I have so much respect for that.  I mean, some of everybody tried to get LaSalle Leffall.  And he's, you know, he just, he's retired but he still does a little.  But he was one of the people who said I'm going to stay here.
Story_ID: 28497
Speaker 1: You were talking about Dr. LaSalle Leffall, at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was just talking about him, in light of the fact that nowadays Howard doesn't have the top pick of all the top scholars, even though they still have some top scholars there.  Because of the--so many of the major--majority institutions, they are recruiting, so they have the resources and also the intellectual environment, as well as the infrastructure that pulls a lot of African American scientists.  And that's good.  But you take a person like Dr. Leffall.  He's always been so committed to Howard University.  He's the first in so many areas.  And he stayed, and all of us love him.  And I think he's an excellent role model for giving back, giving back to his people.  Another person there, I don't know if you've done her, who I put--she's not, no.  I know this is being recorded.  She's not exactly like Dr. Leffall, but she has done her share.  That's Georgia Dunston [also a HistoryMaker; geneticist].
Speaker 1: Right.  We did interview Georgia Dunston.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Georgia has been, has been asked, I know, to go up to the National Institute of Health [NIH].  And she's committed to Howard University, and has done some, you know, great work at Howard.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Dunston, now is she from Florida?  Is she the one that came from--
Speaker 2: No.  She's from, she is, I'm trying--it's either Richmond, Virginia or Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's, alright, right.  Because there's a Dr. [Agnes] Day [also a HistoryMaker; mycologist], we interviewed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Agnes Day.
Speaker 1: Agnes Day is from Florida.  She's the one I was--
Speaker 2: She's from Florida, yeah.  With Bethune-Cookman [College, Daytona Beach, Florida].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bethune-Cookman.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I know Agnes very well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we interviewed them, and Winston Anderson [also a HistoryMaker].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they're all, you know, contemporary, I guess with you, you know, although--
Speaker 2: Well, Winston is a little older.
Speaker 1: Winston, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I met Agnes when she was doing her Ph.D.  So, if you ever ask her about me, she'll tell you I was her mentor.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Georgia and I were probably at the same time.  You know, we're in the same age group.  And actually, Agnes might be the same age group.  But you know, Agnes had, I think she went to Bethune-Cookman and had a child, and worked for awhile maybe before she went to Howard and worked on her Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Right, that's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, we may be the same.  We're probably the same age.  But we got our degrees at a different time.
Story_ID: 28498
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you ever have a course from Dr. LaSalle Leffall?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That's medical school [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'll tell you one thing about Dr. Leffall.  So, I had finished Howard.  It was in November of '69 [1969].  And I was in a classmate's wedding, getting ready for the wedding.  It was about two--a week and a half before, and I was in my efficiency apartment, barefooted, and felt this prick in my foot.  I looked down, my foot was bleeding.  And I had stepped on a needle and it had broken off in my foot.
Speaker 1: A sewing needle, like?
Speaker 2: Yes, a sewing needle.  So, it wasn't very painful, but I knew that needle was in there.  And so, I went to the emergency room, the old Freedman's Hospital emergency room.  Went there, and the doctors, they did an x-ray and couldn't see the needle.  And they looked and looked--and trying to get it, and they couldn't find it. And after about an hour, they said, "Well, you know, we can't find it.  The only thing we can tell you is that, you know, to come back, and hopefully, you know, it'll move.  But we'll just have to sew you back up."  And I said, "Oh, my goodness, but I'm in a--"  No, it was a week before.  No, it was a Monday before.   I said, "I'm in a wedding on Saturday."  And so, they said, "Well, you know, go to the wedding."  So I went to the wedding.  They're pictures of me with my foot halfway out of my shoe.  And I went back to Freedman's the following Monday.  And they went in, and they were just looking.  "We can't find it."  And I remember saying, "Why don't you call that other doctor, you know, the one--and I can't remember the name anyway."  But anyway, he came, and it was Dr. Leffall.  He looked at it and found the needle right away.  So, years, many years later...  That was in '69 [1969], and it had to be maybe ten, fifteen years ago.  I was at a meeting, and Dr. Leffall was there, and we were sitting at the same table.  And I said, "Dr. Leffall..."  I said, "You know, I want to tell you something."  I said, "You wouldn't remember this, but I just want to show you how we're related.  You know, you took that needle out of my foot."  He said, "Was that you?"  I said, "Yes."  He said, "You know, I always use that as a case history of how when the tissue is so bloody, you know, it's hard to find anything.  And I always tell them it's like finding a needle in a mass of tissue."  He said, "I show the x-ray."  (laughter)  Isn't that something?  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That is something.
Speaker 2: So, I said, "Well, I'm the one."  (laughter)  Yeah, so that's an interesting story about Dr. Leffall.
Speaker 1: Now, you said he used to repair injured animals in Florida, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He first started doing that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in his book, that's how he--
Speaker 1: He'd do surgery on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --stitching bird's wings and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the bird.  That was what it was, a bird, yeah.  That's in his book.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.
Story_ID: 28499
Speaker 1: Did you have Montague Cobb [anthropologist] for anything [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: No, but I met--I used to talk to him a lot, because I'm a member of Sigma Xi, which is the scientific honorary society.  And when they'd have the dinners--and then towards the end, he would be at a lot of, he would come to a lot of things.  And I would sit with him, and we would talk.  And I really got to like him.  But I can also remember that when I was working on a master's at Howard, and I was in the medical school working, that the students, you know, they protested against him.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Terribly, oh terribly.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the issue?
Speaker 2: Well, the issue was that sometimes he would come to class and play his fiddle.  (laughter).  And then the other thing, they thought he--I think he's a Dartmouth--was he a Dartmouth graduate?  Anyway, they just thought he was too stuffy.  I mean, this was the period of the sixties, you know, such that my diploma today from Howard is written in English instead of Latin, because Latin wasn't relevant, okay.  I mean those were the kind of things we did in those days.
Speaker 1: Those were the issues that were challenged?
Speaker 2: Those were some of the issues.  I mean, and you know, my Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] diploma is big, it's written in Latin.  It looks so nice.  (laughter)  But during that time, you know, if you didn't put on--if you didn't wear a Dashiki, you know--You know, that was just the way, that's just the way this young group was.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about this anyway.  Now, this is the age of black power.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Black power, in fact, had just been uttered publicly--
Speaker 2: Uh huh, right.
Speaker 1: --by Stokely Carmichael [Trinidadian-American civil rights activist]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: H. Rap Brown.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who used to be on campus.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They, during the march from Selma to Montgomery, they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the story is that he, you know, issued the call for black power.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A story that resonated around the country.
Speaker 2: Right.  In fact, when Martin Luther King came there, I think it was during my--end of my freshman year, maybe.  Nobody wanted to go see him, you know, because he wasn't relevant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  But it's a time--you're, I understand what you're saying, because there was a feeling amongst--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --amongst some, that maybe he had lost his--
Speaker 2: That he had lost his effectiveness, yeah.  I went, I remember going to see him, though.  But I can remember, "Ah, who wants to go?"  You know--
Speaker 1: Anybody's who's striving for acceptance in the white society was seen as--
Speaker 2: Right, that was gone, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a Negro--
Speaker 2: And you know, if you look at it historically you can understand it.  Because they had been trying for so long, you know.  And apparently, it worked, right?  That's when things really started moving.
Story_ID: 28500
Speaker 1: Now, were you a part of the Black Student Organization in the--I mean at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a part of HUSA, which was the Howard University Student Assembly.  And we had a big conference that year.  And if you go to the yearbook, you can see it.  The name of the conference was 'Towards a Black University'.  Now, you know Paula Giddings?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, Paula--Paula and I pledged Delta [Sigma Theta sorority] together.  And Paula was the editor of what was then called the Promethean.  And so, part of this change was that literary piece became the 'Afro-American Review'.  (laughter).  So, I mean, all of that, you know, was happening during those days.
Speaker 1: So, the classical Greek frame of reference is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (unclear) African (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you became a Delta in your sophomore year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you say that really changed your approach to things, or--
Speaker 2: No, I just said I started doing better in my class work. (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there a reason why being a Delta would make a difference?
Speaker 2: Well, I--yeah, I think one of the reasons was that it turns out there were upper classmen who were Deltas, who were majoring in microbiology.  And you tended to study with them.   That, and I guess, maybe too, the other thing was that there was a competition, you know, which Greek letter organization had the highest grade, GPA [grade point average].  So, the sorors were always telling you about doing well.  So, we did maintain the highest GPA.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Greek letter organization.
Speaker 1: So, that helped push you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28501
Speaker 1: Now you said you started off as a chemistry major?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: When did you switch to--
Speaker 2: I think probably by my second year, or late--when I started hearing about this course in microbiology.  And it involved, you know, microscope, and looking at micro-organisms.  That seemed a lot more tangible to me than chemistry.  You know, you could actually see what you were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And now, so you graduated in 1960--
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: Nine--okay, 1969.  Now, you were in school when Dr. [Martin Luther King] King was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Can you remember the--
Speaker 2: I certainly can, I certainly can.  In fact, we had just taken over a group of Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta sorority].  And we were having our initiation banquet at a place on Florida Avenue.  I did have the name of it.  I did remember the name.  What was it called?  Lindsay's Wedding Place.  People used to have weddings there.  We were having our banquet dinner, which apparently had started maybe about four o'clock.  And we were laughing, joking, you know, congratulating, just having a lot of fun.  And all of a sudden, we noticed that the waitresses, who were black, they started getting very snappy with us.  You know, they were just very mean and short-tempered.  And it sort of passed around, that this was going on.  And then finally somebody asked, said, "Well, what's going on?  Why are you so mean?"  And the lady said, "Don't you know?  They shot Dr. King, and you all are in here laughing and having a good time, like it doesn't mean anything."  And we said, "Oh, we didn't know."  So, we stopped right then and walked out on Florida Avenue, and it was chaos.  It was chaos.  And at the time, several of us were living over on Sixteenth Street, at the Meridian Hill dorm.  So, somehow or another we were able to get cabs, I don't know how.  But we got--because walking--people were looting, it was smoke and fire.  And we got back to the dorm, and I think that those who lived right on campus, they were able to walk back to campus, because that's very close by.  So, that's my remembrance of what happened.  And then, of course, the next day classes were canceled, and they told you to come up on campus, and to, you know, it was a big assembly about what do we do now?
Speaker 1: Now, who called that?  The administration or students?
Speaker 2: No, I know it was the HUSA, students.
Speaker 1: HUSA, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Howard University Student Association.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did the president--the president of Howard then was James Nabrit [civil rights attorney]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--you know what, we had already hung him in effigy and protested against him.  I don't remember, recall him.  He might have, but I just don't recall anything.  He's another person that I didn't really get to know who he was and what he did, until much later (laughter).  Because at that time, we just wanted to get rid of him.  He wasn't relevant, you know.  He wasn't there enough, and come to find out he had all these important appointments.  And that's why we didn't know anything.
Story_ID: 28502
Speaker 1: So, and I guess it was the next--yeah, it was the next year that we took over the Administration Building [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia].  Did you do Ewart Brown?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't do Ewart Brown yet.  He's--
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: E-W-A-R-T.  And I didn't write him on my sheet.  I should have--
Speaker 2: Ewart Brown?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ewart Brown was the president of the Howard University Student Association at that time.  He later went to medical school and practiced out in California for some time.  He was from Bermuda.  And he ended up being Premier of Bermuda.
Speaker 2: Ummmm!
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, is he in the [United] States now, or is he in Bermuda?
Speaker 1: No, he's back in--he's not, he doesn't have that position.  But he's, he's back in Bermuda.  I'm almost certain he's back in Bermuda.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's interesting, okay.
Speaker 1: I saw him a couple years ago.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: He also served on Howard's Board of Trustees.  He was one of the Outstanding Alumni awardees.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But, so the next year, Ewart and some other folks, who I believe the state called on, you know--you got the word to come over to the A Building and bring your pillow.  (laughter).  So, we went over and took over for a few days.  And at the time, I had a boyfriend who was in law school.  And he came by to tell me I had to get out of there.  He thought it was really foolish what I was doing, because he had heard that they were going to be deputized, and they were going to come in and take us to jail.  But somehow or another, we did come to some agreement with the University, and we left.  And when it was done the next year, people were arrested.  They took over a founder's library (laughter).  So, it's always good to be the first ones, you know, because they don't know what to do with you, they don't know how to handle it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, you were telling me before we started that the Afro Studies Department, the African American studies department at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], was founded by the students.
Speaker 1: Well, no, that was one of the things, yeah.  That was one of the demands that, you know--an Afro-American Studies Department.
Speaker 2: So that was--I know Russell Adams was one of early--I don't know if he was the first director.   Who was the first director?
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Because I--and see, that happened--And then the next year we had a new president, James Cheek, because the other part was to get rid of Nabrit.  James Cheek came in, and almost twenty years to the date, students did the same thing to him.  They didn't take over the building--I don't think they took over the building, but they got rid of him, which is a good story.  It means  that, you know, you have your time, do what you can do, leave while you're high.  (laughter).  You know, don't stay too long.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28503
Speaker 1: So, well, back to--now, in the world of microbiology.  Now, were you poised to go to graduate school when you were a senior [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: No, I was not, at all.  Sad to say, I was like the rest of my fellow female students at the time.  I was going to get married.  That was all that was important.  And of course, several friends had already identified their wedding dates.  And I was going to be in a wedding in July.  So, this guy, the law school graduate who was graduating from law school, you know, he really cared about me.  And I kind of forced him into agreeing that we would get married.  But he kept telling me that he would probably be drafted, and which he was.  And so, we got engaged.  He bought me a ring before I left, before he left.  But I wanted to get married right then, you know.  I couldn't understand why we couldn't get married, and then he would go to Vietnam.  And so, I was probably very, very upset about that, that I couldn't get married.  And he was trying to, he was a very logical person, you know.  "We'll get married, we'll come back."  So I said, "What am I supposed to do, just stay here and wait?"  He said, "No, you can go out and have friends."  I said, "I can go out with other people?"  Well, he was kind of stupid, too, because he said, "Yes."  So, that's what I did.  And when I did that, I realized I was not ready to get married.  And so, being the honest person that I was, I had to write and tell him.  Of course, he was in Vietnam.  So, I got my phone call to say, "Just put that ring back on, and forget you ever told me this."  So, anyway he came home, and so it was a real big breakup.  No--but, so when he decided, when he--when I realized I wasn't going to get married and he was going to Vietnam, I decided I was going to stay at Howard and work on a master's degree.  So, that's how I ended up going to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they, was cost a factor?  Were you, did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: I got a small scholarship.  But, and I should say--I had, I had several job offers.  I often tell the young people today, being a microbiology major with a B.S. degree--I had two government job offers--Food and Drug [Administration, FDA], [U.S.] Department of Agriculture [DOA].  I had a job offer with Bristol Laboratories.
Speaker 1: This was just with a B.S.?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  They had actually flown me and my girlfriend up there for an interview.  My girlfriend, Brenda, the one who has Alzheimers, she was a microbiology major, too.  We did the same thing.  We were really close friends.  She ended up going to work for Food and Drug.  And I went to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To work on a master's.
Story_ID: 28504
Speaker 1: And during working on that master's, I worked down at the medical school part-time [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So now, now were you going to school with the intention of achieving a Ph.D. [degree]?
Speaker 1: Not at all, not at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what was your thesis?  Well, I have the title here, 'The Ultrastructure of Neurospora Crassa Mycelia'.
Speaker 1: "Neurospora."
Speaker 2: Neurospora, Okay.
Speaker 1: Neurospora Crassa.
Speaker 2: Neurospora Crassa--
Speaker 1: Mycelium, uh huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  And what was that about?
Speaker 1: So that's a fungus.  And it is non-pathogenic.  But it served as a good model to understand mold development, okay.  And so, it consists of two phases.  You have the mycelium, which is the branch phase and then the spore, which is--like if you, you're probably familiar with, like if you see a mold contamination.  And then if you hit it, it's sort of like powdery.  So, those are the spores, those are the spores.  The other part that is attached to the surface is the mycelium.  So, what I did is, I did the electron microscopy.  You know, like the electron microscope--it magnifies many more times than the light microscope.  You can see DNA with the electron microscope.  So, what I did was just do a characterization of the structure, looking at the nucleus in the cytoplasm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, this is, from what I understand, this is like a bread mold.  I mean it occurs on bread?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's sort of pink, pink, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a pinkish looking reddish mold.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you say it's not pathogenic.  It won't really, so you could eat the bread if it was molded?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But normally so much--I mean, especially in human conditions, usually bread just has mold on it.  You don't see it, you don't taste it.  But when it starts to grow, you can see it.  Nobody's going to really eat the mold part.  But there will be microscopic structures all over the bread.  So, even if you pull off the mold part, you'll end up ingesting that, but it's not harmful.  Now, if you took the whole piece of mold and ingest it, I'm not so certain about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, if you ate it without even taking some of the mold off--(laughter)
Speaker 1: Well, I don't think you'd do that (laughter).
Speaker 2: It would be bitter, wouldn't it?  It would be a little bitter.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I've never tried it.
Speaker 2: Distasteful, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, this red bread mold, there's something, there's a note in here that the first published account of this fungus was from an infestation of French bakeries in 1843.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't even know that, okay.  I didn't even know that.  You probably, you got that off the web?
Speaker 2: Somebody did, and they--
Speaker 1: What I'm saying is, you can find out about so much information.  I mean, back in the day when I did that, I remember I had to go to the library--just read through all these books and write these little index cards, and all the notes.  There was no such thing as being able to go on the internet like we do today, and find out so much information.
Speaker 2: Now, is there a difference--I mean what is the difference between this particular bread mold and the blue bread mold?
Speaker 1: You mean the green?
Speaker 2: The bluish-green, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's called, it's Ascomycetes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the one that penicillin--
Speaker 1: Yeah, made-probably--What's the difference?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Difference in structure, you know, a lot of metabolic characteristics, but basically the same.  If you eat it, nothing's going to happen to you, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is there any, is there any, you know, practical use for it?
Speaker 1: Well, the penicillin, yes, for antibiotics.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not any other practical reason that I know about in neurospora.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, they only use it to--okay, not for anything else?
Speaker 1: Not that I know.  Now, remember, I did this work--what, forty years ago? (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: So, I don't know what has happened since then.  (laughter).  But I, you know, I taught microbiology for a good while.  So, I don't recall anything about neurospora.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And who was your advisor?
Speaker 1: Oh, for that, was Dr. Rhadey Dwivedi, D-W-I-V-E-D-I.  And he has since passed.  R-H-A-D-E-Y.
Speaker 2: Okay, R-H-A...
Speaker 1: ...A-D-E-Y.
Speaker 2: R-H-A-T-E-Y...
Speaker 1: 'D'. 'D' as in dog.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--
Speaker 2: So, he's an East Indian, or Pak--, where was he from?
Speaker 1: You know what?  All I can remember now is India.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know he was from India.  So I don't remember--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what part.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Story_ID: 28505
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '71 [1971], it says you joined the University of District of Columbia [UDC, Washington, District of Columbia] as an instructor, biologist?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now that, UDC is--
Speaker 2: When I started, it was Federal City College at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But that's okay.  You don't have to--but I'm just saying that's what it was.  And it didn't become the university until 1976.
Speaker 1: At that time did they offer like a four-year degree, or was it a two--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was a four-year degree.
Speaker 1: Four year?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  It was definitely a four year degree.  And it was one of those institutions that it was thrown together very quickly right after the riots.  You know, right after the riots of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Well, to provide opportunities for inner-city--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just in responding to issues, you know.  I mean, Martin Luther King, you know, the riots and, you know, how do you settle these people?  You know, you got to begin to answer some of the requests.  And you know, D.C., by its nature not being a state, though it had this large black population there was no affordable education, you know, for the district [of Columbia] residents.  I mean, you had Georgetown [University] and you had Howard [University], both of them very expensive.  So, the idea was to provide affordable education.
Story_ID: 28506
Speaker 1: So, well, UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia].  So, you taught biology, right?
Speaker 2: I taught biology, and I taught microbiology and virology.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, were you considering at the time like, oh, maybe I should go on and get a Ph.D. [degree]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, at the end of that year there was, I think there was maybe one other person, who was pretty seasoned.  But there was one other person that didn't have a Ph.D.  And I just felt, you know, I just felt inadequate.  So, I decided, you know, very early that I needed to go and work on a Ph.D.  So, it turns out that the summer of that year, which was 1972, I got a position at [NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)] Goddard Space Flight Center, a faculty position.  And I decided to apply to the University of Maryland and take some courses in the fall, just take one course.  You know, just to start.  I knew that I could not go full-time.  And I applied to the microbiology department.  And I got a rejection, you know, that I wasn't admitted.  So, I was working at Goddard, and it was very close the University of Maryland campus, so I just decided that I would go there and find out why I wasn't accepted.  So I went, and the chairperson told me that--I said, "Well, was it my grades?"  Because I thought maybe it was that.  He said, "Oh, no."  He did show me, (laughter), he did show me one of my recommendations--which I was very, very shocked, because I had done very well.  This was another Indian, a Dr. Dutta [ph.].  I had done very well in his class.  But his recommendation was like four lines, very bad.  I mean, it was good but, you know, you just don't write a--I mean, I knew at that point, you just don't write a four-line letter.
Speaker 1: He didn't take a lot of time doing it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, anyway, and so I was very forceful.  And so, finally I said, "Well, I know I can do the work."  He said, "Well, the other thing, too, is that we really like for our students to be full-time."  So, I said "Well, I can't be full-time now."  I said, "But I will consider it for next year."  I said, "Just take a course."  So, he said, "Okay."  So I got in.  That semester I took a course, and did very well in it, genetics.  And then, bacterial genetics.  The next semester I enrolled in a course, and the teacher was really terrible.  He was elderly, and he would really forget what he was talking about.  That, together with the fact that I would go out there in the morning, and I had an eleven o'clock class.  And it was really, it was always a push to get back in time for my eleven o'clock class that I was teaching.  So, I decided to just drop the course, which I did.  I withdrew it properly.
Story_ID: 28507
Speaker 1: And later that year I found out about this scholarship opportunity, fellowship opportunity from the NIH [National Institutes of Health], that would pay you actually your salary to go to school.  So, I called up the chair of the department and told him that I wanted to come in and talk to him about the possibility of getting a reference.  So, he said, "Well, come in."  So, when I came in and I told him what I wanted to do, I said, "I'm ready now to go back full-time, if I get this fellowship.  And he said, "Well, that sounds good."  He said, "And do you know, based on what you're saying, you'll be getting paid almost the same rate of somebody getting faculty?"  And so, I kind of nonchalantly said, "Yes, but I'm going to be getting faculty at UDC so, you know, the same thing."  He said, "Well, I don't think I have anybody who can serve as your mentor, your advisor."  And the more I think about it--I have been a very forceful person.  So, I said, "Well, maybe if I talk to them personally, they'll agree?"  He said, "Well, I don't think so, but you can try."  So, I looked on the roster, and I went to three people in the department who were still there, a woman and two men.  And the person who seemed really agreeable was a young guy who had just started there.  And he was doing some work in hyphomicrobiaceae, which you wouldn't know what they are.  And I wouldn't necessarily have known, except that I had just lectured on that class of organisms that day, just lectured.  And probably knew--and found out more than I ever knew about these organisms.  So, I said, "Oh, yes, those are the budding bacteria."  He said, "You know about them?"  I said, "Oh, yes."  You know, and I started talking about them.  He was really impressed.  And so he said, "Well, okay, you know, I think this will work just, fine, you know."  He said, "The only thing I have to do, is I have to pass it by the department chair."  He said, "Give me a call tomorrow."  No he said, "You call it--"  What did he say?  No, he said--no.  He told me, he said, "That's fine, and you just call him in the morning and tell him that I said it's okay."  So, I'm very happy.  The next morning, I call this department chair.  And I said, "Oh, you know, Dr. Weiner said that I could work with him."  And he said, "Are you sure?"  And I said, "Yes."  And he said, "Oh, that must be a mistake."  He said, "I don't think he can work with you.  He has just too much to work to do.  He's a beginning faculty--"  I said, "Well, this is what he told me."  He said, "Well, let me talk to him."  And so, in the meantime he said, "You can call him later this afternoon."  When I called him back, he told me he was very sorry, but he just couldn't work with me.  So, that was just so disappointing for me, because I really thought, even though I didn't get it, I thought that I had the opportunity to get this fellowship.  So, I was just really defeated.  And I had been talking to somebody at NIH who was actually running the program.  So, I called her and told her that, you know, I just didn't know what to do, because I thought I could just--Oh, the other thing is that he accused me--the chairperson accused me of just running out without telling anybody where I was.  Because he noticed that I wasn't in that class anymore.  So, I said, "Well, I properly withdrew from it, you know."  Because he asked if I did it over the phone.  So when I went in that day to see him, I had taken these papers to show that I--So, he said, "Oh, well, these papers never made it back to me."  Well, that wasn't my fault.  But anyway, to make a long story short, when I called up the NIH she said, "Well, why don't you try another school?"  So I said, "Well, at this late date, what other school can I try, because they don't know me?  In the department, at least there, I was taking some courses.  So she said, "Well, why don't you call Arthur Sass, at Georgetown [University] Medical School?"  She said, "Give him a call.  I know him, and, you know, he may be able to help you."  And I said, "Oh my gosh, I don't know him."  She said, "Well, nothing beats a try."  I called Dr. Sass, and he said, "Can you come over right away?"  And I came over, and the first thing he said was, "Those bastards at the University of Maryland."  (laughter).  He was Jewish.  So, and then he called in some other faculty members.  And they accepted me.  But I didn't get the fellowship, because the money, the funds hadn't been released.  They thought they were going to have the funds released.  But anyway, that fall, I enrolled in Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], the fall of '75 [1975], and took biochemistry, just took the biochemistry course for medical students.  And then the next semester I just decided to just go on cold turkey, and I took a leave of absence [from the University of the District of Columbia (UDC)] and went to Georgetown [University] and, you know, did the Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28508
Speaker 1: So, did Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] continue to be like cooperative and, you know, helpful?
Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, what was your dissertation at Georgetown?
Speaker 2: 'The Effect of 5-azacytidine on Simian Virus 40 DNA Replication and Conformation.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell me--as if I--and I am the kind of person that doesn't understand what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: So, 5-azacytidine is an anti-leukemic agent.  So, often when you're trying to see whether or not these agents work in cancer, you start off in the lab looking at tissues to see if they, you know, what effect they have on tissues.  And you can also look at the molecules in cells--DNA, the proteins.  So, what I actually did was I used this virus as a model system to see if the azacytidine was effective on stopping DNA synthesis and/or stopping protein synthesis.  So, in fact, that's the way your chemotherapeutic agents work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For cancer--you know, they affect the DNA or the proteins or--either entry of--well, that would be viruses.  So, that's the way they work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, really, cancer cells are cells that are multiplying out of control, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And developing out of control?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: So this, this is a way to slow them down and stop them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, to stop them from growing completely, yeah.
Speaker 1: From growing, okay.  And now with--okay.  Alright, so what were your findings?
Speaker 2: Actually, what I found out is that the virus really destroys--it could destroy the DNA, but in a very controlled method, and that it definitely inhibited protein synthesis.  The other thing that I found out was that at very, very low concentrations, the agent appeared to stimulate the growth of the viruses.
Speaker 1: So, if you didn't give the person enough, it actually would make it grow faster?
Speaker 2: You know, that could be postulated, but not necessarily so, because we're working with viruses now, you know.  In fact after that, you know, the literature showed that there were a number of viruses that the drug could stimulate at very low concentrations.  So, I wouldn't necessarily say that it would be the same in human cells.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, it was a piece of information.  Now, what it could do--and this is the important part.  So, if you're on a cancer drug, it could stimulate a virus that you didn't know you had.  Maybe a latent virus.  It could stimulate a virus to start growing.
Speaker 1: Which could be dangerous?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which could be dangerous, uh huh.  So, that would be the implication.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is this what you had hoped to find out about?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't expect that to happen.  That's just, that's the way science is sometimes.  You see something that you really--you know, that's the way [Alexander] Fleming discovered penicillin.  He was growing bacteria, and he kept seeing this mold grow, and killing his cells.  So he spent a lot of time just trying to get rid of the mold, before he realized that it could be used (laughter), you know, in animals to treat a bacterial infection.
Speaker 1: So, this is actually, this is how it actually was discovered.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He kept trying to get rid of this mold--
Speaker 2: Rid of it, because it was killing his bacteria.  And he was doing some other kind of experiments and, you know, he would go the next day and the bacteria would be dead, because this mold had contaminated his cultures.
Speaker 1: So, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did somebody have to punch him in the head with it?
Speaker 2: (laughter)  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, anyway, so this is--but this is what you did.  I mean, your research added to the body of knowledge?
Speaker 2: Right, added to the body of knowledge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Even though, I mean, and other scientists have told me that it's hard to tell how this is going to be useful in the future.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it's going to be useful, because it adds to the body of knowledge.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, I'll tell you one thing it did do, now that I'm thinking about it.  But don't quote me on this, because I may have it backwards.  What it did do, was we were able to show that the DNA--this drug also called hypo-methylation of DNA--wherein, which means that there were more methyl groups in certain locations on the DNA.  And eventually, this drug was used to treat sickle cell anemia, because of its hypo-methylation activity.  Because what the drug would do, it would, it would increase the synthesis of fetal hemoglobin.  So, while a baby is in utero, they produce fetal hemoglobin.  And then upon birth, the fetal hemoglobin becomes dormant.  So, in sickle cell patients, if you could get this fetal hemoglobin to work, then it would satisfy the hemoglobin needs because it could take the place of the sickled, the adult hemoglobin, which is sickled.  So, they found out that it could perhaps be used.  So, that drug wasn't used, but another drug called urea, which also hypo-methylates.  So, that drug was used to treat sickle cell anemia patients.
Speaker 1: So, your research influenced the development of the--
Speaker 2: Not in the literature.  You wouldn't see that in the literature notations.  But that's how it's related.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, so you received your Ph.D. in 1979?
Speaker 2: '78, [1978].
Speaker 1: '78, [1978], okay.  And your paper was published.  Now, was it cited very--very often?
Speaker 2: I guess average, you know.  I'm not going to say cited very often.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: But it was '79 [1979] when the paper came out, so maybe that's what you're thinking?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's with the paper coming out, yeah.
Story_ID: 28509
Speaker 1: '79 [1979] was also the year that they declared, scientists declared, that smallpox was--
Speaker 2: Eradicated?
Speaker 1: Yeah, eradicated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how did you feel about that?  Or did--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.
Speaker 1: Is that because-- It should be a cause of celebration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, for me, smallpox is caused by DNA--viruses are are divided into DNA viruses and RNA virus.  So, my virus was a DNA virus.  And so was the pox virus, which is also a DNA virus.  But you know, since that time, there were two lab accidents, yeah, where somebody was working with it, and the person got smallpox.
Speaker 1: Now, it's back and out in the world, so--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It's not out in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, there's not--in fact, there was some declaration some years later, that all the smallpox virus should be destroyed.  And it was a controversial--well, don't you need to keep, keep--
Speaker 1: Right, some as a sample--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you'll know what you're working with.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so, I don't know what ever came out of that.  That was after I had got out of the classroom, so I wasn't keeping up with--to the same degree.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I would guess, I would guess that there's still some around somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Frozen or whatever.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know.  It's kind of like we talk about people testing for nuclear, you know, doing nuclear research.  You don't think we're doing any of it?  (laughter).
Story_ID: 28510
Speaker 1: So, what happened after you finished your Ph.D. [degree]?
Speaker 2: Well, after I finished my Ph.D., of course, my advisor wanted me to go through a post doc [postdoctoral training].  And I was eager to get back to work.  And luckily, you know, I had UDC [the University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia] waiting on me, because I was on leave of absence.  So, I was able to, you know, say well, look, I have to go back to UDC.  So, I went back to UDC and my chairperson and dean, they were very, very supportive of me.  I credit UDC with the place where I was really able to grow up scientifically, and be supported in such a way that I was able to make the next step when I was recruited to the NIH [National Institutes of Health].
Story_ID: 28511
Speaker 1: Now you got, you got married in 1979.
Speaker 2: '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Right before I got my degree.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right before--I got married March, '78 [1978], and I got my degree in August of '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell us how you met your husband?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I met him on a blind date, but he wasn't the blind date.  He was the person that my girlfriend knew who got a date for me.  So, he was out with my girlfriend.  So, we ended up together like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: That's how I met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the blind date, it was a disaster.  But the blind date--and he called me later to apologize, you know, and everything.  And as he says today, he decided to go for himself, you know.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: And the rest is history.
Story_ID: 28512
Speaker 1: So, you married, and so--and back at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia]--and then you got a call from the NIH [National Institutes of Health].
Speaker 2: Well, actually, well no.  That was '78 [1978], and so I worked there and did a lot of, you know, consulting.  Went to--no, actually--well, before I got my degree, I was at UDC.  And I did, I did work for General Electric one summer, Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory].  And I did, you know, the Goddard NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] work.  And then when I went back to UDC after I got my Ph.D., I set up a biology lab, which had never been taught.  You know, a biology course that had never been taught there.  And I had a grant, an NIH grant, that I trained students.  Some, you know, who were out, you know, in the industry--some teaching, some administration.  Of course, M.D.s and dentists.  And now I started--I was invited to serve on a number of, you know, NIH [National Institutes of Health] review groups, NSF [National Science Foundation], and I guess my name kind of got out there.
Speaker 1: And then I was president of Minority Women in Science.  And through that organization I did probably some of the very, very first programs of looking at middle school students, you know, starting early at the middle school level to give them exposures to science careers.
Story_ID: 28513
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Minority Women in Science.  And what--now, when was it founded and who--
Speaker 2: So, it was founded in, I think it was 1978.  And it really came out of the work of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, AAAS.  The Directorate for Education in Human Resources, which was and is still headed--Do you know Shirley Malcolm [also a HistoryMaker; science education advocate]?  Did you do Shirley--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, at that time it was headed by Shirley Malcolm.  And Shirley's division was interested in increasing opportunities for minorities, women and the disabled.  And so, she put together a group of women--she and Yolanda George--put together women to look at the participation of minority women.  She, she wrote 'Double Bind.'  I don't know if you, do you remember that?  She wrote 'The Double Bind', okay.
Speaker 1: Just, just tell anyone watching.  What is the "Double Bind?"
Speaker 2: So, the Double Bind was a document that Shirley Malcolm put together, along with some assistance from AAAS, to talk about the barriers that prevented minority women from excelling in science.  And so, that it was not just the gender issue, being a female, but it was also--well, it's--works both ways.  It's not just being a minority, but it's also being a woman.  And before that time it was like well, you know, women have these issues, and minorities have these issues.  And so, for the first time, it was really focused on the fact that minority women are in a double bind.  They have the race and the gender issue.  And an interesting side note to that, is that working with Shirley and being president of Minority Women in Science, I got a chance to go around the country and talk a lot.  In fact, that's how I met Mary Frances Berry.  We were on the same panel here, at UNC [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill.  And I know at that time--well, she hasn't seen me since, but I was probably identified by Mary Frances Berry--because you know how she is--as just a lame brain in terms of what was really going on.  Because at the same time that we were there for that panel, the students at UNC [University of North Carolina] had erected these shanty towns--these, they called them shanty towns.  And they were living in the middle of campus in these housing units that resembled, I guess the houses in South Africa, because they were protesting against apartheid.  So, Mary--so, the people that told us about it--because that was going on--and so Mary Berry said, "Well, let's go over there."  And of course, at the time I really didn't know what was going on, because I was a bit a naive.  And I sort of paved along behind her, and she was doing all the talking.  And I'm sure she just thought I was just a, you know, just not--very ignorant about issues.  That was one reason why I said I wanted to send her a note and tell her thank you for that book.  She probably won't remember the time that we were on the panel together.  But in any event--So, that's how I got involved with Minority Women in Science.  And we started--the first that I know of--at that time in 1979, we had science discovery days on a Saturday, on Saturdays, for district resident middle school students.   And we brought them in and had them attend these workshops where various scientists engaged in hands-on activities.  Of course, the idea was to introduce them to what we now call STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] careers, at a very early age.  But this was the very beginning of this whole--what we do now--when we talk about engaging students at a very early age.  Because with this focus that we had at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia] on engaging minority students, it then became an issue of engaging women at an early age.  And so now, I mean that's the buzz word, you know, engaging students.
Speaker 1: And this was in the early '80s [1980s]?  This is--
Speaker 2: It was, this was 1979--
Speaker 1: 1979, okay.
Speaker 2: --when we had our first Science Discovery Day.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Now the organization is not as active.  I think they still have  the Science Discovery Days, but it's not as active.  In my estimation, it doesn't make the same impact as it did then, because there's so many different organizations now doing the same thing.
Story_ID: 28514
Speaker 1: Now, in 1980 you started teaching at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was just part-time.  That was a part-time position.  One of my colleagues who I had known--in fact she's still there chairing comprehensive sciences, Dr. Margie Anderson.  She, something happened that semester wherein someone who was supposed to be teaching, couldn't.  And she called me at the last minute, and said, you know, "Would you do this course?"  And of course it wasn't a problem, because I had taught biology before.   And so I, and I can't remember if I was there two semesters or just one.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I was there for at least a year.
Speaker 1: Just teaching part-time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just teaching a course.
Speaker 1: Still full-time at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28515
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the early '80s [1980s] there were a number of microbiological issues that hit the news.  E-coli [Escherichia coli; bacterial species], AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], and I don't know what--What are your thoughts about these?
Speaker 2: Well, actually when you said AIDS, I was reminded, and I don't--do you know George Littleton at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia]?  Have you heard that name?  He's a physiologist in the medical school.  But anyway, he reminded me last week that I was the first person--we were in a meeting--and I was the first person to mention the whole issue about AIDS.  He had never heard about it.  And the reason why I did, and I knew a lot about it, you know--in the late '70s [1970s]--because the person who I worked with, Leonard Rosenthal, where I got my Ph.D. at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], he had started working on the cytomegalovirus.  And cytomegalovirus is, belongs to the Herpes [virus] group.  And so, this particular--AIDS, as we know it, it was believed the cytomegalovirus caused AIDS, called CVM.
Speaker 1: So, they thought it was a strain of Herpes?
Speaker 2: Well, the cytomegalovirus is, belongs to the Herpes family, okay.  So, he was doing research with cytomegaloviruses.  And he was thinking--and I thought--and I was in the lab.  And the other real big thing--because what happened when I left--when I went back to UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], because I didn't have my lab set up, I would still go back to Georgetown to do some of the work in the lab there.  And so, even in 1980 when I got pregnant, I had been working in the lab with CMV.  CMV also can cause problems with fetus.   It can cross the placenta and cause deformities.  And so, when I got pregnant I was frightened, because I knew that I had worked with this CMV virus.   And I think that worried me throughout my entire pregnancy until when my son was born.  The first thing, when I awakened, I asked the doctor, I said, "CMV."  (laughter)  He teases me about it now, you know.  But I wanted to know if there was any signs of it.  But in any event--so I had--when we were looking for topics to speak on, I mentioned why don't we talk about this AIDS, and you know, the possibility it's caused by, you know, this cytomegalovirus.  Well, what we know today is that CMV is an opportunistic infection.  You know, if a person has AIDS, they will also be very susceptible to a number of different bacterial and viral infections.  You know, like Candida, yeast.  You know they're more susceptible to yeast.  They're more susceptible to CMV.  And another kind of pneumonia that's not the pneumonia that most people get, but only people who are compromised.  So, the point is that that's when I, that was my introduction to what we called AIDS then.  Now it's HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], because we found, we've identified the virus that causes it.
Story_ID: 28516
Speaker 1: And so, of course, the other thing is that I have to go around talking to--especially young black people that were probably, that are probably just the way I was when I was, you know, a student at Howard--when they started talking about the viruses made in the lab to--when it spread among black folks, you know, to kill them.  You don't have to really go through--I don't think that's the case, because we know how the virus originated, you know.
Speaker 2: Now this is a pernicious myth in the black community.  It says a lot.
Speaker 1: Yes, it says a lot.
Speaker 2: Especially in the former days.  It's getting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you don't hear it as much.
Speaker 2: It's losing steam, but it was populist--
Speaker 1: It was popular, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a genocidal plot--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to get rid of a disease to kill black people, but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but it wasn't focused just on black people, was it?  I mean, it was--
Speaker 1: Well, it started out in white homosexual males.  You know, that's how it started, you know.
Speaker 2: So did--and that being a big contradiction to the conspiracy theory.  Do you have any stories about explaining this to students?
Speaker 1: Well, first of all, we heard about it in the United States as it impacted the gay population in California.  But the issue is that it's believed that that group picked it up from, I think, Angola, in Africa.  So, this gay population would go over to this specific area and mix with the natives there, who actually transmitted it to them.  And of course, once it got in the white community, then it got into the black community.
Speaker 2: Now there was something called the green monkey involved in this.
Speaker 1: African green monkey.
Speaker 2: Does the monkey have anything to do with it at all?
Speaker 1: Well, it turns out that it wasn't the African green monkey.  African green monkey kidney cells are the ones I work with for my virus.  But the way it got all--the way it got all mixed up with that African green monkey business, is that the polio virus was grown on African green monkey kidney cells.  When they first started in the vaccine, some of the people who got the vaccine, came down with a viral disease.  And they believed it was because it was grown on these African green monkey kidney cells, which is why--another reason why we saw this stimulation of viruses growing in these cell lines that I was working with.  But it's not the African green monkey, and I'm trying to remember what monkey it is.  I don't think it was the African green monkey that this virus was isolated from.  It was another monkey.  People were eating the monkeys.  That's the way it's believed it was transmitted, through eating it and also through killing it and getting the blood, you know, the blood infecting open cuts.  And in fact that's the way most of those exotic viruses are transmitted, from monkeys to man.  Now, the interesting thing that I've often said is that this is something that naturally happens, you know, the crossing of viruses from one species to another.  In one species it's not deadly, but in another species, it is.  So, remember swine flu?  So, nobody said anything about that.  You know, the whole thing of--I mean in terms of it being genocidal or targeting a particular population.  But more importantly, they didn't say anything about it that it was, that it couldn't happen.  It was accepted.  Remember SARS [Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome]?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the issue with HIV is because it was a sexually transmitted disease.  And nobody wanted to believe that it was sexually transmitted, especially in the black community if you started talking about it being transmitted by gays.  So, there was, to me there was a need to establish something else to explain it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did you ever have to defend that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, many times.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Many, many times.  Yeah.  I don't know if I did it successfully, but I certainly said some of the same things that I'm talking to you about.  And what I said, you just have to go read, you know.  You read.  And understand that it is logical, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, African Americans, they say that African American women are the most susceptible to it now, because of--
Speaker 1: But you know what age?  Sixties, on up.  That's the fastest growing population.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Yes, why?
Speaker 1: Because a lot of African American women at that age are settled.  They have--they are economically stable, and they have these relationships with these young boys.
Speaker 2: That's something I did not know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you go look it up, yeah.  That's the fastest growing population now.
Speaker 2: Huh, huh, wow.
Story_ID: 28517
Speaker 1: In '83 [1983], you're promoted to Professor in the Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences [at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC)].  So, this was full professor?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time it was the Department of Biology.  Yes, full professor.  It was the Department of Biology, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because now it's changed again.  It's biology, chemistry and physics.  They have, you know, downsized.  But as I told them, you know, my appointment, when I received it, it was biology, biological and environment sciences.  That's what's on the card they gave me.  So, I still use that.
Speaker 1: Now while at UDC, did you have--what was your time, how was your time divided?  Did you have enough time to do good research, at UDC?
Speaker 2: No, no, very modest.  And most of my research done was, you know, I took off a year and went to the National Cancer Institute [NCI].  And that's where I got a lot of research done, because I wasn't teaching at all.  And then when I went back, I still collaborated back and forth.  So, when you're doing that--And then I--my collaborator at NCI, went to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] pharmacology department.  And even though that seems to be closer to me, actually his lab was way out in Gaithersburg, Maryland.  So, I had to travel from D.C., and I lived in northeast Washington, D.C., right in the middle near Catholic University.  So, that was a, it would take me like forty-five minutes to get there.  So, that takes away, you know, time from productive work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in the late eighties when you worked for the Cancer Institute?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did, what was, any significant findings in your research at the National Cancer Institute?
Speaker 2: It was almost as if every project I started, it didn't work.  And these were projects that were suggested by my collaborator, who was--actually he was my collaborator, but he was also my superior.  I actually worked for him.  And it was suggested to me--and everybody else's work seemed to be going fine.  And you know, I would do one piece of work and then get to a point where the results just weren't coming out.  And somebody reminded me much later that I was probably given all of the projects that didn't seem like they would work, but they wanted to make sure they didn't work.  Because probably I was the person who could most, who could, who could least be damaged by getting false results.  Because he had post docs in the lab, and when you have a post doc, you know the post docs have to produce in order to get another job.  And so, I was the--and then he had technicians which, you know, the technicians just did the work, whatever he said.  So it was, the idea was that since I already had a job, I could serve as the person to do the risky work.
Speaker 1: You had nothing to lose.
Speaker 2: Yeah, nothing to lose.  And when I heard it, I said, "You know what, I think you are right." (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but at UDC you didn't have a lot of time to do, do research at all?
Speaker 2: No.  We did some of that, and I--
Speaker 1: You were teaching.
Speaker 2: --think the most that I got done, a lot that I got done there had to do with training students in biomedical research, such that they had the tools to apply and be accepted to, you know, graduate or professional schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were adjunct at Georgetown, too, part-time for awhile?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 28518
Speaker 1: Now in '92 [1992] it says here that you served as program director for the Office of Institutional Development.
Speaker 2: Not program director.  I was director, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, director.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And that's--I was recruited here to NIEHS [National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences].  And as I was talking about working with those middle school students--I don't know if you've done--do you know Ken Olden [also a HistoryMaker]?  Yeah, Ken Olden was the first black to head up an NIH [National Institutes of Health] institute.  Now they have four or five.  But, so Ken Olden had been at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] at the Cancer Center.  And so, when he came to North Carolina--and he was one of the people that I would invite to participate in this Science Discovery Day, you know, talk to students.  And he had seen, I guess, at least two or three or four years how I had--No, more than that-probably--So, we started in '79 [1979].  Yeah, so he had, he had been one of the volunteer scientists for at least ten years.  So, when he came here to NIEHS, he decided that one of the things he wanted to do was to set up a national program to get young people involved in science.  So, he recruited me. He called me and asked me if I would come to work here.   So that's how I got here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--
Speaker 2: So, it was called Director of Institutional Diversity, but there were other responsibilities along with that.  You know, setting up these pre-college programs, heading up the EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] Office, developing programs that targeted women and minorities, and also addressing health disparities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is in 2001?
Speaker 2: No, that was in 1992, when I came here.
Speaker 1: 1992, okay.
Speaker 2: But then we reorganized.  And when I left, we reorganized to the Director of Education and Biomedical Research Development, wherein EEO was not under me, which I was very glad because then I could focus more on scientific program development.  And my other big job was chairing our Institutional Review Board [IRB].  And that's the review board that reviews all research that involves human subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, let me just get this straight.  Now we, our outline I think is a little off.  So, you started at the University of North Carolina in '92 [1992]?  This is--
Speaker 2: No, this is NIEHS.
Speaker 1: Okay, NIEHS, okay.
Speaker 2: The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Speaker 1: But here in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Right, in Research Triangle Park here [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, we got it, alright.
Speaker 2: So, I started in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Now was it, was it easy to move from D.C. to here?  Or, I mean--
Speaker 2: You mean physically, or--
Speaker 1: You were in D.C. a long time.  I mean, you had associates there.
Speaker 2: Well, no.  You know, the interesting thing about it--I was, you know, when Ken Olden called me one night to say he wanted me to think about it--my first reaction, I said "Oh, no, you know, I'm not, I've never been--I like academia and I don't want to be pushing papers in the government."  And he said, "Well," he said, "You know, what I want you to do--because I'm going to send you some information.  I just want you to think about it."  He said, "Just think about it."  And of course I had always thought that I would end my career at UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], because the nice thing about being in academia, which is unlike so many other positions, you do have the opportunity to go different places.  You know, you can take a sabbatical and go somewhere for a year.  And for most of the summers, I would always go somewhere.  And then you had a lot of freedom where you could do consulting.  So, to me that was the ideal job.  But anyway, when I started thinking about it and, you know, I talked to my husband about it--And I said, going to North Carolina.  You know, this would be nice.  You know, the children at that time were eight and ten [years old], I believe.  And I said, it would be nice for them to live in a more neighborly community, you know.  And I asked them about it.  I asked the boys about it.  I said, "Do you want to go?"  And they were so excited.  Their response was, "Yeah, Mom, we've been living in the same place our whole lives."  And I thought about it.  I said, Golly, you see how lucky you are?  (laughter).  I said, "Look at all the places I lived in by the time I was your age."  (laughter).  So, anyway--and my husband, he got excited about it, too.  And we ended up coming down here, and it was an excellent move.
Speaker 1: Well, was it easy for him to find a position here?
Speaker 2: My husband has always been in these moving positions, you know.  He did insurance for awhile, he did mortgage banking, he did bookkeeping, and he has always been very good at getting another job.  (laughter).  Just, you know--
Speaker 1: So, you had flexibility--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then the other thing that was good about the way he worked, was that it was clear that when I came here, I was going to have to hit the road running, in terms of a job, working.  And we had these two boys.  So, it was really great that he could come here without a job and help, you know, set things up and get things moving.  You know, enroll the kids in school--do all of this, do all of that, which he did very well.  So, it's been very, it's been very good that I've had that type of husband.  Otherwise, I don't see how I could have been as successful in some of the things I've done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28519
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the activities and your goals that you've been working on here [National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Research Triangle Park, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: While I was at the NIH [National Institutes of Health], I was engaged in several activities.  One was recruitment of scientists to the NIH, in both postdoctoral positions in the lab as well as permanent positions.  And then the other component was working to recruit people in our extramural component.  I--
Speaker 1: Now, what is that?
Speaker 2: Well, the NIH is made up of--well, I guess I can say three different segments.  First, there's the management segment.  Then there's the research that's done on site.  It's called the intramural research.  That's the research that's done at the labs.  And then approximately 70 percent of the entire budget of the NIH goes to fund research programs around the country.  And that's referred to as extramural research.  It's the research that's funded around the countries in universities, some hospital organizations, and other similar research organizations, okay.  Also, one of the things that was, that I really enjoyed doing, is I established a program that focused on building the infrastructure in minority institutions.  And that was known as the ARCH, A-R-C-H Program.
Speaker 1: Now, what would be one of these institutions?
Speaker 2: Okay, so we had one at Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  We had one at University of Texas at El Paso.
Speaker 1: Xavier is famous for its pharmacy program.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, and also they send the most graduates to medical school.  Most of their--I think 80 percent of their science majors go to medical school.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Where we were?
Speaker 1: You were talking about, you were talking about the--
Speaker 2: The ARCH Program.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the ARCH Program.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, the ARCH stands for Advanced Corporation--Research Cooperation--Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: In health, or is that it, or--
Speaker 2: In [for] environmental health.
Speaker 1: Environmental health, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, thank you.  So the 'E' was silent.  Advance Research Cooperation in [for] Environmental Health.  Thank you.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so A-R-C-
Speaker 2: C-H, uh huh.
Speaker 1: --H,  okay.
Speaker 2: And the idea of the program was--it's a collaborative research program.  What happens often in minority institutions is that they don't have the infrastructure to support high impact research.  And with this particular collaboration, the minority institution and a major research institution can get together and collaborate with the major institution providing the infrastructure.  And the minority institution--actually providing the students who will go into the, the minority students who will go into these fields.  And so often, majority institutions have a difficult time in recruiting minority students.  So, this serves as a bridge to get these students into those institutions.  So, it's a win-win situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is the position that you retired from, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is your career, basically.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Story_ID: 28520
Speaker 1: And the other area that I was involved in establishing was the Environmental Justice Program.  Before that, we were the first federal agency to actually address environmental justice, in terms of supporting the research.  So, the Environmental Justice Programs-- I had a very productive program in charity, the Institutional Review Board [IRB], that oversaw our research with human subjects.
Speaker 2: Okay, that oversaw the research using--
Speaker 1: Using human subjects, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, this is something that I know is discussed not as much as it should have been, I think, during the AIDS days when they were experimenting--Well, I guess they're all--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --You got the Tuskegee experiment--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --a bad example of--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And so, so what happened back in those days is that they really didn't have mechanisms in place to provide participants, human subjects, with real informed consent.  In other words, to let them know exactly what the research entailed as well as the risks and benefit.  And so, now there are federal procedures in place to ensure not only that this takes place by incorporating this Institutional Review Board to review the research protocol, but also to monitor it so that every year an investigator has to submit their--the progress made in their research--as well ensure, if it's federally funded, that they have engaged minorities and women in the research.  Because that was another thing that had happened in previous years.  Most of the research was done on white males.  And so, if you want to really extrapolate the, you know, good data, you need to have both sexes.
Speaker 2: And you have to have minorities, too?
Speaker 1: You have to have minorities, too, correct.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  Now, and I've heard some horror stories about research.  One, a gentleman I know in Chicago [Illinois] worked for the World Health Organization [WHO].  He went to Congo to monitor something that a U.S. citizen was doing in the Congo in terms of AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] research, where he had total access to the people without any consent.
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah.  And so, that has been an issue.  And actually, I am on the board of the African Organization for Research and Training in Cancer.  And this is an African-based organization.  And I gave a workshop.  I think it was in South Africa, because the meetings are held every two years.  So, I gave a workshop in South Africa on the use of, you know, humans in clinical trials, and how it's so important that people in these undeveloped countries are not taken advantage of.  Because so often, you know, just give them a few items, you know, and they'll just say yes without really understanding what the research is all about.  So, there are standard, standard guidelines.  The WHO does have standard guidelines.  And so, the idea is to make sure they're enforced.  Unfortunately, they aren't always enforced.
Story_ID: 28521
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about research in the Congo and some of the other areas in Africa where there are no restrictions.  And you were going to tell me something about--
Speaker 2: Well, no, I was just going to say that so much of the research that was done on Epstein-Barr virus--I don't know if you know that.  But that's a, it's a Herpes virus as well.  It belongs to the Herpes group.  But it was done in--oh, gosh--What is the country where their ruler was so--
Speaker 1: Uganda?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Uganda, right.  So much research was done in Uganda, until they have state of the art facilities there.  I mean, so much has been done there.  Of course, I haven't come across any information where people have been abused.  But in a way, I mean when all of this work was done, it was back in the '60s [1960s].  I mean it was even before we had our guidelines here in the U.S.  So, it's really no telling, you know, what went on.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 28522
Speaker 1: For your work you've been recognized quite a bit.  Do you want to, you want to tell us about some of the recognition you've received?
Speaker 2: Okay.  One of the recognitions that I'm very proud is I was Mentor of the Year at the Meyerhoff  Program with Freeman Hrabowski at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County [UMBC].  So, I was Mentor of the Year there.  And it was because of the work that I had been doing with mentoring students in that program, and subsequently mentoring the students who come here to Duke [University] and UNC [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill.  So, I have a cadre of students that I still keep in touch with.  In fact, one of the students who was in that program, grew up here in Durham.  And I told him about--his family--about the Meyerhoff Program, and he went out to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and got his Ph.D. [degree].  And I just went to his wedding last week in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. And I have another young lady who's still at Duke.  She's doing her Ph.D. in chemistry.  She's a Meyerhoff.  She's getting married in September.  So, it's really, really nice following these students around.  So, that's one award.  I've also received several awards from the American Society for Microbiology [ASM].  Probably the biggest award there is that I was elected to membership in the American Academy of Microbiology.  And I also received the Alice Evans Award that's given by ASM to a person who has made outstanding contributions in advancing women in microbiology.  I chaired the Diversity Committee in the American Academy of Microbiology and received an award for that.  I also was elected to Fellowship in the American Association for the Advancement of Science [AAAS].  That's the organization where Shirley Malcolm [also a HistoryMaker; science education advocate] works.  And of course, I received the Outstanding Alumni Achievement Award from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 2009.  And that was very, very significant to me.  I was really pleased to receive that award.
Story_ID: 28523
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: I believe my professional legacy would be the advancement of minorities into Ph.D. programs--primarily by teaching them, training them; and also the work that I did at the NIH [National Institutes of Health] where I actually developed national programs to do this; and with the various volunteer programs that I have worked in, for example, Minority Women in Science.   And also, through Delta Sigma Theta [sorority] we have a national initiative.  It's called Science in Everyday Experiences, which was initially funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF].  And it was done in conjunction with AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science].  And while the grant was being administered, I chaired the advisory committee for that.  And so, now we have a program here in Durham [North Carolina] with the Durham alumni chapter of Delta Sigma Theta.  And so we have workshops, we have a summer camp--a day summer camp.  We also have parental workshops, all--you know, addressing--engaging your children in science and making them ready for not only their coursework in school, but also to further their careers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll tell you something else I've been involved in, that I think is really important for this overall effort.  I've been a consultant, and particularly in the area of reviewing grants for a variety of scientific organizations including NIH [National Institutes of Health], [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD], EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], Homeland Security, National Science Foundation [NSF].  And being on these committees sometimes as the only African American scientist, I'm able to ensure that minority applicants and minority schools really, you know, get a fair share.  That they're evaluated and that they surface when they are of high quality.  So often when you're on these review committees and some individuals have never heard of the school, they don't know anything about it.  You know, they just dismiss the application.  So, it's always important to have somebody at the table who can address these issues, and say, "Well, do you know 'X, Y, Z'?"  "Well, yeah.  Well, that person graduated from that institution."  So, there's some good things going on there.  So, I've found that that's been very, very important for advancing minorities in the sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28524
Speaker 1: Now tell us, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That's just in general?  Well, I think the big thing that we're facing is the education issue, the performance of young kids on standardized exams.  And I have no, I have no real problems on standardized exams, because I think that if individuals get the proper schooling early enough, they can master these exams.  And it has been shown over and over again that that's the case.  But so often they don't get quality--they don't get a quality education, nor proper exposure.  So, when it comes time to take these standardized exams, they don't do as well.  But essentially, these standardized exams are very, very important.  Not just, you know, in high school or elementary school, but almost all jobs now--or professions--I mean if you're going to go to medical school or dental school, if you're going to be an accountant-an accountant--you have to take these standardized exams.  So, I think that this whole education issue is a very, very important issue.  And it's no different from the issue that we talked about as being important during Reconstruction, right?  But the problem is that some families don't embrace it to the same extent as we did post Emancipation.  So, that's the key now.  And we no longer have the luxury of saying we can get--we don't need to go to college to get a job, because most jobs now require--either they require a technical skill--or there are so many people out there with the technical skills that they'll get the jobs first, before a person who doesn't have a suitable education.
Story_ID: 28525
Speaker 1: Now, one thing that I found out since I've been here and talked to you, that you are somewhat of a historian.  In fact, a historian of the history of African Americans of microbiology.  You've written about that, and you're concerned with--I mean, you read a lot of information.  (laughter)  I've been impressed with all the things that you read and are concerned about.  So, tell us about, something about the history of African Americans in microbiology, briefly.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  Well, I started on this about maybe fifteen--actually, I started looking at this when I was in, at UDC [University of the District of Columbia], which is over twenty-three years ago.  Early on, I would ask my students to do a--for extra credit they could do a one page essay on a black who'd made contributions to science.  And that's when I did biology.  And when I moved over to microbiology, I asked for the same thing.  And usually students would give me back something about a microbiologist who I knew.  And one semester, a student gave me information on William Hinton, who graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1909--1912, I think it was, and how he had done so much to advance syphilis.  But he, nobody knew about him.  He remained obscured.  And a couple of significant things that was in this article was that he had written a textbook on syphilogy in 1936, which I thought was just phenomenal.  It turns out he was the first African American to write a textbook in the microbiology field.  And also, the real thing that caught my attention was that he left in his will, money for an Eisenhower Scholarship at Harvard University.  And that just really, you know, back in the eighties, that just really intrigued me.  So, I called up to Harvard and wrote letters, trying to find out about this Eisenhower Scholarship.  Because I had assumed that probably even though it was established by an African American, I was almost certain that African Americans probably had never received benefits of it.  So, I never got a response.  But once I got to NIEHS [National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences], I faxed a question to Harvard on NIEHS stationery, not saying why I wanted to know, but that I just wanted some information about this Eisenhower Scholarship.  And they immediately faxed me back the statement from their endowment records that said it was established by William Hinton, who taught at Harvard.  And he established it in honor of his parents who were slaves, who were former slaves.  And then I wrote them back to ask them if they could give me a list of the number of people who received it, but I never received an answer from that.  But over the years, I was able to find out where his daughter was, and I got to meet her--went to Boston and met with her.  And found out just some really interesting heart-breaking information, I'll say it like that.  And so, I published some of the information on Hinton already, but I'm getting ready to give a paper next week that's going to bring out much more about his time at Harvard.  Nowadays he is, I mean, Google him, and you get 1.5 million hits, because now a lot of organizations have the Hinton lecture, they have the Hinton Society at Harvard.  In the School of Public Health, they have the Hinton Lecture, State Public Health Building was just named in his honor.  And he just received all kind of awards and notices.  But this has only happened in the last ten years.  I wrote my first paper in 1997 outlining his work, but not telling the true story, because some of the things that his daughter told me, she was very frightened.  She ended up suing Harvard, because she didn't believe that the will was correct, that he was coerced into signing it, and he was not in a good state of mind.  But she told me, "Oh, don't talk to anybody about this, because I don't want them coming after me."  So, after she passed--she passed about three years ago--I've decided now I can talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28526
Speaker 1: So, well, can you say, tell us anything about--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  She told me that her father [William Hinton] was delusional during his last days, and that people from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] kept coming in with all these papers for him to sign.  And she said he wasn't in his right mind.  And when he died, they had to leave the home and everything.  So, according to her, she didn't get anything.  And she was really upset, because his daughter--he had a grandson and he wanted the grandson to have his gold watch.  But they took that.
Speaker 1: Harvard took that?
Speaker 2: They took everything.  This is according to her.  And she had a sister.  So, when I was asking her, "Well don't you have anything?  Don't you have anything, because if he may have any artifacts, I'd like to put them on display at the American Society for Microbiology [ASM]?"  Incidentally, I did get the American Society for Microbiology to establish a Hinton Award, which they give every year.  And she said, "No."  She said, "We had such a horrible life.  My father wanted to be white.  He sent us to England to school with the white governess."  And she said, "My--." She didn't exactly say it like this, but I got the impression that her sister left the home and ended up in a mental institution.  And she said that when these people took her to the mental institution--they were social workers--they took all of the stuff, all of the artifacts that she had from her father.  But, I have since been able to get the court documents where she actually contested Harvard.  And his will is in there.  His will was written in 1955.  And they did interrogations of her and her sister.  And so, they acknowledged that the will is correct and that he signed it, but they felt that during this period of time he was delusional.  He was seen, you know, calling up people on the telephone telling them to come over, because people were after him.  When they would get there, he would tell them he didn't call them.  And it was during this time that he signed the will.  So, they felt that he wasn't in his right mind when he signed it.  Now, I asked her about this Eisenhower Scholarship, because I had been reading that he left seventy-five thousand dollars, which--actually, I found out that that equals to about six-hundred thousand dollars in today's buying power.  So, he left seventy-five thousand.  But the more I did research, I found some newspaper articles that said he left an amount that soon may reach seventy-five thousand.  And so, I said, why did it say soon might reach?  And that's when she told me that they took house and everything and sold it, and that's why they didn't know, you know.  So, there's nowhere in his will--I have the will, that he leaves a definite amount.  But he does say he left a thousand dollars to each of his daughters, and a thousand dollars to his grandson in trust by another person, that if this grandson goes to school and leads a productive life, that he should administer this one thousand dollars to him.  But if he doesn't, then this person should just take the one thousand dollars and do whatever he wants.  And he said the rest of it--if my wife does not precede me, I leave to Harvard.  He said, all my property.  So, that is in the will.  And he did leave her--even though she told me he didn't leave her anything, he did leave her the one thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she also told me.  This is another thing.  So, she told me that she had F. Lee Bailey as her lawyer.  But he told her after, you know, the case didn't go--She did, she said, "We got something."  She did say that.  And I don't know if she was referring to the one thousand dollars, or something else.  But she said that F. Lee Bailey told her, "You cannot fight the crimson."  You know, Harvard's colors are crimson and white.  So, then I started trying to find F. lee Bailey.  And I wrote to him, I wrote to him at an address I had--I saw in Boston [Massachusetts].  Didn't get a response.  Then something happened with him down in Florida, and they said he was in West Palm Beach, Florida.  And I went on the internet and I found an e-mail for him.  And I e-mailed him and asked him, you know, did he have any recollection of this case?  So, he told me didn't.  He did respond.  He said that he had no recollection of the case.  So, I don't know if she made a mistake by saying F. Lee Bailey--because F. Lee Bailey's name is not in any of these records that I have.  Or, if it were a case after this, or a case before.  But I just talked to my sister who's a lawyer, and she said she had program where she can, she can go through and find all court cases in the country.  So I'm going to ask her to do that for me to see if I get any more information.
Story_ID: 28527
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you change it?
Speaker 2: Do differently?  You know, one of the things that you, when you're coming along, sometimes you think that you made a mistake--I wish I had done it this way.  But if you have the luxury, the blessing of living long enough, I think you can look back and see that things fell in just as they should have fallen.  Even though some things might have set you back--but it's been all fine, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's been all fine.
Story_ID: 28528
Speaker 1: Let me ask--I forgot to ask you this one, but people will be angry if I don't ask you about Henrietta Lacks, you know.  Just give us some reflections on that case, the famous case of the--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Kind of set--tell people what it is.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, Henrietta Lacks--and actually I found out about Henrietta Lacks years ago through the same thing with students giving reports.  It seems like every now and then in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], it would surface in the Washington Post [newspaper], as an article of interest.  But Henrietta Lacks was an African American woman who died of ovarian cancer.  She was, well, she grew up actually not too far from here in--gosh, what's--Virginia.  I can't think of the name right now.  But she moved to Baltimore [Maryland], and she went to the doctor.  She had this pain, gynecological pain.  Turned out it was cervical cancer.  And what happened, as what happened with so many patients back in the day--and this is the thing that a lot of people don't understand.  They took some of her cells and did they research on them.  And they did that with almost every patient, okay.  The problem with Henrietta Lacks' cells is that they labeled her name, they labeled.  So, when I was in school I was told that "HeLa" stood for Helen Lane, a white woman.  So, by them labeling her name they were able to--eventually somebody was able to find out who she was.  So, in a way it's--and in those days, too, they didn't have this inform consent that we have now.  So, in a way--even though people look at it as a racial issue and somebody taking advantage of this black woman--in fact, all of our medical advances today are made because they used somebody's cells (laughter) to get answers.  It's just that they didn't label their names.  They used numbers, they used everything else.  Now, the way this reached the forefront--Have you done Roland Pattillo at Morehouse Medical [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Roland Pattillo actually is a gynecologist who worked for the doctor who took Henrietta's cells.  So, he personally knew she was a black woman.  And what he did, which he gets no credit for--and it's just, well, what he did was--I think it was back in the eighties, I mean the early nineties.  He started a seminar series every year at Morehouse College.  It's called the "Healer," or something.  And he would have people come in for tissue culture studies.  And nobody ever paid any attention to that.   So, it wasn't until Rebecca Skloot published her book [The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks] in the way that she published it, you know--very sensationalized--that the whole issue of Henrietta Lacks and these cells came in the forefront.  Now, in my estimation, Rebecca Skloot focuses on how Henrietta Lacks was exploited by the medical system.  But I believe that Rebecca Skloot also played a part, a role, in this exploitation, because she followed Henrietta Lack's daughter around for at least two or three years and got all this information from her.  Wrote a book--and because, once again, this daughter was not knowledgeable, the daughter didn't know that she should have been a part of that story and reaped some of the benefits of it.  She died, you know, she died just as the book--I don't even think the book had come out.  I think she had a copy of it, but it hadn't been released.  So, Rebecca Skloot says that she's established scholarship funds for the children.  But I met the son--and maybe this shouldn't be--because I don't want to breach his confidentiality, you know, his confidence.  But he wasn't aware of any money that the family had received, though she says on her website that two or three students have gone to college.  But even with that, going to the community colleges there in Baltimore [Maryland], it's not a lot of money.  And I know--I was first introduced to--you know, with this whole issue of Rebecca Skloot--to the American Society of Microbiology [ASM].  Because as with all authors who write stories that have a scientific nature that involve viruses or what have you, or bacteria, we like to have them come and speak.  But she wanted an enormous amount of money to come, that was far more than anybody had ever requested.  And they said no.
Story_ID: 28529
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, tell us something about your family.  Now, you have children, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well--my children--so, yeah, we have two children, two sons.  The oldest is Charles, born in 1981 and the youngest is Emil, he was born in 1983.  Both of them, I made sure that they went to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] for undergraduate, you know.  And the reason why I chose Morehouse and was just so set on that from the time that they were born, it's because I had gone to Morehouse--my first trip to Morehouse was in the late 70s [1970s].  I had gone on an NIH [National Institutes of Science] site visit.  And I was just so impressed with the young men, as I am still today.  And I said, that's what, that's the way I want our boys to act.  So, they had a very successful experience at Morehouse College.  Charles, the oldest, had gone there with the idea that he was going to work on a Ph.D. in some--in the micro medical sciences, because had worked two summers at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] with a microbiologist at Duke.  And then when he came home, he said, "Mom, you know, I think I want to go to medical school."  And of course I said, "Oh, you don't want to medical school."  Anyway, I'm glad that's what he decided.  He went to medical school.  So, he went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] Medical School and he did a surgery, five year surgery residency.  He's doing a fellowship right now at the Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio], and he just signed on to join a practice on Long Island, New York.  So, he'll start there June 15th--July 15th.  He's married to a lovely young lady from New Rochelle, New York who also graduated from Howard.  She's a cardio-thoracic pulmonary physician assistant.  So, they've been married for two years.  An interesting thing, she's a lovely young lady, and about six weeks ago she donated a kidney to her father.  Her father was born with some immunological malfunction.  And they knew all along that his kidneys were going to soon go out.  And he made it to a very late stage.  But anyway, both of them came out of it successfully.  She was back at work in four weeks.  So, that's been a blessing in our family.  The second son, Emil Thompson, is going to do a Ph.D. in bioinformatics.  And he got a very nice NSF [National Science Foundation] Fellowship to do it at North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And after one year he said, "I don't want to do this."  And of course, Mom was very, very upset.  "What in the world are you going to do with your life?"  And he said, "Well, I want to go to law school."  "Ahhh, who's going to take you into law school?  You can't figure out what you want to do."  He worked for a year for Bank of America.  Got a scholarship to go to Wake Forest Law School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Had just a wonderful time there.  He was on the Intellectual Property Law Review Journal.  He did the mock court.  He worked with the criminal justice system, and actually got a person out of jail in Winston-Salem who had been wrongly sentenced--and got him out of jail.  It made the newspapers and the news.  And then he went to D.C. and clerked for Judge Herbert Dixon in the Criminal Division in the D.C. Superior Court.  And now he works for the Deputy Mayor of D.C. Government.  He's in charge of Criminal Justice in Health and Safety.  So, they are two fine--and he has a daughter.  He has an eleven year old daughter.  You figure that out.  He's--So, but, she's a lovely young girl.  She's in the picture.  And so we're all planning--my brother, my youngest brother, who lives right outside of Chicago [Illinois] in Buffalo Grove [Illinois], he retired from Abbott [Laboratories] some years ago.  And he has his own company now.  But he's rented a big place in Montego Bay.  So, we're going to all go down in June and do a little mini-family reunion, just the siblings and their offspring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28530
Speaker 1: When you asked about what my contributions have been--So, the other piece that I think I contributed in a good way is through mentoring students--those that I taught, but also those who have graduated and need advice.  I've also done a lot in, you know, in mentoring professionals who are in jobs that need to know what's the next step.  You know, how should I do this, how should I do a resume?  And I find that very rewarding, especially when I see them advancing. So, I believe that's a contribution that I consider very important.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28531
Speaker 1: Maam, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd liked to be remembered--Oh, I know what the other piece was, and then I'll tell you what I remember--how I'd like to be remembered--The other thing that I do whenever I can--and it comes up a lot.  When I see awards, announcements for any kind of award, especially in the sciences, when I see--I always try to find a minority that I can recommend for the award.  And I've been very, very successful, believe it or not.  Often it's times when minorities have never even been, you know, considered.  So, that's good.  So, the legacy is, the legacy that I would like to leave, is that I have been instrumental in advancing minorities in the sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been a good wife and mother.
Speaker 1: That's very important.  Thank you very much.
