Story_ID: 222629
Speaker 1: So we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Tuesday, December 14, 2004.  And this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would please, for the record, please tell us your full name and spell it, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Ella, E-L-L-A, Mizzell, M-I-Z-Z-E-L-L, Kelly, K-E-L-L-Y.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: March 17, 1939, Columbia, North Carolina which is in Tyrrell County [North Carolina], and it's the eastern--northeastern-most county in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a social science researcher in the Department of Pediatrics and Child Health at Howard University [Hospital] in Washington, D.C.--
Story_ID: 222630
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So I ask that you give us short answers to these particular questions.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Everything.  I literally have no food prejudices, and I like everything that I eat.  I've lived all over the world where I've had to, you know, "catch is, catch can."  So whatever you put in front of me, I'll eat it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: All of them.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: You know, I never thought about that.  No (laughter).
Story_ID: 222631
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother starting with where your mother was born--I'm sorry, your mother's name, and where she was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry.  She grew up in Columbia, North Carolina, which is a rural farm area.  And that's where she met my father [Frederick Mizzell].  The--when I visited years ago, it's not very large.  I mean you can walk around and everybody, I discovered many years later, is probably related (laughter) and the cousins, et cetera, et cetera.  They're clans by name, and at various times, they intermarried with each other, and so that was it.
Speaker 1: And now, did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like as a girl growing up?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was a person of secrets and mysteries unfortunately.  So what I learned about her, I had to learn from my own explorations and by talking to members of the family.  She was quite sickly as a child.  And it may be that she had bad memories of being ill all of the time, and therefore, she didn't care to dwell on it and share it with us.
Speaker 1: Did she grow up on a farm?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a farming community, yeah, sizeable farm.  And it's only been within the past, I think within the past ten years that the farm was sold.  But it had been in the family, from my--the land grant, I still have the original land grant, was in the family from 1862 and stayed in the family until about 1994 when it was sold.
Speaker 1: And do you know how it was that your family came about, how they acquired this land?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an interesting story.  The land was originally owned by a Scottish slaveholder and his wife.  They did not have any--the wife was barren apparently.  And he had a child, one child, by one of the slave women on the plantation, and for some reason--this is a story I've got to find out, his wife accepted her as the child in the family.  And when she married, my maternal great, great-grandfather, as a wedding present, he gave the property to her.  And that's how it came in the family.  I have the grant, and when I read it, especially since I was trained originally as a historian, I said, "Oh, my God, this is one of those stories," you know.  "I've got to find out some more about it."  So that's one of the things, if I live long enough within the next three or four years when I really do plan to retire finally, I'm going to really try to check that out.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very beautiful, charismatic woman with a lot of secrets, and now what I guess we'd call, low self-esteem in some regards.  By that I mean, for her generation, very, very fair women were expected that they would marry men who had money, who would prize their beauty.  My father did not have money (laughter), and I just, I think what happened was that, the kind of thing that normally happens in farming communities where people don't get that much education and, of course, before birth control, that she had a fling.  She got pregnant, and in those days, you married the person.  So I remember being eleven years old and seeing my birth certificate and also seeing the marriage certificate, and then doing the counting.  And I thought, "Oh, okay," (laughter).  "That's what happened."
Story_ID: 222632
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting with his name, and where he was born and grew up.
Speaker 2: Frederick Douglas Mizzell, also in Columbia, North Carolina and grew up in that area.  From everything that I can discern, worked as a laborer as I think most young African American men did at that time.  And after all, this would have been, let's see, he was born in 1917.  So he would be, would have been in his teens in the early '30s [1930s], not the nicest of times and particularly in rural America and particularly in the rural South if you were growing up.  And probably it was that with World War II [WWII], when he was probably drafted, that's when his life changed.  But he and his family, my mother's family lived about two miles away from each.  I mean lit--I literally walked down the road from my grand--my maternal grandfather's [John Hill] farm to my paternal grandfather's [John Mizzell] farm (laughter).  It's only about two miles.
Speaker 1: And did your father ever share any stories with you about life growing up?
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, the marriage didn't last that long.  My mother [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] and father were separated when I was about twelve or thirteen and divorced some time thereafter.  I don't know.  My mother never really talked about it.  So I have no idea of her feelings about the whole thing.  But what I know--what I knew about him I knew mainly from my uncles.  I was close to the family, because in those days, growing up in New York City [New York, New York] and during the summers, if you had relatives in the South, you went south and you stayed with relatives.  So I learned a little bit about him through uncles and aunts who still lived in North Carolina.  And he was, my memories of him are very, very fond memories.  I was very close to him.  I look just--at least I thought I looked just like him.  Everybody, you know how it is with kids.  At one stage, everybody says, "Oh, you look like your mom."  Then another stage, "Yeah, you look like your father."  In early pictures of me, I looked very, very much like my father.  As I've gotten older, everyone says I look more like my mother's side of the family (laughter).  But I have very fond memories.  I was very, very close to him.  He was a barber; he was very nice, one of those kind of mellow kind of guys.  I never remember him having a sharp word for anybody, and I was not present when he died.  My younger sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldell] was, because I didn't--I lived in Maryland.  She stayed, she was one of those New Yorkers that stayed in New York.  I always wanted to get out of New York (laughter).  So she's the one who has all the stories mostly about, she had all the stories mostly about family.  And her impression is the same as mine.  You know, he was just a nice guy, very quiet, never talked that much about himself.  And whatever thoughts and so forth that he may have had, he shared with someone else, but not with us.
Story_ID: 222633
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] do growing up? When you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, let's see, my earliest recollection she was at home.  But by the time my sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldell] and I started school [P.S. 194, Countee Cullen School, New York, New York] in New York City [New York, New York] because we moved to New York from Virginia at the end of World War II [WWII].  At that point, she worked in a garment factory and then worked in electronics.  It was usually light manufacturing which was very prominent in New York at that time, particularly in places like Brooklyn [New York, New York] and Queens [New York, New York].  I mean Manhattan [New York, New York] was essentially New York, but the outer boroughs were places where there was a lot of light manufacturing in those days.  So she worked in the garment district, then in electronics, eventually ended up working for the State of New York as a secretary.  And that's when she retired.
Speaker 1: And why did the family move to Virginia?
Speaker 2: Because after I was born, from everything I've been able to find out, my father [Frederick Mizzell] was drafted.  There, most of the family had moved to Norfolk [Virginia] to work in the war industries there.  And there were also family members there, and I--we lived with one of her many sisters and brothers.  My mother was one of fourteen live births if you can imagine.  When I was pregnant with my son [Berlin Vincent Kelly], because I was so old (laughter), went to a genetic specialist, and he said, "Do your--just go back two generations," because they look to see if there're any diseases that run in the family.  And I, when I got to my mother's side, I almost gagged (laughter), all these aunts and uncles (laughter), yeah, how do you remember the names of thirteen siblings (laughter).  But whatever the case, she moved to Norfolk too to be there, and my sister was born Norfolk.  I was born in [Columbia] North Carolina, but my sister was born in Norfolk, Virginia.  And at the end of the war when my father was discharged, he stayed in New York, and we traveled to New York to be with him.
Speaker 1: And so did you attend elementary school in New York?
Speaker 2: In New York City, um-hm.
Story_ID: 222634
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you a little bit about your grandparents.  Did you spend much time with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure, particularly, my mom's [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry], my maternal grandmother [Annie Bowser Hill] was dead by the time I was born, but my maternal grandfather was very, very much alive, had been a minister, a Baptist minister.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: John Benjamin Hill, and very, very vigorous person.  And as a child, especially growing up in New York [New York], he lived with my mother's eldest sister.  And we lived just a short distance away.  So my job as the eldest of all of those cousins, that second generation that was born and was in New York, my job every Saturday was to go to my aunt's house and clean my grandfather's room.  And, of course, I didn't like it because I'd just cleaned my own, but in the course of (laughter), of that--I wasn't the most likeable of children, very vocal--my grandfather and I started talking a lot.  And my earliest, my earliest conversations with an adult in which I was not treated like a child was with my grandfather.  So I became very, very attached to him.  And the Saturday forays ended up being conversations because he was a great walker, one of those folks, you know, get up at five in the morning, have your water with lemon juice, read the Bible, do your prayers and so forth.  So by the time I got there, he was ready for me.  And over time, it was less cleaning up his room, but I would go with him on his walks.  And he said I was the only one of the grandchildren that he thought had any redeeming value (laughter), so he would talk to me (laughter) like an adult.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you all talk about?
Speaker 2: Oh, we talked about everything.  I was one of those contrary children, you know, "Well, why?"  I wasn't so much about why was this and why was that.  It was, because I was a--my mother said I could read when I was two.  So I read everything that I could find.  And it was, "Grandpa, I think--" this, and, "I think--" that.  And in retrospect, he must, I must have, it must have been laughable.  I mean I was only seven or eight (laughter).  He was in his seventies, and here I am telling him what I thought about the world.  But he indulged me (laughter).  So my recollection of him is very, very fond, and he--I promised him that I was gonna graduate from college.  And my promise was made to him.  He died my--the end of the first semester of my senior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and the family knew how close we were.  So they never told me until I graduated, which I'm sorry.  You know, families make those types of decisions for whatever reasons.  I can appreciate it now, but I was very hurt by that then.  I was taking final exams, and my aunt said that, you know, they didn't want to disturb my taking finals.  So, but I was very, very close to him--
Story_ID: 222635
Speaker 1: And what about your--
Speaker 2: My grandmother and, paternal grandmother and grandfather [John Mizzell]--I did not spend as much time with them as I did with my maternal side [Annie Bowser Hill and John Hill], for obvious reasons, proximity.  But I have very, very fond memories of them.  My sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldell] looks just like, used to look just like my paternal grandmother, short; looked just like she spit her out.  My grandfather was, I don't know how to describe him.  He's, he was musically inclined, and the thing that I always liked when we went to visit, was that he would sing us songs, which I don't remember (laughter).  But I remember that being with them was always a very happy time because our grandmother fed us to death, you know, hot biscuits every morning, you know, what's not to like (laughter)?  And our grandfather was just, just charming and very, very delightful.  He died, I would say relatively young, meaning in his early sixties, which I think would be young.  My grandmother lived much longer.
Speaker 1: And what were their names?
Speaker 2: This was my step, this would be my step-grandfather.  I never knew my father's father.  My grandmother, Martha Halsy Mizzell, married, remarried, and he was Grandfather Tatum [ph.].  That's what we called him.
Story_ID: 222636
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear, my memory goes back to when I was two.  I remember when my sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldell] was born.  And I know because I took a broom and tried to beat her up.  She was in the middle of the bed, and I tried to hit her with,--you know how children are.  She was unexpected.  "Who's this kid?" (Laughter) And I tried to get rid of her with the broom, and my mother [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] came and spanked me, of course (laughter).  I never did that again.  But I have memory of that.  I have memory of the train ride that we took from Norfolk [Virginia] to New York [New York].  I didn't realize it then, but in retrospect--it was at the end of the war [World War II, WWII].  The train was extremely crowded, and I remember we were looking, my mother was trying to find a seat where we could sit because there were people all over the place.  There was a young, white sailor who was sitting on the train, and he had his feet up, and my mother asked him if he would move his feet so we could sit down.  And he didn't do it.  And the conductor came by, and she said something to him, and the conductor made him move his feet.  As a child, I didn't think about it, but I think that was probably the first--I didn't see it as a racist act.  It probably had a lot of racism built in it cause the sailor was white, and this was 1945, 1946, not the nicest of times if you were a person of color traveling on the train.  But the conductor.  But the conductor was white, and I've always wondered about that.  So there, but that did stick in my mind.  The other, of course, was going to school in New York City which I enjoyed but was difficult because it's--I think it's difficult if you're a child who enjoys school when your classmates don't like it.  I liked school.  They didn't like it, so I got picked on a lot, but it didn't bother me that much 'cause I always fought back so they left me alone after a while (laughter).  Yeah, the typical things about growing up.
Story_ID: 222637
Speaker 1: Could you give us your siblings' names and their birth order?
Speaker 2: Yes, I only have--I had one.  My younger sister, who always thought she was my older sister.  My younger sister, Joyce Alberta Mizzell Yeldell, who just died over the Labor Day weekend this year.  I miss her very much.
Story_ID: 222638
Speaker 1: Well, for me growing up was essentially growing up in New York City [New York, New York].  And unlike my friends, I always wanted to get out of New York.  I don't know why.  But when I was, I know that when I was twelve, I made a list of all the things I wanted to do before I died.  And one was, I wanted to learn to speak Chinese, don't ask me where it came from.  I wanted to go to school in England.  I wanted to learn to fly a plane.  There were a whole bunch of other things.  And so for me, New York City was a place that was gonna prepare me to go someplace else.  And I was very, very fortunate in that I did well in school.  And New York in those days had excellent public schools.  And I went to Junior High School 136 [Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York] which was an all girls' high school in Harlem [New York, New York].  And it was at a time when we were the first generation of the parents who had migrated from the South.
Story_ID: 222639
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Car, a lot of cars, the subways and the parks.  New York City has a lot of parks.  And I grew up at a nice time in New York City.  Harlem [New York, New York] was a really nice place when I was growing up.  And there were a lot of parks, and there were a lot of organizations like the Police Athletic League [PAL], the Catholic youth clubs and so forth, the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association].  So there was always something to do, and there were always organizations cause all of our parents worked.  And there were after-school programs as well.
Speaker 1: So, are those more sights?  So, what sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: No distinctive smells that I can think of because the city wasn't that crowded in those days.  It was very clean.  It was--
Speaker 1: Is there like a particular cooking smell that reminds you of just growing up?  Anything like that or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, with that, I guess the holidays obviously.  And in our family, that would have been Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Speaker 1: And what sounds?
Speaker 2: A lot of noise.  It was a big family (laughter).  And you get all, you know, fourteen, well, in this case, ten siblings with their spouses and their kids all in one big place.  And it was noise, a lot of noise, a lot of conversation, a lot of laughter and music, a lot of music.
Story_ID: 222640
Speaker 1: And what were holidays like in your house growing up?  Were they very special occasions?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, because in those days, well, first of all no one had a lot of money, but you always got something from somebody.  So, and the holidays we got, instead of a lot of toys and clothing, we got a lot of fruit, and fruit and nuts was a big thing that we got.  You'd get one toy that you liked, but, you know, oranges at this time and so forth.  I remember that, you know, compared to now, kids would look at you and laugh.  But that was a big thing then.  And in my case, the sights were provided for us by the schools because in those days in New York [New York], every kid in elementary school got two trips a year where you got on the subway and you went someplace.  And the two that were almost always the [American] Museum of Natural History [New York, New York].  And we went to The [Met] Cloisters [The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] which is on the upper end of Manhattan island [New York, New York].  And the Cloisters in those days were, and still are, I think, are just absolutely beautiful.  It's an unbelievable place to be.  So for me, a lot of growing up in New York when I was younger was about exploring the parks and the sights and I got hooked on museums.  I'm a museum freak.  So I got hooked on the museums, and in those days, what, five, ten cents on the subway was nice.  And the museums were all free, no admission charge.  So it was kind of great.
Story_ID: 222641
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Our first street was, when we first moved, we stayed with my mother's [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] eldest sister [Clara (ph.) Hill] on St. Nicholas Avenue, 721 [New York, New York].  Then when we got our own apartment we moved to 159 West 145th Street, and then we moved to a larger apartment, 229 West 144th [Street] and that was, that was it for me.  I didn't really go back.  I mean by that time, I'd gone to college and didn't live, at any, for any extended time in New York [New York] after that.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe your community or your block for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, the first block, 159th Street [sic. 159 West 145th Street], was interesting because we had more girls than boys.  You know, the block is always a function of who lives there (laughter).  So most of my friends were female friends.  You know, you learn to jump rope, blah, blah, blah, blah.  We lived there till I was about eleven.  When I moved to 144th Street, most of the people on the block were guys, were boys, so I, that's when I learned to play stick ball (laughter), because you had to be on a team.  I mean that's the way it--so it would be, it was myself, my girlfriend, Bunny [ph.].  I think there were four of us at the time.  There were four girls and about fifteen guys (laughter), so whenever you played on teams, you know, we were always in the minority.  So you ended up having to be little thick skinned at that point.
Speaker 1: And was there like a corner store?  What else was on your block?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on 144th Street, we, I lived right across the street from a public school so it's a big school yard and everybody congregated in the schoolyard.  145th Street, there was a big--there were markets.  In those days, they used to sell live chickens in boxes or containers or something.  It was across the street, and so we played only on one side of the street which was relatively short because at the end of it was a gas station, whereas 144th Street was a little different with a playground and made everything quite different.
Story_ID: 222642
Speaker 1: And what were your family's experiences like at church?  Did you all attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: My sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldell] and I attended.  My parents [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry and Frederick Mizzell] didn't (laughter).  Every Sunday morning, we went to what was Union Baptist Church [New York, New York] which was on 145th Street, between 7th and 8th Avenues, and we were affiliated with the church for a long, long time until when I was thirteen, I--almost all my friends went--were Roman Catholic, so I started going to Mass with my friends on Sunday mornings.  It created quite a brouhaha in our family because there was a Baptist minister (laughter), my grandfather, maternal grandfather [John Hill] was a Baptist minister, and the idea of going to the Roman Catholic church, you would have thought the world had come to an end.  But, you know, you wanna be a part of the crowd, and that was my group, my social group at that time was all Roman Catholic.
Speaker 1: Did you convert to Catholicism?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you converted?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.  My parents were very upset, but yeah, I converted and remained very much a part of the church through college and was, the--in some ways I probably have never strayed from the church.  I mean whether you're born Catholic or you convert, there's things that stay with you.  The problem that I had with the church though was--I read everything, and I, in those days, my boyfriend and I--and this started when I was fourteen.  We loved French film.  And then the Italian film.  All the new wave stuff was coming out, so, you know, we used to see all these films.  And every Sunday, and what happen in those days, is that I'd have to take the, you had to take the legions of decency oath once a month where you swore that you wouldn't put yourself in the occasion of sin by what you read, so on, so forth and so on.  So you looked at the list, and being a devout Catholic and wanting to be perfect, I was very upset by the fact that all the movies that (laughter) I had seen were on the list.  And then some of the books that I had read were on the list.  And the priest who had given me my first communion, Father Newman [ph.], we became pretty close, close friends.  He had a group of younger people, like a discussion group.  And I was always arguing with him about the church (laughter), you know, why, why was it, I couldn't understand.  Why was I in the occasion of sin because I had seen a [Federico] Fellini movie?  I mean (laughter), you know, other than the fact that the woman may have taken off her clothes or there--it wasn't even explicit sex in those days; very, very mild stuff.  But it was the reality of the movies that I loved.  And he was trying to explain to me why the church thought that this was not right.  It was immoral.  And so I still couldn't see, and we would argue all the time.  I finally got to the point where I just stopped.  I decided I had, my peace with the church was that I would try to live up to as much as I could, but when it came to what I read and what I saw, that's where we kind of separated.
Story_ID: 222643
Speaker 1: And what impact did your parents' [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry and Frederick Mizzell] separation have on the family?
Speaker 2: I don't know about on the family, but it had a profound effect on me.  First of all, my mother and I never got along so when my mother and my father separated, for me that was very, very upsetting.  I know that I literally almost went into sort of a shell.  And she--my mother was a very beautiful woman who didn't have time for her children.  So, by the time she and my father separated, it was as if there was no one, no adult available to me.  And that breach between my mother and I lasted pretty much through our lives, even though I was always civil and was always respectful, but that breach never really was filled.
Story_ID: 222644
Speaker 1: So, when your parents [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry and Frederick Mizzell] divorced, did you and your sister [Joyce Mizzell Yeldel] continue--?
Speaker 2: We lived with our mother.  And shortly thereafter, my mother remarried, and my stepfather [Louis Jerry] was a very nice man.  Well, he loved her, and, but by that time, I was in my early--well, let me put it, I graduated from high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York] when I was sixteen so by the time I was thirteen, I'm starting high school.  And, you know, at puberty, that's, it's, you're having problems trying to figure out who the heck you are.  And then all this other stuff is going on.  So my stepfather and I sort of had our peace with each other, but he was, for all practical purposes, never really a part of my life.
Speaker 1: And did your father move back to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, he stayed in New York [New York].  And he remarried.
Speaker 1: And were you able to maintain a relationship?
Speaker 2: No, I did not have a relationship with him at all which, you know, I've regretted, but, you know, in those days, my concern was to focus on just, I figured, the rule was I'd be on my own when I graduated from high school or when I became eighteen, whichever came first (laughter).  So I graduated from high school first (laughter).
Story_ID: 222645
Speaker 1: Let's talk now about elementary school.  What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: P.S. 194 [Countee Cullen School] in Manhattan [New York, New York], which no longer exists.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see, yes.  There was, there were two, a Mrs. Lewis [ph.] and a Mrs. Fox [ph.].  I tell everyone that for my generation growing up in New York [New York], we had the benefit of these very bright women who in later years could go into other professions, but these were really, really smart women who were teaching.  And one of them, Mrs. Fox, was Jewish, and the other one, Mrs. Lewis, was African American.  And the word got around, well, when I was in the fourth grade, I had Mrs. Lewis, that I was her favorite.  I don't know if I was, but I did enjoy her, I did enjoy her class.  And Mrs. Fox was the one who had me tested because she thought that I, whatever she thought.  She never told me, but I was tested.  So I did the fifth and sixth grade in one year.  So I went from the fourth to the fifth for about two months and then the sixth for the rest of the year.  So I did elementary school in, I started in the second grade.  So I did elementary school in four years, and I did junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York] in two years.
Speaker 1: Wow, let's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but elementary school was nice.  I mean I enjoyed it.  It was a nice, we had very good teachers.  It was very strict.  A lot of stuff was rote, but--
Speaker 1: Did that bother you at all?  I--
Speaker 2: No, I was a reader, so, you know, for me it was the first month of school, I read the book, and I did all the exercises.  And then I did what I wanted to do (laughter).  It sounds funny, but I learned at a very early age, I learned something, because children don't have rights (laughter).  And I figured out that kids don't have rights, but there are things that you can do.  So what you can do is, and you should be respectful and so forth and so on, and as long as the work was done, everybody left you alone.  But I liked to read.  And so I would do, once you did your work, and you turn it in, your time was your own.  So I always finished before everybody else.  And I always happened to have a book that I wanted to read, and I was left alone, and it was great.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what kind of books you liked to read in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, (laughter), oh, don't laugh.  When I was ten, I got interested in the French Revolution.  So I read--
Speaker 1: Ten?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I read Charles Dickens, 'The Tale of Two Cities,' [sic. 'A Tale of Two Cities'] and then I decided I wanted to read some more (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You read 'The Tale of Two Cities' when you were ten?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  I decided that there was something else that I wanted to read and there is this famous historian.  He's a British historian.  I can't remember his name now--it escapes me for the minute, who has written the definitive history of the French Revolution.  It's about this thick.  So I went to the library (laughter), and I got the book.  And I realized I was out of my league there.  It was a bit too much.  After the first chapter, sitting with the dictionary (laughter) and, every other word, and not being able to figure it out, I sort of put that aside for a while.  So I stayed with Dickens instead (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you understand what you were reading when you read the 'Tale of Two Cities'?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I understood (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you enjoyed it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Laughter), yeah I did, yeah.  My playmates said I was weird, of course.  You know how kids are (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous) not reading books like the 'Tale of Two Cities' at ten.
Speaker 2: I don't, the thing is I don't know where it came--well, wait a minute.  I do know.  I do know where it came from.  I had teachers who were very, very supportive and encouraged me to do a lot of reading and saw to it that children like myself who were interested in things--and it was all of this free stuff in New York [New York] in those days.  And so on Saturday afternoons, there were puppet shows downtown in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and every school got so many tickets.  So I always got tickets to that, and I would go.  I'd get up early in the morning, do all my chores, get on the subway and go downtown.  And then you meet other kids around the city, and you find out what they're reading, you know, and you read what they're reading.  And that's pretty much what happened.
Story_ID: 222646
Speaker 1: In many ways, it was a nice, it was a very nice childhood because New York [New York] was very safe, it was very clean.  You had public transportation.  You could get around.  Everybody uses the subway.  The libraries were great.  The librarians were great.  We had, and I had teachers who were strongly, were very much interested in me as a person.  And that's when the idea of going to college got planted in my head.
Speaker 2: In elementary school [P.S. 194, Countee Cullen School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: In elementary school.  They said, "You know, you should go to college," which I knew absolutely nothing about, looked up the word in the dictionary (laughter).  Neither of my parents [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry and Frederick Mizzell] had finished high school, much less, you know, coming from the rural South, much less anything, and they never talked about going to college.  But I, that's when I started talking about going to college.
Story_ID: 222647
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school [P.S. 194, Countee Cullen School, New York, New York] years, what were some of your dreams and aspirations, like what did you wanna be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I never really wanted to be a particular thing.  I always wanted to have experiences.  You know, people say, I wanna be a doctor or this or that.  I never said that.  For me, it was I wanna see China.  I wanna see England, I wanna go down the Amazon [River], you know.  That's what I (laughter) wanted to do.  And, you know, it's very, in retrospect, it's probably very foolhardy.  After all, I was a young black girl in Harlem [New York, New York] and no money, no beauty, no--I couldn't sing or dance (laughter), couldn't be an Althea Gibson or anything like that.  But I had all these dreams about stuff that I wanted to do, not what I wanted to be, but what I wanted to do.  And that's, I told you I made that list, and I decided that's what I was gonna pursue.
Speaker 1: And would you, do you think you were exposed to all of those different things through reading?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, absolutely.  I had an unbelievably vivid imagination, and still do (laughter).  But, and I would, but the thing about, in those days, it was encouraged.  I mean I was in--I thought about writing.  I don't have the patience for it, but at least then, I didn't have it, but, yeah.  For me it was about experiences.
Story_ID: 222648
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about junior high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I did junior high in two years.
Speaker 1: Right, and tell us again, you mentioned the name--
Speaker 2: Junior High School 136 [Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And it was an all girls'--
Speaker 2: Harriet Beecher Stowe, a (unclear) lady (laughter).  It's still there, but it's now the Frederick Douglas Academy [New York, New York].  I drove, when I was New York, my son [Berlin Vincent Kelly] was in New York, and I drove by, and it's a co-ed school now.  But it was an all girls school.  And it was great.  It was absolutely fantastic because--
Speaker 1: How did you manage to do it in two years?
Speaker 2: I started at seventh grade, and Mrs. Thompson [ph.], who was my seventh grade teacher, one day said, "You know, I don't think you're being challenged."  And I was given another test.  Don't ask me what they--I was given another test.  And the next thing I knew I was in eighth, I did 7A and then 8B.
Speaker 1: And I'm sorry I interrupted you.  You were saying that it was a wonderful school because?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, it was all girls, and the nice thing about being in a single-gender school, especially when you're starting to go through puberty, is that the focus is on academics.  It's not on boys.  And it was great.  And we had, I remember the teacher I will remember all my life was a Mrs. Hilda Lester [ph.] who was my ninth grade English teacher.  Mrs. Lester must have been about 4'10" [inches].  She was a [William] Shakespeare scholar.  And we had to learn twenty new vocabulary words every week, plus she was real big on poetry, which I was never big on.  But we did, you know, all the poets which we had to memorize.  That's when we, and we, let's see, that's when we started reading 18th and 19th century British literature.  And she encouraged me to take the exams for one of the top prep schools, public high schools which were run like private schools in New York City [New York, New York], which I did.  And I got into.  So I always remember her because her class, her English class was unbelievably rigorous, and that's where I really learned to master English grammar.  And she was the one who advised me, after I passed the exam, she said, "Now let me tell you what you take while you're high school.  You're gonna take Latin."  I'd already done--doing Spanish.  "You're gonna continue the Spanish," and so forth and so on.  And she was absolutely right.  I got hooked on Latin in my first year of high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York], stayed with it for too long probably, but she, of all the teachers I've ever had, she would have been, she was number one.  And then there were a couple at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who would be two and three.  But they're--in my case, it was really the teachers in my life who made a difference for me because I did not come from a family in which that was a part of the, I mean they valued an education, but for them, if I graduated from high school, that would have been fine with them because none of them--they had not graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Did they recognize your academic prowess?  Did they recognize that?
Speaker 2: Yes, but you know, yes, however, it creates problems in families.  People like to talk about, you know, my kid is bright, but, you know, bright kids are pains in the ass.  And I know I was, I mean, because you're always asking questions.  And for my mother [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry], it was really rough.  It was really, really bad for her.
Speaker 1: Was it because she couldn't answer a lot of the questions or just--?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it was that, or it was just the fact that like most highly-verbal kids, you have, you know, you run off at the mouth.  So I got, I was beaten a lot, and which doesn't help, but it, my, you know, I think it's a struggle.  On the one hand, it's how do you maintain your authority as the parent.  On the other hand, it's, you know, you're proud that your kid is successful in school, but what do you do?  It literally was, and I don't mean this in a selfish way, there literally was a point at which I'd lit--I stopped talking to my mother.  I couldn't think of anything that, if I had a problem, for example, a problem in school, there was no way she could help me.  You know, what do you do in a--I recognized that at some point.  Now, I didn't throw it in her face, I mean, my God, I did have respect for her.  But I recognized, I appreciated the fact that I got food, clothing, shelter and support and love from my family.  But there's a point at which, if you're, particularly in my case, when it's not so much that I was exceptional.  I think I was just, if you're that much ahead of your peers, however defined, it creates real problems in terms of finding a place for yourself and your family and with your family.
Speaker 1: Because there wasn't a place you could fit (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the fit, and a real problem for me had, in my early adult years, was how do you find a fit because your mind is one place, you know, your body is someplace else.  Your emotions are, God knows where.  But that's really a problem.
Story_ID: 222649
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things did you like to do in your spare time in junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York]?  Did you have lots of friends and--?
Speaker 2: No, I had a couple of--I had some, you know, a few close friends, a couple of really close friends.  And we always talked about what we wanted to do.  I wanted to go to college.  My other girlfriend, Bunny [ph.], she wanted to be a nurse, which she became.  And eventually, I started, I had my mother's [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] eldest sister and her husband, my uncle, my Aunt Clara [ph.] [Hill] and my Uncle Al [ph.], the ones with whom we lived when we first moved to New York [New York], they, my Uncle Al and my Aunt Clara ran an insurance agency.  It was at one point the largest insurance agency in Harlem [New York, New York].  And my uncle had written policies for all the black businessmen in Harlem at that time.  I went to work for them.  And I started, after school a couple of days, and then on Saturdays.  Then in the summer, I would literally run the office for them, when she would, when they come in late.  So I became very, very close to them by the time I got to junior high school because there wasn't any money.  I didn't have any money, and I started working for the phenomenal sum of fifty cents a week (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did you do with your money that you earned?
Speaker 2: What, I loved chocolate ice cream, so for me the big treat was to take my girlfriend, and we'd all pool our money and there was a local ice cream parlor and the chocolate sundae with chocolate ice cream, not vanilla (laughter).  And, of course, going to the movies.  And in those days, wherever, whatever we wanted to do, we walked a lot.  And I lived on, we lived on 144th Street, 125th Street was the main drag.  We'd walk from 144th down 7th Avenue to 125th Street in those days, you know, gossiping, talking (laughter).
Story_ID: 222650
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went to Julia Richman High School [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: This was a prep school?
Speaker 2: This was a public high school for which you took an exam to get in and there were girls from all over the city who came there.  Julia Richman was the first female superintendent of schools for the City of New York [New York], I discovered.  And the school was named after her and on 67th Street and East Avenue, East End Avenue [sic. East 67th Street and Second Avenue].  Three thousand girls, of which at that time, let's see--there were about fifty who were African American, but about twenty who were Puerto Rican.  Everybody else was white, but you took an exam to get in so there wasn't a question of whether you belonged because you passed the exam.  And it was great.  It was just great (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were some of the activities you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I was an, I was an officer.  My senior year I was in the student government, and I was an officer, the only African American in the student government at the time.  And I sang in the choir--or, the chorus.  We had a huge chorus.   And then we had the Latin club.  We used to do plays in Latin, yeah.  We did, once a year we would do something called the meeting of the Roman senate, and I was always Cato the Elder (laughter).  And we, it was just great.  It was really great.  We had this absolutely gorgeous woman who was very, very wealthy that taught Latin, and I think her husband was prominent in Republican politics, very stately and so forth and so on.  And so we would do these plays, Mrs. Finnegan [ph.].  I'll never forget her name.  So every time we would do, she would throw these big parties for us.  Oh, we would do anything for her (laughter).  She was just wonderful.  Then we had Mrs., another Mrs. Thompson [ph.], who came the first year I was there, who was the only black member of the staff.  She taught music, was an Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] graduate, another brilliant woman.  And we'd give these fantastic choral presentations for the special occasions.  And it was a nice place because you were trained for leadership, and we literally ran the school.  I mean, we literally--all of the activities, you had a faculty advisor who was there in name or body only.  But we literally ran it.  It was a wonderful experience in preparing me for adulthood.  The problem is that I was a, you know, a '50s [1950s] person and the world wasn't really (laughter) prepared to deal with very, very smart women of any kind (laughter) in the '50s [1950s].  So that was a, you know, that was a learning experience.  But it was great.  I mean the experience was absolutely wonderful, and I took three years of Latin, three years of Spanish.  I mean so the--three years of Latin, three years of Spanish, three years of math, three years of science which was biology, chemistry and physics; three years of social studies, three years of English, and a few--and phys ed [physical education] in those days was not the phys ed that you have now.  I, in your freshman year, you had--you had gym, you had phys ed, but you also had to do, you had to get your learner's or swimmer's license, because we had a swimming pool.  So you had to learn, you had to swim the pool, and you got a learner's, you got your learners or your swimmer's depending upon your level.  We also had something where you took the [American] Red Cross, something called a home nursing course where you, it was like a first aid kind of thing.  So when you graduated, you were certificated three or five, four or five certificates for the Red Cross.  And in my case, there was what was called a leader's gym.  There was this, a phys ed class just for young women where we learned all the rules for all the sports, and we ran the gym classes for the teachers.  So, we would be the referees or the umpires or whatever for all of the sports.  So you had to know all the rules.  So you learned all the rules.  You had to pass the exams at a certain level, and that's what you did.  It was great; it was really great.
Story_ID: 222651
Speaker 1: And you knew you were going to college, but when you were in [Julia Richman] High School [New York, New York], when did you start thinking about where you would go to college, and where did you think you'd go?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time I'd decided I wanted to teach, and I wanted to be a history teacher.  I was really hooked on history by then, and I wanted to do that.  And there was no money, so--but I knew that if I got a Regents Diploma, that is, you take a certain number of Regents exams [Regents Examinations] you have to pass at a certain level, I could go to the state university, what was then, they call it SUNY [State University of New York System] now, but it was then the state teachers colleges in the State of New York.  And I applied to the one at Albany, in Albany, New York.  So my first two years after high school, I attended Albany State [New York State College for Teachers; State University of New York at Albany, Albany, New York] and then transferred to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And you did get the Regents?
Speaker 2: I had a Regents Diploma, yeah.  I graduated--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  What year did you graduate from Junior High School [136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955], and I graduated thirty-three in a class nine hundred and something or other.  I've forgotten.  I used to know the exact number, but I was in the top one or two percent.
Speaker 1: And did you try to get scholarships from any other schools?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, because as I learned later, I didn't come from a family where that was the case.  And in those days, most girls didn't go to college.  You know, when you graduated from high school, you took a job.  A lot of them got married.  As a matter of fact, of, in the girls in my block, Bunny [ph.], my girlfriend, Bunny and I, we were the only ones who didn't get married after high school.  Everybody else got married.
Speaker 1: Did you have a boyfriend in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a lot of them.  I liked the jocks (laughter).  But I wanted--I was ser--I wanted to go to college.  I mean it was, I wasn't serious about anybody.  I wanted to go to college, and nothing was gonna get in my way (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Minnie Hill Mizzell Jerry] think about you going to college?
Speaker 2: She had no decision.  I made the decision.  I filled out the forms, and I said, "Just sign," which she gladly did.  I mean she didn't, well, let me put it that way.  She did not refuse to sign.  Now, how she felt about it, we didn't talk about it, but I, she--I told her I wanted to go to college.  I knew there wasn't any money, but I was gonna go, and I was gonna work.  As it turned out, my aunt and uncle had been putting money aside.  So when it was time to go, the tuition wasn't that great anyway, but when it was time to go for my first semester, the money that they had been saving for me was used to pay my tuition.  After that I worked.  And I worked my way all the way through after that.
Story_ID: 222652
Speaker 1: And so you were at Albany [New York State College for Teachers; State University of New York at Albany, Albany, New York] from 1955?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955] to '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: Albany [New York] was different, of course, than New York [New York], in addition to being cold and what have you.  That's the first time I openly had an experience with someone who was blatantly racist.  He was my chemistry teacher, and he was the dean of the college.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: We did not get along, but I took his class.  He, he never--he called, he called--we called ourselves Negroes in those days.  But he called Negroes darkies, and the first time he used it, I got up and walked out.  And there was no one to go to, because he was the dean.  And then I had to make a decision about what I was gonna do.  So I stood it for about a month, and then I transferred out of his class and took biology instead.  That was the end of that.  But, so that was the only negative.  The rest of the time was all right, but it was, for the most part, Albany just isn't in New York (laughter).  It wasn't New York.  I don't know what it is now (laughter), but it wasn't New York.
Speaker 1: And how were you fairing emotionally because you were only sixteen so still very young for college and being so far away from family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, a little different, but I've, at an early age, I sort of learned to keep myself entertained.  Plus, I had to work, and I got a job as an arts and crafts instructor at the local boys' club there.  I walked in, I knew there was an advertisement.  I walked in, I introduced myself, and I said, "I'm not--I don't have a background.  I'm not that artistic."  He said, "Oh, no, you don't have to worry about it.  You know, we'll help you," blah, blah, blah.  They were very nice to me.  It was a beautiful club.  I mean it was absolutely beautiful.  The, most of the kids who came, you know, were the young kids in the neighborhood.  There weren't that many African Americans who lived because the college was in the suburban area rather than downtown--well, Albany didn't have--the black population was very small anyway.  But I was treated very, very nicely, had a great time.  The building was beautiful.  It was great.  They paid me well.  I enjoyed my job, and I did that for a year and a half, and at the end of my sophomore year, that's when I--well, the middle of my sophomore year, that's when I decided that I wanted to leave.  I didn't really like being there.  And I decided to--I had some friends who'd gone to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and so forth and so on, and I decided to apply to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I was accepted.  But I was very active.  I was in the--I was the, I was elected to the student government in my sophomore year.  So I was one of two representatives to the student government from the sophomore class.  And I did well academically.  I also got interested in one of the clubs there that worked with an orphanage.  And I became like a big sister to one of the orphans, a little girl who was in the orphanage who was African American, and Rose [ph.] was her name.  And I would spend, once you did that, you made a commitment to spend a certain number of hours.  So every Saturday afternoon, I would spend two to three hours with her.  It was nice.  It was really nice.
Story_ID: 222653
Speaker 1: So when you transferred to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you transferred to Howard in 1957?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did you think of Washington, D.C.?  Had you been to Washington, D.C. before?
Speaker 2: No, and quite frankly, I experienced a kind of a culture shock.  I don't mean in terms of the fact that it was predominantly black.  It wasn't all black, but predominantly black.  But that the students (laughter), I thought the--I thought that the administration was very paternalistic.  I mean when you come from a high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York] where (laughter), you literally, when you've been used to sort of designing, doing what, having the freedom that you had as I had in high school, to come to Howard was really like going back a couple of years.  It was--I enjoyed the environment and everything, you know, it was great.  But it was the faculty, coming here--I was here when some very illustrious people were teaching here, as an undergrad.  And it literally changed, it pretty much, almost changed my life.  I mean after Mrs. Lester [ph.], the next real influence on me was three of my professors that I had at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: The first was [Dr.] Harold [O.] Lewis who was my mentor who was in history.  The second was [Dr.] Winston [K.] McAllister who taught logic and epistemology in the philosophy department.  And the--oh, why am I blanking out?  It will come back to me in a minute, but my first year here was, oh, [Dr.] Eugene [C.] Holmes, who was my, when I did my--I did my master's [degree] at Howard.  And he was--Eugene was the first person who'd ever used the term feminist.  I'd never heard the term feminist until he used it, and he was telling me something about one day I was in a conference with him on a paper that I wrote, which he really liked.  And he was making the point that he was a feminist, which did not resonate.  And I'm trying to figure out, why is he trying to tell me he's a feminist which I looked up and I realized, oh, that's--his wife [Margaret Cardozo Holmes] was a very, very successful entrepreneur.  He married, there was, they were called the Cardozo sisters.  They used to have the beauty salon [Cardozo Sisters beauty shop, Washington, D.C.] that was in Washington.  I mean it was the place, and the two sisters owned the--
Story_ID: 222654
Speaker 1: So, you were talking about one of your professors [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] who had, your introduction to the term feminist.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it was [Dr.] Eugene [C.] Holmes who was a protege of Alain Locke and--who was the first African American to become a Rhodes Scholar.  So, he was telling me about being, and of course, I didn't understand what it was.  Oh, I know what it was.  We were talking about a paper I should write, and he was recommending that I write a paper on Margaret Fuller.  And he said she was a feminist and he considered himself to be feminist too.  And, you know, I said, "Okay," (laughter), left the class and ran to the library and looked up feminist, someone who believes women as equals.  And I thought, "Okay, that's nice."  And then I would try to figure out, you know, why was he making this point?  And I never quite figured it out except that what I do remember, and aside from the fact that he was absolutely brilliant, and was challenging, and his classes that he taught, he taught classes on Marxist theory, Marxism and a couple of other classes as I recall.  I can't remember right now.  But the particular class on Marxism I do remember because I wrote a paper that he thought was the best he'd had in a long time which, coming from him, was a real, you know.  But the thing that I do remember was that he was married to a woman [Margaret Cardozo Holmes] who was a businesswoman, and she--her family was quite wealthy.  And it was the first example in my life in which this was obviously a very, very accomplished man who was very, very proud of his wife's accomplishments.  It made an indelible impression on me.  And I always stayed in touch with him.  And it turns out that I have a relative--they all used to be up on the Cape [Cod, Massachusetts].  I have a relative who's well-to-do who taught at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] whom I'm very close to, and in the course of mentioning things, it turns out that he and his wife and Eugene and his wife were very, very close friends.  And he told me that Eugene had died.  And so I wrote a letter to the wife to tell her what he had meant to me.  And she wrote a very, very nice letter back, and said, "Oh, yeah, I remember you.  My husband always talked about--" and I'm crying, blah, blah, blah.  And I thought, you know, it meant a lot to me.  He was a very, he was the one who whenever thought I could sort of slip and slide, (laughter) he would just say, you know, "Do it over," (laughter).
Story_ID: 222655
Speaker 1: When you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], were you still thinking you wanted to pursue a career in teaching history?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did, mainly because in those days, remember this is the '50s [1950s].  You know, it wasn't the computer age.  There were some women, I thought about doing law.  As a matter of fact, they had a program at Howard in those days where at the end of your junior year, if you had a 3.5 average, you could go into the law school, do the three years.  Then when you graduated, you got your B.A. or B.S. and your law degree.  I sat in on the law school classes, and, oh, I just thought it was so boring (laughter).  I still have a problem with it (laughter).  But, and I don't think I would have been a good lawyer.  So, but I did consider it for a while; never considered medicine, can't stand the sight of blood.  And I had thought about going into business.  I probably should have gone into business.  It turns out I have a knack for administration, but my uncle, I'd worked with my uncle, and he'd gone to Columbia [Business School, New York, New York] and gotten his M.B.A. from Columbia, and wanted me to go to Columbia.  But he was such, I mean he was, he was just one of these overbearing, authoritarian types, you know.  And here I went to this high school [Julia Richman High School, New York, New York] where I was supposed be my own person (laughter).  And so we respected each other, but I thought the idea of working with Uncle Al [ph.], oh, my God (laughter).  So that didn't work out (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from Howard?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: And you got your degree in history?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah, with, I graduated B.A. summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 1: What did your family think?
Speaker 2: They were happy that I graduated.  I mean (laughter), they don't know any--none of this means anything to them.  I mean, it didn't mean anything.  They knew that I graduated, and I did well.  And I got a fellowship that allowed me to go to England, on my list (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you go to England in 1959--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, yes, I did.  And I got a Lucy Moten Travel [Fellowship; Lucy E. Moten Fellowship], in those days Howard gave five fellowships for summer travel to five outstanding graduating seniors.  You could go any place you wanted as long as they accepted you.  And I applied to [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England], and I wanted to do modern British history.  By this time, I'm reading [George] Bernard Shaw (laughter), and I'd started reading some of the British philosophers, Bertrand Russell and so forth and so on.  And so I wanted to understand, I wrote a proposal to write some papers on what were then called the Fabian [Society] wing of the British Labour Party.  And it was accepted, and I went.  And I, oh, it's like I died and went to heaven (laughter).
Story_ID: 222656
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of England?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.  Well, first it looked like all the pictures.  That was the first thing.  It wasn't so much of England as it was Oxford [England] because most of the time I was there.  And I suddenly realized, I realized two things while I was at [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England].  Number one, that race is a universal phenomenon, and as is class.  I was never really, you know, I was never aware of race and class the way I was until I got to England.  And I don't mean I felt badly about the race thing, but what was obvious in England was that you had this class system in which places like Oxford were really for the elite, who were being trained for leadership.  And coming into that, and remember it's mainly all male, very, very wealthy families, and it's white male.  While I was there, I think that there were three African Americans.  I was the only female.  There were two Fulbright scholars whom I met, one who went on to become real big in Michigan politics.  But the other, the other people of color who were there were mainly Africans, these were the wealthy sons of the--what were now the newly emerging nations in Africa, from Nigeria and Ghana in particular.  And so I met a lot of them which was interesting (laughter).  But it was, it's this rarified, really rarified air kind of thing where literally, once you--it's all about getting there.  Once you get there, you do whatever you damn well please.  I mean it was, I thought, "I don't believe this," (laughter).  I was in a, I was in--I was staying in Exeter College [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] first, and I realized that the college is where you live.  And I--you have rooms at the college, and I had (laughter), but these rooms were bigger than my apart--my parents' [Minnie Hall Mizzell Jerry and Frederick Mizzell] apartment in New York [New York].  You have a scout who does everything for you.  I mean you don't have to--if you wanna get tickets; you wanna get this, you wanna get that; they clean up your room.  Okay, that's nice (laughter).  It's all about--it's collegial, everything is collegial.  There is a refectory where you eat and the big thing is that you show up for tea at five or six and for meals.  That's the big thing.  That's the big social hour, and the meals are always with wine which is nice, and you talk about the things of the day and this and that and so forth and so on.  And I met very, very smart people from all over the world who were there.  And you go--you don't go to class.  You have a don who is a specialist in the area that you're interested in and you read.  You don't go to class.  You read.  So all you do is read and write papers and discuss your read and write papers and discuss.  It was great (laughter).  It was absolutely fantastic.
Speaker 1: And so you were there for a year?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, it was great.  I just--it was hard to come back to the [United] States (laughter).
Story_ID: 222657
Speaker 1: And so you came back [from University of Oxford, Oxford, England] in 1960?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you go back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to get your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, I did.  I did philosophy.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about, what was the climate like in Washington, D.C. at Howard in 1960?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was the, what we called the black Civil Rights Movement which had been ongoing, but the '60s [1960s] Civil Rights Movement was very active then.  I need to step back a minute.  My senior year at Howard, I was elected president of the Liberal Arts Student Council.  And we were just beginning to do the sit-ins and some of the demonstrations then.  And I thought it was funny.  We did, I was the vice president of the campus NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter.  So one of the things that we did in those days, in the early days, 14th Street NW, which was one of the main shopping areas in the black community, we did a sit-in at Woolworth's and--no, we picketed, we didn't sit-in.  We had a picket.  And I was called into the office of the dean at the time who made it known that what I had done was not what a Howard student was supposed to do, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  And there was a veiled threat that I would be kicked out of school if I continued, at which point I said that if she was threatening me that she should know that I was prepared to take her to court.  And that was the end of that.  That was left alone and so forth.  But for the most part, I would say that the students here--Howard might be, in those days was an interesting place because it depended on what your social or political orientation was.  It was big on fraternities and sororities in those days.
Speaker 1: Did you pledge a sorority?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't.  I don't--I mean, they're not for me.  I don't like exclusive organizations, anything about keeping people out, I have a real problem with that.  I've had it all my life.  So, no, I did not pledge one.  I was very much involved in the political activities, the activist activities that were going on.  They had things like the faculty student forum which was like a current issues group that met once a week, no, once a month with faculty and students and so forth.  I was involved in those types of things.  And in that regard, the faculty was probably more to the left than the student body in those days.  But it was a nice, Howard was a nice place.  And I learned a lot about black society because New York City [New York, New York] is, you know, the urban areas in the North are very different than the urban areas in the South.  The urban areas in the South, you have, you know, the long, long history with the genealogies and so forth, and you have a parallel class system to the white population that's in the South.  It's a different situation in the northern and north central states.  That's not to say that you don't have classes, but there's a bit, there's more fluidity in terms of movement between and among classes than you would have in some of these other areas where the traditions are, you know, are deeper and longer.
Speaker 1: And so, what year did you earn your master's degree?
Speaker 2: In 1963, and I did it in epistemology.
Story_ID: 222658
Speaker 1: So, as this point when you get your master's degree [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.], what are you thinking that you'd like to do professionally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I taught in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] public schools.
Speaker 1: So, but, so you still--that's what you wanted to be, a teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I was teaching then.
Speaker 1: And so you began teaching in--
Speaker 2: Excuse me, just a minute (cough).
Speaker 1: Sure (unclear).
Speaker 2: I'm fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I taught, my first teaching position was at Garnet-Patterson Junior High [School, Washington, D.C.] at 10th and U Streets.  I taught the seventh grade, and I had a great time.  The classes were huge.  But I had a really good time.
Speaker 1: You taught history?
Speaker 2: Yep, and geography.  It's funny because like all new (cough), excuse me.  It's interesting, because I loved my job and I loved the kids, but there's something kind of, there's something very sad that happened my first year.  I was in my American history class as I'd always done.  In those days, they would teach maybe a little bit of, maybe a unit on slavery or something like that.  And I decided being a Howard grad that that wasn't sufficient, that they needed to have, they needed to know that there was a history prior to the slave trade.  And when I was at Howard, one of--I took two courses under, who was then the leading Africanist in the world, William Leo Hansberry.  As a matter of fact, I wanted to do my master's work under him, but he retired in 1959.  That's why I went into the philosophy, but I really wanted to go on and study and Dr. Hansberry.  So when I started teaching, I had organized all my notes.  I'm gonna start by teaching, you know, going all the way back to the beginning of Western civilization as we know it, and starting with, you know, the Greeks and the Romans' recognition of Ethiopia and so forth and so on.  I'd put all this stuff together, and I was doing it, and I remember the first class, the first day of that first unit a student raised his hand and said to me, "You've got to be kidding."  And I said, "I beg your pardon?"  He said, you know, "We don't have--Negroes don't have any history."  And I was astounded, almost in tears.  And I said, "Some people believe that, but it's not true."  And I said, "Now, what I should do is have you leave the classroom, but instead every day you're gonna write me a short essay telling me what you learned that day."  And I could continue to teach the class that way.
Story_ID: 222659
Speaker 1: I need to jump forward for a minute, because I only taught for about eight years in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Then I left; went into government.  And then when I left government, I went back to get my doctorate [from University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  But when I returned to the District of Columbia, a year and a half ago, I was--there's a congregation that I, I hadn't joined, but I was going to services because I enjoyed the lessons of the leader of the congregation.  And a young lady walked up to me, and she said, "I know you."  And I said, "Okay, who am I?"  (Laughter)  And she said, "Isn't your name--" and she kept on, and I said, "It used to be that."  And she said, "I used to be in your history class at--" such and such a school.  I said, "Oh, my Lord (laughter), you remember me?"  She said, "Oh, yeah," she said, "you know, look at me.  My hair is in dreadlocks--this is what (laughter) (unclear) while my hair is in dreadlocks."  I said, "Well, wait a minute (laughter), now, what did you say?"  And she told, she became a curator.  And she works at the Smithsonian [Institute, Washington, D.C.] in the Africana section, and I was like, "Oh, my God," (laughter).  She said, "You were the one who--you were the first one to tell me something about, you know, us as a people before that."  And I go, okay.
Speaker 2: And how did that make you feel?
Speaker 1: I was almost in tears (laughter), but in those days, you, if you said, if you were to talk about us as a people, I mean it wasn't just the kids in the class, it was my family, my this, my that.  I mean it was--and whenever stuff would come up and you would, in my naivete, try to offer some insight, I never knew what it was that I was dealing with.  I never knew whether it was information they didn't wanna have.  I never knew if it was, you know, you think you're smarter than we are.  You think you're better than we are.  When you're the only one and you've done some things that are unusual, you never quite know what it is that's underlying.  But what I, what was obvious was that, not obvious, but what I had discerned was that clearly one of the things that we, in general, as a community had to deal with was the fact that many of us really didn't know who we were.  That's why I said going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] changed my life because once I internalized that, when I got to Europe, it was very easy to function in Europe knowing who I was, because places like London [England] and Paris [France] where I've traveled, can be overwhelming if you don't have a sense of who you are.  And you don't know what it is that you can bring.  And you're, and if you don't appreciate that there's a role that you can play, and I wouldn't say correcting the record, because people have biases, but at least offering an alternative that people have to deal with, whether they accept it or not.
Story_ID: 222660
Speaker 1: And so after you left teaching in 1968, what did you go on to do?
Speaker 2: I went into government.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what did you do in the government?
Speaker 2: I started out--
Speaker 1: The federal government (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the federal government.  I was entered in one of those kind of fellowship programs that was designed to identify, quote, talented African Americans who could move up in government and lucked up in that I got attached to--I was assigned to what was then the Office of Education.  This was before the [U.S.] Department of Education, Office of Education.  And the guy who was the commissioner for all the regions was a Latino, Armando Rodriguez, from East L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. He had been the president of East L.A. City College [East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California].  I became a speech writer for him, and I traveled with him all over the United States, to all the--their nine, their nine regional offices [for Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)].  And I traveled with him all over the United States to the nine regional offices, and it was great to get a chance--because I'd never really seen the--I'd seen parts of Europe before I'd seen the United States, and it was wonderful.  But I also got a sense of, and this was '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], I got a sense of what it was like to live in, to be a person of color and live in different parts of the country.  For example, after I left Armando's office, I went to work with Upward Bound [Program] in the early days.  And I had the western region.  And Southern California in the 1970s was terrible.  I mean we think about California as this great liberal place and so forth.  It was bad enough if you were African American, but if you were Mexican, I mean I've seen unbelievable stuff.  Clark County, Nevada, where Las Vegas [Nevada] is, I remember sitting in the office of the (laughter) superintendent of schools for the county.  And he's in violation of all kinds of laws, having to do with free lunch and so forth because we were recruiting--in Upward Bound, you recruit bright, minority kids who are interested in going to college, to prepare them for college.  And he's talking about, you know, "niggers," and, "spics," and so forth.  Now, I'm sitting there in front of them, and I finally said to him, well, I said, "You know, I'm having a problem with this.  You're," you know, "here you are talking and using certain types of terminology that I cannot accept."  I said, "But, you know, to a lot of people I would be one of those people you define as niggers."  "Oh, no, no, no, you're a fed [federal government employee]," (laughter). How do you disaggregate--?  Because I'm a person in authority, I'm sort of in another category or something, another classification, but I mean, what it did was, you get people talking freely or whatever.  And the type of blatant racism that I had not had to deal with, this when I began to realize what it is that people are dealing with every day who may not have a voice, may not be able to defend themselves, may not have money, and so that was a real eye opener about this country.  Now, there were a lot of places where it was very nice, but it was, I got a sense of the systemic nature of racism and discrimination in that job which is always, that information has always stayed with me.
Story_ID: 222661
Speaker 1: Were there many opportunities for women in the federal government at that particular time?  Were the doors just starting to open a little bit?
Speaker 2: You know, it's hard to tell.  I don't know because I met a lot of, there were a lot of women that I met.  One of the things that has pretty much characterized my career has--because a lot of stuff for me has happened without any kind of a plan.  It's not like I planned to be this or that, but there've been these points at which there was someone or someone who said, you know, look, I need--"Why don't you try this?"  Or, "Why you don't you--?"  And since I was always the adventurous type, I would think about it, and in a lot of cases, I would do it.  For example, when I left teaching and went into government, my family almost died.  "Oh, my God, you're giving up your good job (laughter) to do what?"  And my attitude in those days was, you know, "I'm supposed to be smart.  I've got to figure out a way to do it, and if it doesn't work out, I can always type.  I mean come on.  What's the big deal?"  But I realized that, and it's probably, I'm sure it goes back to having gone to [Junior High School] 136 [Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York] and to Julia Richman [High School, New York, New York], that with all these bright women who were teachers and role models, there was this notion that, you know, the world is out there.  And you might as well use it and explore it and have a good time.
Speaker 1: So how long did you work in the federal government?
Speaker 2: From '69 [1969] through '78 [1978], '77 [1977]. '77 [1977]. I left in '77 [1977], because the following year my son [Berlin Vincent Kelly] was born.
Story_ID: 222662
Speaker 1: When did you decide to go back and get your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: While I was in the federal government.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year you earned your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I don't--it wasn't--yeah, I got my Ph.D. in 1995, but when I was in government what was obvious, there were a couple of things that became obvious.  I was originally a senior program officer with what was the [U.S.] National Institute of Education which became the Office of Educational Research and Improvement when the department was created.  We were a small agency in those days, and it was a lot sociologists, psychologists, political scientists, that kind of thing.  And I was, at one point, I was, what, 25 percent of all people of color at a [General Schedule] GS-14 level and above.  And I was, there were, and I was 50 percent of in terms of women of color.  There were two, it was another woman, but I was the only African American in the agency at the time who was not in what I would call a race-related or affirmative action type of job.  I was in program.  And in program, as a senior program person, I was often asked to be on the major auditing for the big federal projects that were going on.  So I--it was a group of about four or five of us who used to travel together around the country to do the audits, the program audits of these really, you know, these multi-million projects.  And that was interesting because I became aware of one, how much money is in research that the government puts in, I mean millions and millions of dollars.  Number two, the fact that there weren't that many people of color who were qualified to go after the contracts or the grants.  I'm talking about big money now, not the training stuff.  And in one, because I ran a basic research program, I was the officer for a basic research program, I got an opportunity to meet the grantees who were all from, for the most part, from the Ivy League and the big research institutions, almost all male, whom we funded.  And I began to, after a while, you know, "I'm as smart as they are," so forth and so on.  And I was, at that time, I was in my early to mid-thirties, and it was a recognition that at some point, because I didn't have--up until that point, experience and master's [degree] was fine, but the world was changing, computers were becoming prominent.  And I realized that my skills were eroding and that I didn't have that final degree.  And I was gonna have to deal with it at some point.  And I dealt with that.  I decided after my son [Berlin Vincent Kelly] was born that the next thing I was gonna do was gonna be that, and my husband and I divorced in '82 [1982].  In '82 [1982], I applied to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I got accepted.  And we drove across country in '83 [1983], and that's when I started working on my degree.  Took me a long time to finish, not because--I wasn't in school all the time, but it took me a long time.
Story_ID: 222663
Speaker 1: So when you moved to California, and you were accepted at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  You were a full-time student--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I decided, first of all, I was so old (laughter), I decided: go straight through.  So I lived in what was called--I called genteel poverty (laughter) for three years, going to school full time, working part time.
Speaker 1: And taking care of your son [Berlin Vincent Kelly]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  He got one day a week, I was all his (laughter); that is, totally, in terms of stuff that he wanted to do.  But I decided to do the coursework straight through.  I figured if I sort of nickeled and dimed myself to death, I'd never get it done.  So I went straight through for three years, took a year to study for my comps [comprehensive examinations], did my comps and passed.  Then the question, then I was--I thought I had a dissertation topic, and I thought I had a job.  And then the economy was going south, and just as I was about to start working I was told, "We didn't get the money for the grant that we had been promised, because the money isn't there."  So I had to look around and find another job, which I found right away as a research assistant to one of the--it was a fellow who was on the faculty, who was in administration at, was an ACE Fellow, the American Colleges something or other [American Council on Education], fellow.  Ed Keller [Edmond J. Keller ] is a very, very prominent political scientist and Africanist.  When you're at that level, you're in line to become a president or a chancellor and so forth.  So he hired me to work with him.  And he was a part of a team that was working out of the office of the president of the University of California [UC] that was looking at the whole issue of under representation of African American and Latino students on the UC campuses.  UC has over, what, two hundred thousand, no, probably close to four hundred thousand students and in the '80s [1980s] something like less than 20 percent of them were combined African American and Latino.  And so they were divided up into task forces.  And he was on the one for the, looked at the under representing of African American students.  And I was the graduate research assistant to the task force and a personal assistant to him and helped co-write the final report.  In the meantime, out of that, I got my dissertation topic, developed my proposal, got it accepted, and once the proposal is accepted, you can, you know, if you have the time, and again, I needed to get money to raise--I needed to raise some money, so I could do the research.  So I got a job.  And I was, I applied for a job at Charles [R.] Drew University of Medicine and Science in Southern--in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I was hired by the Department of Family Medicine to do evaluations.  I did my--my area of expertise is research methodology which is measurement evaluation statistics in the Graduate School of Education [and Information Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  It's a branch of educational psychology.  It's the quantitative side.  And my job was gonna be to do the evaluation of all the services components in the family clinics that were run by the department of which there're about ten clinics.  Well, it became clear fairly early, and certainly after I got there, they didn't want anyone to do any evaluations.  But I had a lot of experience in writing proposals, and I was very successful at it.  So I got hired as an administrator.  The vice president said, "Look, you know, you can keep your faculty appointment, but we need people to help us raise money."  So that's what I did for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 222664
Speaker 1: And one year--it must have been '94 [1994], that's right, '94 [1994]--there was a conference going on in California, I mean in San Francisco [California].  A colleague of mine in the department couldn't go and said, she said, "I think you'll enjoy this.  I can't go.  Why don't you go for me?"  And it turned out that it was a conference plan that was run by The [James] Irvine Foundation.  The Irvine Foundation is the not-for-profit people who use the money from the--Orange County [California] used to be owned by one family.  When the family, the Irvine family, started selling off the property, they created a foundation for the State of California called The Irvine Foundation.  It has so much money, you can't begin to imagine what it's like.  And they were interested in a major initiative in women's health.  So they were putting 50 million dollars into a five-year effort to look at issues around women's health.  So I went as an observer.  And while I was there, a--two young women, Connie Chan Robison and Diane Littlefield, were talking about this idea that they had for training women, grassroots women, to be leaders in the area of women's health.  And they had this proposal that they, they were in the--they were finalists, but they had to get this final proposal written.  And the idea attracted me.  It seems like a natural--and I, during lunch, I talked to them, and said, "Let me look at what you put together."  It was horrible, but the idea was great, and I said, "No, no, no," (laughter) you know, "you've got forty-four objectives.  There's no way you're gonna do this.  Let me tell you what you need."  And I suggested some things to them, and they liked it.  And they said, "Look, we don't have any money."  And I said, "That's all right.  It's a great idea."  So I worked with them, and they got something like over 5 million dollars.  So when they got the money, they hired me as a consultant.  And it was the best experience I'd had in a long time because it was, you know, first of all, their idea was that they were gonna, they were going to, in a five-year period of time, they were gonna train 250 women from every major ethnic group in the State of California to take on a leadership role in the area of women's health, as they defined it, meaning the women themselves defined it.
Speaker 2: Were they successful?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, yeah.  They've been written up a lot.  They've gotten all kinds of awards.  It was, and at that point, I decided that I really wanted to work in the areas of women's health, but I narrowed it down to HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/autoimmune deficiency syndrome].
Speaker 2: Because what was the AIDS issue like among women, more particularly African American women in the--
Speaker 1: This would have been in the '90s [1990s].  In the '90s [1990s], it was a gay disease.  In the beginning of the '90s [1990s], it was a gay disease.  By the end of the '90s [1990], it was an African American disease.  By the beginning of the 21st century, it was a women's disease which, and essentially, it's really a human rights issue.  It's a universal human rights issue.
Speaker 2: Would you say it was more of an African American women's disease than just a women's disease?
Speaker 1: In the United States, it is, but globally, it's a women's disease.  And it's low-income, uneducated women.  I mean it's very, very clear that the population most at risk are those who are pov--mainly, it's by gender, race and class.  And I've written several articles that have been published.  Some of them don't show up there because they've, within the past few years, they've just been published.  But I've written several articles as well as a couple of chapters in books around this.  I focus mainly on adolescent girls, and why they're at risks, and the fact that for young adolescent, low-income girls, you literally have a time bomb that's waiting to explode, because you have issues having to do with poverty.  You have issues having to do with sexism, and you have the issues having to do with racism and discrimination all coming together.  And that's, it's the combination of what I--what we refer to in the social sciences as multiple social violences that place them at risk.
Story_ID: 222665
Speaker 1: And when did you come to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: A year and a half ago.  My--I had worked with my girlfriend, Dr. Kathy Sanders-Phillips who'd been doing a lot of work on violence in low-income communities, particularly communities of color when we were both at Charles [R.] Drew [University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California].  She was in pediatrics.  I was in community medicine.  We were both having the same types of problems, and mainly that it's male dominated and the worse person to be is a female Ph.D. in a medical school with male M.D.s (laughter).  But we were having--because some doctors think that the Ph.D.s are there for their service.  She left Drew and went on to The California Endowment which is another big endowment in California.  One of the things about California is they have all these rich people who leave money to the state.  It's a great place to be if you (laughter) if you wanna run a non-profit organization.  She became their director for research evaluation and eventually was hired by Howard when the government decided that in order to foster equal opportunity, that some of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] had to be nurtured so that they could compete for research money, which mean that they had to, the only way to do is to literally attract some top researchers who were willing to come and set up centers to do it here.  And she--they made an offer to her, and she asked me to come and be her deputy.  That's how I ended up being here, but I was working in the UCLA neuropsychiatric institute [University of California, Los Angeles Jane & Terry Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Los Angeles, California] in the Center for Community Health which is focused mainly on at-risk behaviors, HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/autoimmune deficiency syndrome].  And my area was HIV, HIV/AIDS risks for women of color.
Speaker 1: And so you came to Howard.  What was that, 2002?
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003], July 10 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, 2003.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll never forget because in one week, there was more rain than I had seen in twenty years (laughter) in Los Angeles [California].  It just came down in sheets (laughter) for seven whole days.
Speaker 1: And what, and today in 2004, is the situation getting better in terms of the numbers going down, women and HIV/AIDS?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that the numbers are getting better.  The numbers are decreasing.  They're--it depends on where you look at it, and it's either good or bad depending on your point of view.  The fact is that HIV is now treated as a chronic illness in this country.  With the medications that we have, you treat it as chronic; you don't die so forth and so on.  Very seldom do people die of AIDS in the United States, and when they do it, it's because they didn't get treatment.  But if you are tested, and you get treatment, you can live your life.  You have to take your medication.  It's treated as a chronic illness.  Given that, one would think that the rate would begin to decline, but in fact, what's happening is that, the number of new infections is staying about the same.  That's not changing.  There is this forty thousand a year that's staying there.  So then, as the population increases, obviously--the numbers staying that way--it's getting less.  But we still have--it's still too high given that you have all of these other things that are going on, mainly access to medication, most of which is underwritten by the government.
Speaker 1: So is the education just not working or is it not the right kind of education?
Speaker 2: They're a couple, well, that's one of the issues is that the issue is, they're a couple of issues.  One of them is, is it that the messages that need to be delivered aren't being delivered in a way in which those people who are most at risk are going to receive them or are there other issues?  I think that there're other issues because from a social scientific perspective, at the basis of the epidemic is the lingering history and the permanency of an underclass that's gonna be at risk.  And elements of that have to do with homophobia, because the real rise has been for young Latino and African American men who have sex with men.  So it's gonna be around homophobia and it's gonna be around sexism and it's gonna be around racism.  As long as you have, you know, the intersection of those three to some degree, you're gonna have people who are gonna be at risk.  So, unless you're prepared to deal with some structural issues in society to reduce those forms of violence, I don't see how it's gonna change any time soon.
Story_ID: 222666
Speaker 1: What about a new issue so to speak, new so to speak in the African American community, the whole down low thing, African American men who sleep with other men but are married and sleep with women as well?  How much of that contributed [to African American women's risk of HIV/AIDS], do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but one of the young Ph.D.s that I supervise is now writing a proposal in which--we hope that he'll get funded, and we'll study it.  And I proposed to him, and I think he's gonna buy it, and we've got some receptivity from colleagues at Children's [National Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] and at Johns Hopkins [Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] who are partners with our center [Washington, D.C.-Baltimore Center to Improve Child Health Disparities, Washington, D.C.]--that he'd begin to focus on adolescent, young adolescent males at the point at which the issues around their sexual preferences become behavioral because what we do know is that for the most part, it's--you don't choose to be gay or not gay.  You may choose to be bisexual, but you don't choose to be gay.  There's something that appears to be inbred, whether it's genetic or not is yet to be determined.  But we do know that the issues around that really come very, very early.  I have a friend at Children's who's looking at what you call the gender variant [transgender] children.  And parents notice those differences, that is, where a child chooses a role that is not societally prescribed by, in terms of his or her gender, as young as three years of age.  So, this is, the question is how to deal with it.  But at that point, they're usually protected by their parents.  But by the time you get to be, you approach puberty, now you have other kinds of issues.  And I recommended that the focus of his study be that group when we begin to identify.  What are some of the things that happen because for those young men, look, they're dealing with being stigmatized as men of color in a society that's racists, and they're also being stigmatized by their sexual choice in a society that's heterosexual?
Speaker 1: And with the down low issue, is that more of an issue of men who are bisexual or men who are homosexual and still have sex with women or are they one and the same?
Speaker 2: I can't answer that question.  I'm not an expert on that, but what I suspect is we don't have enough information, because it's a taboo issue.  I mean it, what's happening now is that we're at this point in our evolution in this country in which the whole issue, what does freedom mean?  You know, can you have, can you be, can you literally be free in terms of your gender identification and choices, and if that's the case, should you be protected if you make a choice that is not within, quote un-quote, the normal range.  In European societies, it's been happening for a long time.  Nobody gets upset about it.  But in this society, it's a problem now, not just because that philosophical and constitutional issue, but it's also because there's another undercurrent in terms of public policy having to do with the, I call it the evangelical, whatever you wanna call it, or the conservative Christianity in which some questions--there's an attempt now not to even deal with the issue.  I mean they've politicized some aspects of science and the funding of the scientific effort so that it may well be that the types of questions that you're asking now, as researchers, we can't even do the work on it because it won't get funded. So I don't, you know, I don't know.
Story_ID: 222667
Speaker 1: But for African American women and HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/autoimmune deficiency syndrome], the majority are infected by men.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What, in your opinion, what is the future for these women and what's the outlook?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, you would have to ask that question.  This a hard one.  I was asked that before I left California, and I told, I said, "Look, I'm gonna give you, tell you want I think, and you're not gonna like it.  But this is what the reality is."  The reality is that romance is not what it used to be.  And when I was younger and so forth (laughter) and blah, blah, blah, and the thralls of romance, the worse thing that would be happen is maybe you'd have a baby, you got a baby which brought shame on the family.  Well, there's no longer shame attached to a woman having that, but now it's different.  Now, you're talking about your life.  And now you have to be careful because you've gotta ask yourself, what are your needs, and what are you prepared to do?  And that is an individual decision.  What I always recommend is, you get as much information as you can.  You ask yourself some serious questions about what you want in life and what are you prepared to deal with.  And then your partner, if your partner is serious, you talk to your partner about our mutual health.  And I say that, our mutual health, and that means both of you have to get an HIV test.  And you wait six months and you get another one to make sure you're not.  Now, I know people in which one of the partners has been HIV infected, and the other partner decided it didn't matter.  That's a personal decision that people have to make themselves, but you have to know what your status is or else you're putting yourself at risk.  I have argued, and a lot of women get upset about that, I said, "You know, women aren't stupid."  I've done thousands of interviews with women who've been infected.  And I'll say, invariably, it's been by the male partner, and most of the women have been married.  So they got it from their husbands or their lovers in which they thought they were in a monogamous relationship.  And I'll say, you know, "Tell me something about his habits."  And they always say, "Well, you know, he did have his special friend, or he used to be out on the boat together," which meant they didn't wanna know what was going on.  And they did not think that they were at risk.  Now, if you don't know and you place yourself at risk, then what do you do, especially if you have children.  The disease is expensive.  I mean in many, many ways.  It's expensive emotionally.  It's expensive physically.  Even with the medications, there're things that we don't know.  There's certain--you've got to change your regimen in a particular period of time.  There is what is called, you know, regime, regimen fatigue.  People get tired of staying with the regimen, and they go off.  They begin to feel good.  "I'm okay so, you know, the medication's working.  I know I'm all right now."  Yes, it's because of the medication, to continue to, in order to continue to feel good, you have to keep taking the medication.  It's awfully difficult and it's extremely troubling, and it means that people need to talk seriously, openly and honestly first with the people whom they trust, whom they know love them.  And that could include a religious or spiritual advisor.  It should be loved ones in your family, and particularly whoever your partner is.  And this would be true whether it's the same gender kind of partnership or whether it's heterosexual.
Story_ID: 222668
Speaker 1: Are you at all concerned about young women, you know, and young girls?  What are some of your thoughts there?
Speaker 2: I wrote a chapter in a book about that, and I'm really concerned about them because the, when I first started out in this area, 30 percent of the infected were females.  It's now 50 percent.  For those nineteen years of age and under, it's 50 percent.  Females are as likely to be infected as males, and that's the future.  So you have young women now in which their sexual future, in terms of their bodies, their physical sexual self, and in a way, it's already been predetermined because of the infection.  And what does that mean?  And in some cases, depending on the nature of the disease, there can be inflammation.  They may not be able to have children, or if they have children, they have it at risk and so forth and so on.  But there're problems that young women, particularly African American young women who are low income.  I'm not talking about everybody now.  I'm really talking about a cluster in which you have the overlays of gender, income and race, in which those young women are growing up, unfortunately, without an adult male who can serve as a protector and someone to inform them about risks.  You know, it used to be when we were growing up--well, I'm older than you, but in my day, if you wanted to go out with me, you saw my stepfather who was only 5'6", who told you, "You'd better have my daughter back here by a particular time, not a minute later.  She's got, or I'm coming after you with my gun."  I mean it was just (laughter)--no debate that there was gonna be someone who was gonna protect me.  You could not act up, slap me, beat me, so forth and so on.  I mean that was just not gonna be acceptable behavior.  We have so many young women now who are needy and--which there's, they're not getting sufficient adult advice, protection, information.  And a lot of them, the mothers are struggling by themselves to be mother and father, economic provider, and they're overwhelmed.  So it's extremely difficult.  And I, we as a community, have to find a way to deal with that.  We can't rely, we can't expect individual families to take on some of these burdens.  We've gotta do it as a community: in our schools, our churches and some of our public things like our recreational facilities and social clubs that we--and youth clubs that we have for young people because families can't do it.  It's just too much for low income families.
Story_ID: 222669
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Ella Mizzell] Kelly, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: I would say a lot of luck, and I think also, at an early age, the fact that I could read and decipher, and I had curiosity.  I'm--I've always been a curious person.  I'm still curious.  I mean, for me, the world is a place where you can do and find out almost anything.  I mean, it's here for me to enjoy and to benefit from.  And I've always viewed that.  And in that regard, I've been extremely lucky and very, very, I would say, in my case, I would say, I've been successful and happy.  I've enjoyed, I've had a good life.  I don't have (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: Oh, no (laughter) and especially now.  I have the perfect job.  I've literally created my own job, and I can do just about--I can manage my own time.  It pays me extremely well.  I work with smart people all day long.  I meet interesting people all the time.  No, I wouldn't have chosen anything else.
Story_ID: 222670
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your son [Berlin Vincent Kelly].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, God was good to me.  He's smart, much smarter than I was when I was his age.  And he's funny.  I don't have that, his sense of humor and probably because I was the tight-ass who was always struggling and trying to make it.  But my son is--he's very, very smart.  He has a very strong social conscience.  He cares about his friends and his people.  He has excellent skills.  He went to very good schools.  That's--I made my investment in his education.  So when we got to [Los Angeles] California, he, I wanted him to go to a bilingual English-Spanish school and only to find out that in Southern California, the discrimination is against Mexicans.  So all the private schools teach French.  So he went to the Lycee, the Lycee Francais [de Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  So he's fluent in French.  My money ran out when he got to junior high school, but he got into the gifted program, and got into a magnet high school and studied Japanese.  I wanted him to study Chinese, which I had studied, but he studied Japanese.  And then he, when he graduated, he was a Jackie Robinson [Foundation] scholar, got a full scholarship and went to Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] which is a Quaker school outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which was a perfect match for him because he's very big on independent study.  And his first year he got into--he wanted to be a doctor, but he got into this class with this brilliant young political scientists from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] who was writing a book on African American revolutions, and that was the end of medicine.  So my son did poli sci [political science], and then got a full fellowship to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], and went to Cornell and got his master's [degree].  And he's now a supervisor; he manages the paralegal department for the largest Wall Street law firm in New York [New York].
Story_ID: 222671
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Ella Mizzell] Kelly?
Speaker 2: I think as someone who cared and tried to do something about it.  I'm not big on bitching, but I am big on trying to be a part of the solution to whatever the problems are and making some kind of contribution.
Story_ID: 222672
Speaker 1: And is there anything you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: Just that I'm surprised that I was selected (laughter) to be a part of this program [The HistoryMakers].  I think it's a wonderful idea.  When I was teaching in my first incarnation, one of the assignments that all my students had was to interview someone of their grandparents' age and ask them questions about what it was like to be a teenager (laughter), which they always enjoyed.  So, and it's sort of like full circle, in a sense.  But I've, you know, I think you've been very thorough and I've enjoyed talking about my life, the things that I had to pull out of the past that I'd pretty much forgotten, but I appreciate your asking.
Speaker 1: Okay--
