Story_ID: 449819
Speaker 1: We're going to start by slating, my name is Adrienne Jones and I'm the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and today we have no observers. Would you please state and spell your name including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Including my middle name.
Speaker 1: Yes, please.
Speaker 2: Ricardo Mohamed Khan [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan], R-I-C-A-R-D-O, Mohamed is, M-O-H-A-M-E-D and Khan is K-H-A-N.
Speaker 1: Will you tell us your date of birth and your location of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on November 4, 1951 at Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital] at Howard University in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Today is August 14th, 2007. Would you state your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I'm a theater director, writer and educator.
Story_ID: 449820
Speaker 1: So now I have five People man- magazine-ish type questions. I'll ask the question and you just say whatever occurs to you. What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lobster, seafood.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: So far? (Pause) Right now Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's your favorite phrase if you have one?
Speaker 2: Believe, (pause) hold fast to dreams.
Story_ID: 449821
Speaker 1: So we're going to start off the interview by exploring your background.
Speaker 2: Oh good that's easy, those hard ones I can't do anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So the first person I'd like to ask you about is your mother. If you can start by stating and spelling her name and tell us where she was born.
Speaker 2: Sure, that, that'll be--Jacqueline Driver [Jacqueline Driver Khan] is her maiden name, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, Driver, D-R-I-V-E-R. Born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Did she grow up in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yep, born and raised.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about your mother's background and about her growing up? Did she tell you any stories about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, yes. (Laughter) She, well she was raised as one of two siblings, her brother and my mother they grew up very close, a close family. Their parents were Helen Driver and Richard Driver, Sr. and her brother is Richard Driver, Jr. They were raised in Philadelphia. She went to Germantown--I think Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is where she went. She had a very strong understanding of her heritage as an African American woman who went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], who aspired to be a nurse and very active socially in terms of social clubs, civic organizations who were about the movement. She was involved all her life I think.
Speaker 1: So you said your mom had an awareness of herself as a black woman.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us just an example of a way in which she expressed that?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't so much the expression; it's how they lived at that time prior to segregate- to integration. In a segregated world you, you live going to the black schools, going to the black churches, to the black this, to the black that and you don't think of it as you're growing up that way, but in retrospect when you're able to explore how society moves, you are able to see your own growth and your own evolution within your ethnic group, and you're able to watch that develop and appreciate as she would express the teachings of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the speeches of Malcolm X, the contributions of Richard Allen in Philadelphia in terms of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, the Baptist roots that we have, her family rooted in Virginia, those sorts of things in terms of how she would express her understanding of her race.
Speaker 1: Did you know your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you said they were from Virginia?
Speaker 2: Her--Richard Driver was from Virginia, the Drivers from Virginia and my grandmother was from Jersey City [New Jersey], born in Jersey City. I can't remember where they met, but I know that mostly it was in Philadelphia where her family and all her relatives were rooted.
Speaker 1: Did you ever speak with your grandmother about her background in Jersey City?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No not all, not at all, only Philadelphia. She might have moved when she was a kid, I'm just not sure. We've seen pictures of her in school with a big, big bow on in the, you know, in the school clothing but that's really about it.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, did you get an opportunity to speak with him and did you hear any stories about how he was raised?
Speaker 2: Sure, not in terms of how he was raised but he was a barber, he had a barbershop in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] on Germantown Avenue and I think he was one of the few black barbers who actually had his own shop and that's most of what I know about him other than the fact that he would be the one to cut our hair all of the time. So whenever we would, we would get haircuts it would always be on a Sunday 'cause that's when we were off and that's when they came to visit. I don't really know that much more about him. Oh I do know that he played, I think he played baseball and my mother sometimes talks about his connection to the Negro Leagues though I've never gotten to that connection, but somehow it was possible.
Story_ID: 449822
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan]?
Speaker 2: My mother is very creative, imaginative, a lot of fun. She is very passionate about a lot of things and she sometimes will express her, an opinion that seems quite off the wall and in fact she would do that a lot (laughter). But then sometimes you realize later (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like what?
Speaker 2: Like what? Oh gosh, one time she was taping metallic tape to the window with its reflection facing out. I asked her why are you doing that and she said well because that light over there coming from our neighbors' really bugs me and I don't want that energy coming this way so I'm sending it back to them. Well you look at that as kind of wacky, but then you find out years later that actually there is some truth to that, in certain, you know Far East beliefs. She didn't study it; somehow she just connected to it and those sorts of things. But she also always loved music and the performing arts and culture. When my mother and father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] were--had just gotten married they would spend a lot of time in Washington, D.C. listening to music and they spoke about how they would, when she was pregnant with me they would go out to concerts--free concerts in the park and they believed that's probably where I got my appreciation for music. It could be true but my, we were also raised to take on a musical instrument whether it was a piano which I took on and one of my brothers took on the violin, another took on the drums. You know, we were--it didn't matter what it was, we just had to pick one and that I remember her instilling in us. Culture, understanding of culture, being part of organizations growing up like the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. That was important to them, going to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. At one time we lived in Camden, lived in Camden for a long time. Camden, New Jersey, and my mother and father were both members of the YMCA but it was the South Camden YMCA [South Camden Branch YMCA, Camden, New Jersey] not the, you know, the main branch was primarily white and the South Camden Branch was primarily black and that was the one we belonged to. It was only later in life that I realized that they didn't really have a choice but we looked at it as that was our Y. Those things were very important to my parents, to both of them and from the Y we learned a lot about community, about family, about the village that raises a child and my mother and father both were very strong when it came to that.
Story_ID: 449823
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your father. Can you tell us his name and where he was from?
Speaker 2: Sure, Mustapha Khan [Mustapha Khan, Sr.], Mustapha Mohamed Khan, M-U-S-T-A-P-H-A, Khan, K-H-A-N. I honestly don't know if Mohamed was his middle--yes, Mohamed was his middle name, M-O-H-A-M-E-D is his middle name. My father's father his first name is Mohamed from Trinidad, and the tradition is that we take on as our middle names our father's father's first name, you see. So my father's father Mohamed Khan, the Mohamed became our middle name for all the boys--all my male siblings and then the sister [Sherena Khan], I only have one and her middle name is my mother's mother's first name [Helen Driver], and that's how it works. But my father was born in Trinidad. He is of East Indian descent. They came over as indentured slaves--indentured servants, I'm sorry following the end of slavery. Came to Trinidad, worked the cane [sugarcane] fields, worked cocoa fields that sort of thing, the plantations. And eventually earned a piece of land and then they built from there. They're all in business. My father is one of, I think it was 12 children and my grandparents had something like a 130 grandchildren, (laughter) huge. They have a lot of children. So it was a very big family in Trinidad. It started off in the south in Trinidad where the cane fields are and then gradually the family spread to the central and northern parts of Trinidad as well. So now they are all over and what's interesting is that they were all businesspeople. They didn't really work for other people. All of them started their own businesses or they worked in the family business and then expanded it from there. My father was the child--the youngest boy of that group and it was their decision that he was the one with the smarts and they were going to send him away to school. So he had always loved medicine, that's what he loved and his goal was to study medicine and come back and be a doctor in Trinidad. So they put him on a boat and he tells the story about the boat that he took coming to dock in Florida and then I think from there they took the train or the bus to New York [New York] and then to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and that's where he got his degree as a physician but that's also where he met my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan].
Story_ID: 449824
Speaker 1: What kind of businesses was your father's [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] family in? You said the family business and businesses.
Speaker 2: Oh, they started, in Trinidad they start, they started with a small store at the junction and I remember that store. They sold general things; it was a general store--small general store. Somehow they might have expanded to also include books and then they started a bookstore. The bookstore was the, the enterprise that really took off because there weren't any other bookstores, and in Trinidad the children wear uniforms in school. So the bookstore sold books and school uniforms. It started off in one place called--they were all, they were all from New Grant in Trinidad, I think the first bookstore might have been Princes Town [Trinidad and Tobago], which was the town over from there, and that store still exists but then they expanded and I guess they must have, well they have a chain of stores now. The family over the years also started to branch out into their own bookstores. So many--most of the family is involved with bookstores and kind of like the Borders [Borders Group, Inc.] of Trinidad or Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] that sort of thing and they do quite well, they do quite well. Another uncle has a nail factory, which is the largest, I think the largest nail factory in the Caribbean. They all did quite well. And then my aunt who is closest to my father, Auntie Dulynn [ph.] she runs a store--she and her husband ran a pretty big store for a while and just recently gave it over to their son. So that's how it works. Interestingly enough on this side my mother's father [Richard Driver, Sr.] also worked for himself as a barber. So I look at it and I say, well I wonder is this in our blood that we have our own businesses and I ask that question a lot because I always ask, as black people in America we're not raised to run our own businesses. We work for other people and we do quite well when it comes for, to our involvement in government, when it comes to our involvement in corporations, but when it comes to businesses we don't seem to do that as much. Sports, entertainment, education, politics and corporate but not businesses and in none of those areas do you own your own thing. So it's hard to pass down to our children the family business, you know. A Michael Jordan cannot pass down his talent for basketball but he can invest, he can build businesses and then pass those down but he doesn't have the skill to do that. You can't pass down, if Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is--you can't pass down the first presidency that is black to your children, what do they do with that even though history is very important. And certainly corporations, it's about shares no one person owns these, so this has been of particular interest to me to try and figure out why we as black people--what is it we're missing, and I'm convinced that in watching my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] and my father's side that we, that it is not a racial thing, it is not ethnic, it is not about that. That we don't have those genes or whatever, it's that we're not, I think we're not raised with that in our tradition and we also have not needed to the way other ethnic groups have needed to start their own businesses. In Trinidad they didn't have a choice there were no corporations they could be part of, there was no politics to speak of that they could be part of because in those days Trinidad was part of the British Commonwealth [British Commonwealth of Nations] it was not its own thing. So opportunity in a way for black people in America has caused us to avoid doing it ourselves. It's just an interesting thing I learned from looking at the parallels in my own family.
Story_ID: 449825
Speaker 1: You said your father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] attended Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's where he met your mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did, has he told you any stories about being at Howard, what it was like there who was there with him?
Speaker 2: Are you kidding me? My mother and father, that's all they talked about most of the time are their days in Howard University. You know the first president [sic. prime minister] of Trinidad, when it became its own thing or Republic of Trinidad [Republic of Trinidad and Tobago], was Dr. Eric Williams who was a professor at Howard University. The cricket teams, the soccer teams at Howard were very, very big at one time a lot because of the players from Trinidad. The friendships that they made continue you know, and they talk about their friends, they talk about their--all of that so much.
Speaker 1: About what years are your--just a zone of years that your parents went to Howard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Zone (laughter).
Speaker 1: --before I let you tell us more about their time there.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were there in the '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s] I would think, mid to late '40s [1940s] into '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945], '46 [1946], '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think so, I think so, I don't recall the exact--but yeah, that was the area because when they met, they got married in 1950, I was born in '51 [1951]. I think they graduated a couple of years before that.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the people who they met there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who they met there?
Speaker 1: You may not know their names specifically but what did they do and you said they, they found friendships there that they've maintained.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it would be bad for me to make a mistake here. I just, I can tell you this; this was before the doors to many other universities were open to black people. So there was a, what they would describe as, an amazing gathering of brilliant minds and people who were steeped in the knowledge of who we are as black people in, throughout, with roots throughout the world. So they at Howard would talk a lot about friends that they made who were part of the movem- Civil Rights Movement in America who were leaders, who went on to write major books and be major physicians and educators and lawyers. They would talk about that a lot. My father is from Trinidad as I said, and he is of Indian descent and considers himself black, relates to black history and black culture in America. So if anything I would say they are very, very proud of the consciousness that they had while at Howard and for the rest of their lives because of it.
Story_ID: 449826
Speaker 1: Is your father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] a physician?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, he is a physician in Camden [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] study and what did she get her degree in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nursing.
Speaker 1: You did say she was interested in nursing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes hers was nursing. She--they'd talk about, they would go down--I was the, I'm the first born in our family, and when it came time to colleges and trying to figure out what college to go to I remember I was very, very interested in theater but I didn't know that I was ready to just jump for it, you know. I was interested in entertainment, I was interested in architecture, I was interested in law, in medicine many, many things. So when I was looking at colleges to apply to there was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because they went there, there was Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] because it was close, there was UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] because it was exciting and it was California, there was Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] as a backup, there was Ithaca College [Ithaca, New York] which was very good in both theater and architecture. And I remember trying to make decisions about all of these. We didn't go to visit any of them other than Rutgers and Howard. Now, when we went to Rutgers to look, we were in and out like that (snaps fingers), when we went to Howard my mother and father--we had to go through every brick of that place. This is where we met, this is where we courted, they talked about this one class that they had together where they met. It was a lecture class and I think it was psychology and they happen to be sitting next to each other and my father started talking to my mother and you know all of that (laughter), and my mother looked and she's coy and all of that and he asked her one day for her phone number and she wrote it on his arm. So of course they have to reenact that, and they do for us and they reenact that then they take us to where the, the reservoir [McMillan Reservoir] and the water and where they would walk and he would court her. Then the courtyard where my mother, with all of the other nurses would be living over there, and my father with all the med students would be living over there and to say good night they would click the lights (laughter) and blink to each other. Those were the things--those were the stories that they would always tell and every time we'd go to Howard and it doesn't matter how many times we go visit they would tell those stories, they would walk those paths. That's what they speak about a lot, but went to Rutgers right through that was it, but Howard those stories. My sister, Sherena [Sherena Khan], she counts the number of stories. She said, "Oh yeah, oh yeah that's number 262 (laughter)."
Story_ID: 449827
Speaker 1: So after Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], did your parents move to Camden [New Jersey] and do a residency there?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father went to Howard and got his undergraduate degree and then he applied to med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and in the interview they asked, "Well what are you going to do?" Now he had met my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] and he said, "Well, I was going to go back down Trinidad, but I decided I'm going to be a doctor and I'm going to stay in the states and practice." He was not accepted, so he went and got his master's [degree] the next year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What school was this was this? Is this still at Howard?
Speaker 2: Howard. This is Howard, yeah. This is Howard. The next year somebody said, "Mustapha [Mustapha Khan, Sr.], you shouldn't have said that, you should say you're going back," so he did and he got in (laughter). So he wouldn't have gone back because my mother wouldn't have let him, but that's how he got in and went to Howard. So my mother was a registered nurse. She got her nursing degree at Howard and my father did the master's, and then med school and after that did his residency at, in Norristown, Pennsylvania at a hospital there [Norristown State Hospital]. It was a state hospital so it was mental patients. We lived on a little, little--in a little, little house and it was on a farm, everybody was on a farm. Basically the people who were there, the patients and everybody, would tend the cows, the pigs you know all of these things that I remember when I was a kid. There was hay and straw--bales of straw and in our basement our furnace was coal, and as kids we would go down there and pretend the coal was gold and play around with the coal. I remember one time the cows getting out of the fence (laughter) and ending up coming up to our porch freaking my mother out. And I also remember one time looking around for my brother, Must- I mean Rasheed [Rasheed Khan], who was about this tall, and we couldn't find him one day and one day found him standing underneath a cow looking up, he was just amazed thank god the cow didn't sit or anything like that. But those were the days in Norristown and that's where he did his residency.
Story_ID: 449587
Speaker 1: So mommy [Jacqueline Driver Khan] listen, so when you and daddy [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Yes.
Speaker 1: Who were the people you feel we would know about now, because of what they've done since then or what they did then? Can you name any of them?
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Well, I'll tell you the mai- the main one that I would say--speak of would be Dr. Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] who was my surgical instructor, but I think by the time your father got into medical school, Dr. Drew had passed because he died in 1950. He died actually the year that I was on his surgical unit.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): And he was killed in an automobile accident with him and a couple of physicians going down south.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): (Simultaneous) And that's why they, and that's why they always had that story about Dr. Charles Drew was not received at the hospital--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): --to be, to be given blood.
Speaker 1: Oh, because he was black.
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): He was the discoverer of blood [sic. blood plasma], but later on we did find out in life, his daughter did say that he was not really refused, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let me--and what about--you told me about Dr. Eric Williams.
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Eric Williams, Eric Williams, wait a minute now, I know Eric Williams, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was the president [sic. prime minister] of Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago] remember?
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Oh yes, he was the, he was the philosophy--actually what was it that you were going for at the beginning, the--
Speaker 1: When, when daddy was going for master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): When you're, when you're in there for, to become a philosophy major?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ph.D.? Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Like a Ph.D.?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): A doctorate?
Speaker 2: A doctorate?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Eric was--he was the premier of Trinidad, but he was at the same time that we were there. He was the professor of--oh god, what was that first major that you had started to take?
Speaker 2: Now they're going to talk with each other. Oh me, you're talking to me?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Yes, what was the major that you were going to take (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Psychology?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): What was it? No, you took psychology, but you were mentioning that you were taking another first?
Speaker 2: Like pre-law or, or something like that?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Yea, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well that's okay, but he was, so he was a professor there.
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): But anyway he was that professor.
Speaker 2: Okay, got it. Okay.
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): The professor of that, I'm trying to think of the name of what you would call it. Like a doctor of philosophy something on that order. It was another--political science, I'm sorry, he was a professor of political science.
Speaker 2: I forgot I was going to major in political science.
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Yeah, that's what you were going to do.
Speaker 2: It was between that or psychology. Mommy, let me ask you, now who is the Trulane [ph.] person you're talking about?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Trulane was a--he was a great--chemistry, he was my chemistry teacher. I don't know what he was most famous for, but he was my chemistry professor. And there's a doctor--a pediatrician [Roland B. Scott] who actually they built the sickle cell anemia building [Center for Sickle Cell Disease] at Howard University for him because he did so much research in it.
Speaker 2: So this was a pretty--but you always talk about how rich that period of time was at Howard?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Oh yeah, that was the time they had the best professors. The very best, you couldn't find any better professors than they had during that time. They were excellent, and they were really the most known and if I can think about it we got our sickle cell building at that time, we got our cancer research building [Howard University Cancer Center, Washington, D.C.] during that time, during that period by Dr. Jack White [Jack E. White]. Dr. Jack White was a surgeon who came right behind Dr. Drew.
Speaker 2: Let me ask this mommy this is a very, very important question.
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time were you black, Negro or colored?
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): Honey, I've always been colored.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (JACQUELINE DRIVER KHAN): But I was marching for civil rights and we were still called colored and Negro.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, all right mommy thank you.
Story_ID: 449588
Speaker 1: So could you describe your father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] for us, if you had to explain him to someone else?
Speaker 2: My father, well my father, the love that he has for medicine is a love that is, it's very hard to describe how big that is. He chose not to go to surgery or anything that would make him a lot of money instead he always believed in working for the people. So he continues to practice in Camden [New Jersey], he should be retired by now but it's what he loves to do. He is a general practitioner and as a family doctor he sometimes charges and sometimes he doesn't. He would pick us up from school when we were kids, and then we'd go with him on house calls because he would always do house calls. I remember him leaving very early in the morning and he would come home for dinner--we'd all have dinner together and then he'd go back out and work again in the hospital or whatever. Because most of our growing up was in Camden, he was a physician in Camden, his own practice, but he also was at the hospital. He was the team physician for the football team at Camden High School [Camden, New Jersey]. He was the physician for the Camden County Jail [Camden County Correctional Facility, Camden County, New Jersey] (laughter), two jails. Those are the kinds of things that he loved to do, and now he goes bowling every Wednesday, and as many Wednesdays as I can I'm down there with him bowling, he and his friends. He continues to go to Trinidad. I remember loving how they would always take us to Trinidad for the summers because they wanted us to know our roots on that side, and we'd go all the time and of course it's the island, it's the Caribbean, you love it. I remember my father telling me one time, "You know, I want to get back home," when he was in Trinidad. I said, "What, seriously? I'd be down here all the time." He said, "No, no," and I started to realize that for him that was his roots Trinidad, but his home was wherever his family was and he loves that. He's a family man and that's what he loves more than anything in the world. He will love the barbecues that we do on 4th of July, that's what he looks forward to the most when all the kids come home and when everybody just gathers and has those barbecues and those sort of things. Those are things he loves to do. He's not the kind of person who, as much as I would love him to spend more time at home, he will but I don't think he'll ever give up his profession, even if he does doctoring once a week he's going to try and do that. I have a brother who is a pastor and has a church and they have many outreach programs and my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] and father both work in those outreach programs as volunteers. My mother teaches the nursing and physical health and my father is always there to help as well. But wherever my father goes, if there is a emergency or if there is a somebody in need, he'll always attend to them whether it is in a school, or in my theater (laughter) when they come to visit, or on the phone when a friend of mine needs some advice, or at the bowling alley whatever he'll be there. And I always wondered why he would take on such a burden, well it's because that's what he loves.
Story_ID: 449589
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings in order for us, and spell any names that are not obvious (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Yes, I could try. Well, I'm the first, after me is Rasheed [Rasheed Khan], R-A-S-H-E-E-D Mohamed Khan. After Rasheed is Amir [Amir Khan], A-M-I-R Mohamed Khan, and for a while it the three of us, three boys and my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] and father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.], they were wishing for a daughter, when are we going to get a sister. They took a break after Amir and then came back a few years later and said, let's try it again, and finally got a daughter and her name is Sherena [Sherena Khan], S-H-E-R-E-N-A, Helen Khan. Helen being my mother's mother's [Helen Driver] first name. So they felt they were on a roll, so they said let's have one more, so the following year they proceeded to try and they had their fifth child who was a boy and that was--his name is Mustapha, Jr.--Mustapha Mohamed Kahn, Jr. [Mustapha Khan].
Story_ID: 449590
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Very earliest? That's funny because I have memories of being at my parents' wedding and they swore I wasn't there (laughter). I think my earliest memories are watching pictures that were up on the wall, and I think one of those pictures was from their wedding and I would put myself into that picture in terms of my imagination, and I think that's how I think that I was there. I remember my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] and father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] planning to go out for a party one time and I was in the crib with my brother, Rasheed [Rasheed Khan], so I must have been only a couple of years old, but I remember those were very early memories. It's funny because I don't know that I can distinguish between memories of where I was and memories of pictures--of photographs you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: It also sounds like your parents are very good storytellers.
Speaker 2: Yeah they are--
Story_ID: 449591
Speaker 1: I guess maybe moving forward a couple of years as you're gaining siblings. What was your family life like? What was it to be in the house together (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my--my parents [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] were--first of all we grew up in Camden [New Jersey]. If you go to Camden now in 2007, it is, there are places that look like a ghost town. Some places are just falling apart. There's--
Speaker 1: We're talking 1953, '54 [1954].
Speaker 2: In--no, no, no. We got to Camden in the '60s [1960s], in the '60s [1960s]. We started off in--I was born at Howard [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] while we lived in Virginia--Arlington, Virginia, and then we moved from there to Norristown, Pennsylvania for residency and that was a couple of years. Then we moved to North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because that way we would be closer to my mother's parents [Helen Driver and Richard Driver, Sr.] who lived in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then we moved to Camden when--what is his name, a physician there--I can't remember his name, but he passed away, had a heart attack and died and he left--Harmon, Dr. Harmon [George Harmon], H-A-R-M-O-N, and he left a family. His wife, Sylvia [Sylvia Harmon], and I believe three children. My father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] took over that practice in Camden, and when we moved to Camden that's basically where we were. That was for most of my upbringing. So I guess we're talking in early '60s [1960s] and on, maybe '58 [1958] on. My education was in Quaker schools. My parents believed in peace and that sort of thing and also giving us the best education they can. So from when I was in preschool like first grade, I remember growing up with Quaker schools and being the only black person, or maybe one of two in any of my classes, the classes were small. So what I remember is when I'm growing up, I remember my education being in the white community and my social life being in the black community, it would after I came home from school. And I remember my three brothers--I mean me and my other two brothers [Rasheed Khan and Amir Khan] being very close, whether we were in school or at home. But I do remember at home feeling like it was the greatest block in the world. We didn't notice if there was poverty, we didn't notice if there was crime, we didn't notice these things. I only notice that now when I go back and I look, but as children you don't. You see them as your playground and there we all knew each other. It was very wonderful, fun growing up.
Story_ID: 449592
Speaker 1: Can you describe that block through your childhood eyes?
Speaker 2: Sure, we lived on Kaighn Avenue for a little while in Camden [New Jersey], and that was over top of my father's [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] office, and I remember selling Christmas trees out in front of the office on Kaighn Avenue for the YMCA [South Camden Branch YMCA, Camden, New Jersey] every Christmas, but I also remember the patients waiting in the waiting room and they would wait for hours and hours there. I remember hordes of people, like a lot of people all the time and then we would be living upstairs. I think eventually our noise got too much for my father, so we moved and that's when he kept his office there, but we moved to another place on Princess Avenue in Camden. Princess Avenue, unlike Kaighn Avenue which was a big, big street, Princess Avenue was a one way street. There were more trees, there was more green on Princess Avenue. Every house was filled with people who were proud of their house, proud of their garden, little, whatever they had. It was mainly black though there were some white families. There were the legends, the people we knew of, there were the girl who we would always make fun of, there was the boy who was always the bad one. Everybody has those when they grew up. But that's what that block was like. It was filled with all kinds of people. I remember my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] horrifying us one time because this one guy who we always called retarded, he was slow, but we made fun of him and everything and then we came home one day and my mother's tutoring him, oh my god mommy. But that was the kind of thing she would do, and I also remember one time befriending one guy who had just moved in and I remember we were playing one day and then he got in trouble for something and needed to hide out, so I remember hiding him in our closet, and then my mother got home and we had to hide him from there and I think he got caught by my mother. But those were good times, those were good times they were fun, they were imaginative. I believe that where I started in terms of theater was on Princess Avenue, where I started these things called nature shows. I have no idea where they came from, I was what maybe ten years old, and what I would do is gather pieces of nature, flowers or grass or whatever, and I would put them in jars and I'd display them, and then I'd put a sign out telling people in the neighborhood come and see these jars and maybe even buy them, I don't know. And then I think we started, my brothers [Rasheed Khan and Amir Khan] and I started selling lemonade or something while they came to see this nature and then we started adding in things like music and singing and skits. I remember practicing some song that [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte had at the time, and getting my brothers together and we'd sing it together for people. I think 'Straighten up and Fly Right' was one of those songs and people would come. Of course they were mainly my parents and their friends, and they would come and they'd see these shows (laughter) when we were little. And nature, nature show, we would do the nature show every, every year.
Story_ID: 449593
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells today trigger memories of Princess Street or Kaighn Avenue (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Princess Avenue.
Speaker 1: Princess Avenue?
Speaker 2: Princess Avenue and Kaighn Avenue, you know I always hated beets (laughter), so if I ever smell beets it reminds me of my childhood with the beet juice going into my rice and turning the rice red.
Speaker 1: Is that a Trinidadian thing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just beets and rice?
Speaker 2: Beets and rice, I just hated it. Even though my father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] always plopped all the food together and I always wanted it separate. Way back, things that trigger or takes me way, way back in terms of sights and smells, I don't know. I will say this; I don't know that I have anything like that. I know that when I think back on certain things that we had, I know I'm very grateful for those things, very, very grateful and the images that are very vivid for me are images of us at the South Camden YMCA [South Camden Branch YMCA, Camden, New Jersey], or being pin boys putting up the pins--the pins at the bowling alley at the Y that we had. I think it had maybe three lanes. I remember day camp that was--that took us--picked us up in Camden [New Jersey] and took us out to Berlin, New Jersey which was kind of like out in the countryside and that was like paradise out there. Then we'd come back to Camden at night. Those images are very vivid and they go way, way back. And those are probably the strongest images that, that I remember.
Story_ID: 449594
Speaker 1: In terms of your day to day care was it your mom [Jacqueline Driver Khan] who was spearheading when you came home from school, was she there, was it someone else because--
Speaker 2: No, I think it was mainly my mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sounds like your father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] was practicing most hours--
Speaker 2: Well my mother--somehow my mother was extremely busy and there too. Yes, my father was very, very busy with his profession and my mother was not nursing, she didn't pick that up again until later, but she was taking care of us, while she was also a member of about three or four social groups, and of course eventually it was five of us--five children she was taking care of. She did have help, a housekeeper, but for the most part she was always there. We were in school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I remember in grade school bringing home a book, 'Huck Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], and she was reading through that and she saw the N word in there and she got upset, and she gathered some people together and went and got that thing banned in Philadelphia school systems. So she was not one to just stay in the house and take care of us, she took care of us outside too.
Story_ID: 449595
Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about your elementary school, but tell us what elementary school you attended and what it was like to be at a Quaker school.
Speaker 2: Well, the first one I went to--the first one I remember was Plymouth Meeting Friends School [Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania] and that was in--when we were in Norristown [Pennsylvania]. Then when we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we went to Friends Select School in Philadelphia, and then we moved to New Jersey. I was going to Friends Select for a while and then eventually transferred to Moorestown Friends [Moorestown Friends School] in Moorestown, New Jersey in South Jersey. I think that the positive things that I remember had to do with learning about peace. This was during the '60s [1960s], and so it was a decade that eventually forced you--all of you to choose. You had to choose between nonviolence or violence, between Malcolm [Malcolm X] or Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], between Vietnam or Canada. You always had to choose and the worst thing that you could be was in the middle at that time. You had to choose your radio station, the white station or the black station.
Speaker 1: What radio station did you choose?
Speaker 2: The black station (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: WDAS [WDAS Radio] in Philadelphia, WDAS, WDAS. See, in those days white stations didn't have any black music at all. We were all raised to, if you were black you did the black things, if you are white you do the white things. That's how everybody was raised, there was no crossover and it was not statement of politics, it's just the way it was, it was just a fact and that way of life. But in Quaker schools while I didn't learn anything about black people, I did gain a lot about the importance of nonviolence and prayer, meditation. And even though they didn't--because see, every Wedn- every week--at Friends Select it was Wednesdays, at Moorestown Friends it was Thursdays. You had to go to Quaker meeting. Quaker meeting is when you go--that's one class you take. You go there and you sit on these hard, hard wooden benches and you sit there. Our classmates were all there and there was the faculty, which is primarily Quaker. They are all up there and you sit there and you think and you wait for somebody to say something and no one ever does there is no program. You literally go and you sit on these hard benches, and the worst part is that it was normally before lunch, so your stomachs are growling and everybody hearing your stomachs growling, and you are sitting there and nothing happens until somebody is moved to get up and say something like, the road is long, and they sit back down (laughter). You're supposed to think about it or something. It was crazy, it was crazy, but it--I realize the benefit of it now but back then, of course kids--you don't appreciate it, I remember that.
Story_ID: 449596
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was okay, I was okay. I was not at the top of my class.
Speaker 1: Were you well behaved?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I also remember daydreaming a lot. I remember daydreaming a lot. It was mid-'60s [1960s], I was in class, Moorestown Friends School [Moorestown, New Jersey], I was sitting in the back of the class and I had a ruler--a plastic ruler and I'm playing with this ruler like it was a spaceship right, because one of my favorite shows at that time on TV was 'The Jetsons' and so I'm pretending (hums 'The Jetsons' theme song) you know, and I'm pretending that I'm one of the Jetsons and we're coming down for a landing in the house and everything. A guy in the front asked the teacher, he says, "Excuse me, but can I go get a drink of water," and the teacher says, "No, you can't," and he says, "Why? I'm not colored," and the whole class turns around and looks at me for my reaction. You know what, I missed it 'cause I'm playing. You know how you hear things sometimes backwards, well that's what I did. So when they turned it all went backwards and I heard it and I got it, but I got to believe that when they first turned and looked at me, rather than being like (gesture), I was like this (gesture), and then I looked up and I vowed never to do that again. But after that, this child who said that then kind of became my best friend. He spent a week trying to make up. So I must have--he must have either realized what he did wrong or he was forced (laughter) into making amends, but either way it was vivid in my memory. If I were with other people of color maybe it would have been different, but I was the only one so, so I do remember feeling loneliness like that sometime.
Story_ID: 449597
Speaker 1: Did you have another story that you wanted to tell us about your elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Oh, the, this one was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe we'll move forward. So let me just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, it was in Philadelphia--it was prior--
Speaker 1: Prior to that one--
Speaker 2: --to the last, the last story. It was in Philadelphia at Friends Select School and there was not a, a big reaction or anything but it was one of those times when I felt very, very alone and it was when we were studying history, and we're going through this book and I don't believe it was the profess- teacher, I think it was in the book. And it was telling the story of the evolution of migration and how mankind started in Africa, and there were those who were adventuresome and ventured out to the rest of the world, and then there were those who were lazy and stayed. And I remember that hitting me so hard. I didn't raise my hand to ask a ques- I was a kid, I was in what maybe fifth grade--fourth grade. I didn't ask a question about it, I didn't--but it, but it stuck with me, it hit me so hard that it would be part of a history lesson and that all these people were learning this. But that's basically what was taught, and I remember sweating, going into a heavy sweat in that class, I remember that. So there were times when in spite of the, the great education there was this loneliness.
Speaker 1: Did you have an idea in elementary school about what you might be interested in doing in the future?
Speaker 2: We were doing a, we would do a Gilbert and Sullivan [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan] show every year at Friends Select School, and the first one that we did when I was there was 'The Mikado' and I, I think we all had to be in it. Now the people who were just singing were on the sides and then there were the actors on the stage and we were singing and I was always on the side. Now first of all, again it's the '60s [1960s], so if you were black you couldn't be on the stage, it just didn't--they wouldn't let you do that. Not by law they just wouldn't. If you were Jewish they wouldn't let you do it and if you had braces or glasses they probably would not let you do it, you know. So we were off to the sides instead, but I loved it, I loved--I always knew about music and, but this was theater this was--we were live and there were audiences out there and they loved us and we sang the--we're singing and there's a story being told and, you know, and then the following year was the 'H.M.S. Pinafore' [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan] and, you know we're up there singing these songs and then I started to think, well I could be that guy, I could be that guy, but never got that opportunity. But I started to think I could be that, I could be that, you know. This was in fourth grade was 'Mikado,' I think or fifth grade was 'Mikado,' sixth grade was 'H.M.S. Pinafore' maybe, something like that, or sixth or seventh. And then I remember coming home and my folks [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] had this book and I, I can't remember what it was. I think it was 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] and it was Sidney Poitier on the cover--his face on the cover and I took that book and I'm in my bedroom and I am trying to do his lines and pretending that I'm Sidney Poitier. And that was back in fifth, sixth grade but it was running parallel to my experience at Friends Select School with 'The Mikado' and the 'H.M.S. Pinafore' on the same days. It was very interesting but when I look back on where were my beginnings, probably the love for it started with being in those, those shows.
Story_ID: 449598
Speaker 1: So I want to ask you next about junior high school, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I keep itching to ask you, you mentioned [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, we're now talking a little bit about Sidney Poitier--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tell me about the music that's drawing you, like which songs and you know--
Speaker 2: Well my, my--
Speaker 1: --you said 'The Jetsons,' like sort of the media, what's the media around you that's attracting you at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, well, well because of my parents [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] what they would always listen to, we would listen, so they were the ones who would listen to 'Harry Belafonte at Carnegie Hall' [sic. 'Belafonte Returns to Carnegie Hall'] with Miriam Makeba. They would listen some jazz, a lot of Mahalia Jackson, Ella Fitzgerald, Dinah Washington, a lot of Dinah Washington, those sorts of, those sorts of people. The Mills Brothers, The Ink Spots. Those, that was the music that would always be on around that time. We had a piano in the house all the time because it was my mother's piano when she was a kid, you know. So we'd play the piano a lot, she'd play and then when I started to learn the piano I would play and I loved that piano, I'd be there for hours and hours and hours. The sounds were of those, that kind of music. A little later on, I remember the dentist we would go to, he, Dr. Robinson [ph.], Dr. Robinson, and he was a black dentist and he would always--while he was working on us, we wouldn't hear music, we would hear speeches, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm X and then much, much later he would have on 'The Donahue Show' (laughter), I mean this is when we were (unclear), 'The Phil Donahue Show.' So he was always into issues and discussion, you know, but they were on records as well so that was part of the sounds. That was all part of the sounds, the sounds and yeah. I would also hear in my head, I would, I would eventually start to love shows. I remember they had the, the 'Flower Drum Song' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], a Broadway show, they had the soundtrack to that, and I would listen to it over and over again. I would love the 'Flower Drum Song.' And I remember one time asking my father, could I please, please get an electric guitar, an electric guitar because, because that's in the--and he said, "Why do you want an electric guitar?" And I said, "Because it's in the soundtrack listen to it, listen to it." Now, I don't think it was, but I thought it was and he said okay. So he got me an electric guitar, you know. I think that the sounds that I would love the most from, you know soundtracks like that would be the French horn--the sound of the French horn I would love, I would love the sounds of the French horn, those sorts of rich sounds. And somehow I knew I always loved that. Now, keep in mind now we're on, on Kenwoo- on Princess Avenue in Camden [New Jersey], I was listening to the 'Flower Drum Song' and I loved that stuff but I also had Stevie Wonder (laughter) you know 'Fingertips' and Upt- 'Uptight' [Uptight (Everything's Alright)'] 'Uptight' it was called, you know, the, the records when I start to, to buy records the 45s [45 rpm record]. They were, and I still have some of them, but Don Covay and The Contours and Fontella Bass and Aretha Franklin and Stevie Wonder, the Four Tops, certainly The Temptations and The Impressions, The Yardbirds, The Young Rascals. You know, tho- those were all of the, the sounds of us growing up in, prior to, to high school.
Story_ID: 449599
Speaker 1: Did you all have a television?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a television.
Speaker 1: So you're watching 'The Jetsons' at home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What else were you watching?
Speaker 2: 'The Flintstones' (laughter), every Friday night 'The Flintstones.' In high school--did things change in high school--prior to that do I remember--oh yes, Glenn Miller, that's--not Glenn Miller, I'm sorry, Mitch Miller, 'Sing Along with Mitch.' I used to love that because he would have this orchestra and he had these songs and they'd have the, the lyrics and the bouncing ball and you could actually sing along with Mitch and that was fascinating to me and I loved that. Now, my father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] I think probably his favorite show was 'Johnny Carson Show,' 'The Johnny Carson Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson']. That was the time when Johnny Carson would be smoking cigarettes, no big thing on TV, but he would, he would watch that all of the time and sometimes we'd be late enough to catch him watching 'The Johnny Carson Show'. We'd go to my [maternal] grandmother's [Helen Driver] house in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we'd go there because--what we were fascinated about that was the fact that she had a colored TV, ours was black and white. Hers was color, it was one of those round screens and it was color, RCA Victor, and man that was like amazing to watch that. Back home we had black and white but we also had this (laughter) piece of plastic you could put over it and the top part of it--of the plastic was, was kind of blue and the middle part was pink and the bottom part, third, was green and if you put it over your TV and look through it, it kind of gave you some color in there like a blue, you know, sky and green grass and stuff like that. It was funny, but that's, that's the closest we got to, to color TV at that time. But when we went to my grandmother's house we would watch, we would watch that and of course because it was always on a Sunday that we would go to her house, we would always watch 'The Wor-' 'The Wide World of Disney' [sic.] I think it was called, 'The Wonderful World of Disney,' Sunday evenings. So those were the kinds of things on TV. Now we got to high school, oh boy, 'Good Times,' 'Good Times' came on, and I remember 'Happy Days' being on too, and loving 'Happy Days' but when 'Good Times' came on it made us really proud and we were really into 'Good Times.' Then of course after 'Good Times' there was 'The Jeffersons' and everything else that came on to. But in high school I remember 'Good Times,' I remember 'Good Times' a lot.
Story_ID: 449600
Speaker 1: So tell us about junior high school. Was it--was the Quaker system separated into what I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Basically yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was elementary and then, and then junior high school.
Speaker 1: No middle school?
Speaker 2: No middle just elementary school went--it just, I don't even know if they broke it up because everybody was in one building and if you only had fourteen or so people in each class, you didn't have many people in the whole school but we were always in one building. So it kind of went from first grade up to twelfth.
Speaker 1: So tell us about your middle junior- kind of junior high and high school years. Were you still a well behaved student? What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was always well behaved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was always well--I just got bad in college [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you in terms of academics?
Speaker 2: Well in, in--it's very interesting, when you change schools, what I discovered was that when you change schools and you go to a school where nobody knows you, you can become somebody else. Because reputation in school is everything, so when I was in Friends Select School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was there from second grade to seventh grade I think, and during that time I guess I was considered one of the outsiders. I was black, you know, that was really it. There were times we weren't allowed to go to parties and things, you know. When I went to Moorestown Friends [Moorestown Friends School, Moorestown, New Jersey], and I remember turning thirteen there, I made a decision that I wanted to become part of the in crowd, and everything that people knew of me as in Friends Select now I didn't have to carry any of that here, I could come cool (laughter) and I did, and one of my close friends, and I was close with him because he had to take the bus from Camden [New Jersey] also. When, when I went to Moorestown Friends, we were still living in Camden and on Princess Avenue I would have to get up and take the bus from Princess Avenue down to downtown Camden and then transfer to a bus that went from Camden to Moorestown [New Jersey] and when I would transfer there, this guy Don Larenz [ph.] was his name and he would transfer--he would take that same bus and he was white. But he was bigger, so that meant he was cool but what really made him cool was that he was on a dance show on TV in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know. In those days you had these dance shows and I can't remember the name of the dance show he was on, but he was on this. You know, people would be part of the dance shows, you know and he was in high school, you know, so after school he'd go, and sometimes he'd even be able to get off early from school to go and be on this dance show. Well, I'm on the bus with him every day so I thought, well wow he's cool then I'm cool by osmosis and I did it and I was cool and everything was cool. So I remember that change in high school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey]. I was still okay in terms of a student and I loved, math I was very good at and I was also very good at sciences. So academically that's what I liked. Math, I was really, really good. Really, I was always really great at that, maybe because it helped me put things in perspective (laughter), you know. Before you get to algebra you get to really just look at one plus two equals three and whatever, and even then when you get to algebra you throw in factors but there's always a formula, in life there's no formula, but in math there is and you can figure it out, you can make it all balance and everything is cool. So I always loved math I think for that reason. But in Moorestown Friends the times were changing, Civil Rights Movement was going on; the sense of who black people are, what our culture was, was building. Still I lived in Camden, so my social life was still with my, with black people and my education, school days was white people and it never mixed. I was--certainly I was going to all the birthday parties and all the functions with the school. I was in sports and I was good in sports. Soccer I played and baseball I played and I didn't feel ever in school that I was--I didn't feel ostracized. Sometimes I felt alone, but I never felt that anybody was doing anything to me bad or anything. I liked my classmates, I liked my, my teachers.
Story_ID: 449601
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in particular who you were influenced by?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not at all. I certainly remember one guy who in fourth grade made us--really taught us how to polish our shoes, your, and neckties and this and that, I certainly learned that and I remember that. But generally I don't remember anybody. In tenth grade, I remember getting a little antsy because I was missing my friends, I was starting to miss--I was becoming--I was a teenager now so I wanted something else. I didn't know what it was and we moved from Camden [New Jersey] to Cherry Hill [New Jersey] and the high school was right around the corner, so I don't have to take two buses anymore. But from Cherry Hill you could take one to Moorestown Friends [Moorestown Friends School, Moorestown, New Jersey]. My friends, who I only knew in Camden, had all moved out to Cherry Hill so they are there. All of a sudden all my friends are at this high school and the high school was a good high school in terms of education it was very good. But where my class in Moorestown Friends was maybe fourteen people, in Cherry Hill West [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey] it was close to a thousand people in one grade, you know. The whole class was--the whole school was about four thousand people, huge. But it had marching bands and it had football and all these things. It was pretty amazing and it had my friends, that's where I wanted to go and I wanted to party and I wanted to do all these things that kids do, and I remember talking to my parents [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] about it and they said okay. I remember the principal at Moorestown Friends sitting me down and trying to convince me to stay, "Just two more years and then you're done, you graduate." I said, "No, but this is what I wanted," and he said, "Well, I guess it's the--they have football, they have all this stuff." Not that I played football but I liked the excitement of it and he said, "Well, if that's really what you want." So I got along really well with my teachers in Friends School and my classmates. I remember times when my classmates--my white classmates would stand up to defend me when somebody was giving a party somewhere like at a country club and I was not allowed to go and I remember classmates getting up and saying, well then we're not going to go either. So I never felt bad there--I was never treated badly, I was very close to them. There was a guy named David Mamet [ph.] who was a good friend of mine when we were in Friends Select [Friends Select School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I don't know where he is now, but I, but he and I got along really well, he was Jewish and because he was Jewish we weren't--he was like kind of on the border too--on the outside too. So we hooked up and those were good times, those were good times. But when I went to Cherry Hill High School West, which was in 1968, all of a sudden I walked to school, all of a sudden my friends were there and some of the friends were black, but then there were Jewish friends too and there were other friends too. It was the time of Vietnam [Vietnam War], and it was the time of the peace movement and the Civil Rights Movement all in one and it was a time of incredible music going on. And my, one of my best friends, his name is Benny White [ph.], and he is still a teacher in Camden. He teaches and he loves dance and theater and that sort of thing, and I remember when he was in junior year and he said, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan], I'm going to go audition for a play." I said, "A what?" He said, "A play," and I remembered it from Gilbert and Sullivan [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan] days, but this one he said, "No, I'm going to audition to be a dancer." I said, "Benny, you want to be a dancer, you're a guy, guys are not dancers. What are you talking about?" He said, "No, I want to go--I want to be a dancer." I said, "Okay, well this is really funny, I'm going to come watch you," and in those days you auditioned on the stage and while you're waiting to audition you are in the audience watching everybody, and I'm watching him. I'm saying, my god I could do that, and there were about twenty guys up there trying to follow the steps--to learn the steps of the choreographer and then if you get them, then you get into the show and he was getting them. But I said, I could get that too because I would know the steps from the weekends when we would gather and my brothers and I and my friends, we would be The Temptations or Four Tops or The Impressions and we get steps so I could do that. So I got up there and it was 'Funny Girl' [Isobel Lennart] was the name of the musical and I auditioned with him and I got in, and from that point on theater had me (laughter) in a chokehold and I thought it was the most important thing in the world, whatever play or musical I was in. I loved the music, I loved the storytelling and the way music and dance and everybody fit together to tell a story.
Story_ID: 449602
Speaker 1: So you're a junior in high school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey] at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you're in 'Funny Girl' [Isobel Lennart] in this, in this performance?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so where are you performing?
Speaker 2: In the high school. It was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I thought it was like a downtown audition.
Speaker 2: No, it was the high school musical--
Speaker 1: I understand. I understand.
Speaker 2: It was the high school musical, and that was the weirdest thing for me. It was like you're going to be a guy in the dancing, words going to get out (laughter). But I just turned it around, I said, oh my god, I love this, I could do this. So that year Benny [Benny White (ph.)] and I were in this musical, 'Funny Girl,' and I'm more into--I tend to like acting, but he always loved dance. But his mother, her name was Peggy White [ph.], god bless her soul, she would always prior to this take us out to see plays, like community theater and stuff like that. There were these things in the Camden [New Jersey] area called the music fairs where there's this big tent and underneath the tent they had seats and they had professional summer stock shows that would come through, musicals and things. She would always take us to these things. Also in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], which is where, we would always go out to these shows and functions and every month was something different. One month it may be to go skiing, one month it may be to--one month we sat with a Black Panther who taught us things about movement at that time and one month in that junior year in 1968, the trip was to go to a Broadway show. Now, none of us had ever gone to a Broadway show before. We lived there in Camden and in Cherry Hill [New Jersey] and we went, got on the bus and it drove us up. All these Jack and Jillers to see a show on Broadway, 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart], and what was remarkable about it, we didn't really know anything about it, was when we got in there, 'Hello, Dolly!' had become a big hit. It was produced by David Merrick and Carol Channing, the people that had made it famous. It won all these Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] but when we got there it was an all-black cast. Pearl Bailey was the lead and Cab Calloway. Pearl Bailey, Cab Calloway and an all-black cast of 'Hello, Dolly!' of all things, 'Hello, Dolly!,' which has nothing to do with our culture at all. It was based on 'The Matchmaker' [Thornton Wilder], it was incredible but it was amazing that we were there doing it. All of sudden Broadway which is the center of theater in the world and the best show on Broadway at the time that we could be that, that we could be the best, no, no, no. Unbelievable what that did to us, these kids who hopped on a bus in Camden, New Jersey to come up to New York City [New York, New York] to see a show on Broadway and look up there and see that these people up there look just like us. Never ever could I come up with the words that properly describe this impact. But there was one thing that happened even more powerful and that was that at the end of the play we get back on the bus to go back to Camden and we're on the bus and a couple of the people from the play--from the show come out onto the bus and look at us kids and say, "You know what, we just wanted to thank you for coming." These guys, they were in this Broadway show and they came onto our bus to thank us for coming and then we asked them questions, they answered us back and all of a sudden there was a dialogue between us and these Broadway people who looked like us. I think that was the most powerful thing for me because it showed me that it doesn't matter how big you are, it doesn't matter how big you are, how bright your star is. Always remember where you came from, always remember that part of your role is excellence on stage or in film or whatever you're pursuing but the other part is to give back and I learned that that day.
Story_ID: 449603
Speaker 1: Your 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] experience is during your junior year in high school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: That was junior year--that was, that was again the weird parallels in my life. We're, we are in a musical in high school and the high school, of course was predominantly white and the show was predominantly white and it was 'Funny Girl' [Isobel Lennart], but we're also on a bus going to see a Broadway show that was all-black, just another musical, just very, very extraordinary. You know what was in between on the bus on the way back Benny's mother [Peggy White (ph.)] says, "You know you guys are in the show in high school, and Benny [Benny White (ph.)] you love dancing and Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] you love theater and acting, why don't we do 'Hello, Dolly!'?" So he said okay, it was the first play I directed, (laughter) it was just that simple. It was like Annette Funicello and them saying, let's put on a play. "Let's do a play." She said it, she, we were coming back from 'Hello, Dolly!' and she said, "Let's do 'Hello, Dolly!'." So the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] actually of Camden County [New Jersey] gave me my first opportunity to direct a play and that was 'Hello, Dolly!' and Benny was the choreographer, and we were rehearsing that while we were doing 'Funny Girl.' (Gesture) It's incredible, it's incredible how things work but that's how it happened and that's what got me really into the stream of theater, before it was that I loved it. I was participating from the sidelines, or I was singing from the sidelines or I was watching or I was pretending to be Sidney Poitier in my bedroom. But now I was directing, I was directing.
Story_ID: 449604
Speaker 1: Do you do that show in your senior year or does that happen before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--well, it was in my senior year, yeah because we actually started rehearsing it in senior year and I remember being in rehearsal. We would rehearse in the church and a very vivid memory was being in rehearsal and hearing that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot and we had to go home, we had to go home. So that was in my senior year between junior and senior year going that way. So--
Speaker 1: How did that affect your family and your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was very scary because the next day we didn't know whether America was going to blow up or not. That was, I think, our biggest concern is the nonviolence over, I think that was our biggest thing and we talked about it in our family. It's interesting the next day going to school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey], I actually--now my family had--my parents [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] had about eight records of Dr. King, all his speeches on records and the next day I went to school with those records, I brought those records to school and I dressed up in a jacket and a tie. I'm a junior in high school. I don't know what possessed me to think that way, I do, but to have that frame of mind I'm very proud of that, I'm very proud of that. In Friends School [Friends Select School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you have to dress in a coat and tie but in public school you don't have to. That's the other reason why I wanted to go public school, but that day I did, I wore a coat and tie in honor of Dr. King and I took his records just in case somebody asked me about it. Isn't that deep? Because a few years before that when they looked to me, I'm playing 'The Jetsons' with a ruler, now I wanted to be ready and I didn't think that way. It wasn't conscious, all I knew was I should take these records just in case, and it never came about, you know, no one asked, "Let's listen to these speeches." But that was okay, I wasn't disappointed I just wanted to be ready. I remember one of my friends--they were both white and a guy asked, "Why is Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] dressed up like that?" And she nudged him and said, "You stupid, of course you know why he is dressed up like that." I was proud of that too. So that was what--those are the days I remember right after Dr. King died. I felt the same way after Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] died. When Bobby Kennedy died it was in that same--within that same year, I think. Bobby, Dr. King and James Meredith, they were all shot in the same period of time--same year and at the same time I'm directing plays, musicals (laughter) and I'm performing in the school musicals.
Speaker 1: And do you do the school musicals your senior year in conjunction with 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] at the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] of Camden [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, the senior year in high school the musical was 'How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying' and I played--who did I play did I play Bratt- I think Benny [Benny White (ph.)] played Bratt [Bert O. Bratt] and I played Overton- Ovington [Benjamin Burton Daniel Ovington] or some guy like that, a small, small role I had a couple of lines.
Story_ID: 449605
Speaker 1: And were you clear in high school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey] that you were going to college? You might talk a bit about that, and by the time you're a senior, you're clear that you're going to go and study theater?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, by that time loved the theater, I really did. But it may have been for the wrong reasons. I, what I loved--you see we were performing in the shows, and when I say we I mean all the cast black, white all of us, we were in these shows. It created this sorority/fraternity thing. I mean it was like if you were in the high school musical that was a pretty major thing. There was nothing corny about it because they, and this is where my teachers--you asked did I remember any of them. I remember Barbara LeCush [ph.], can't remember her name--how to spell it, but Barbara LeCush was the choreographer and Herb Fisher was the director of all the high school musicals. Herb Fisher was also the coach--the head coach of the football team that was strange, that was funny. But he was this big guy and he was the director of this high school musical, and under them we all kind of loved each other. It became a clique and we kind of gathered around like that and when the high school musical was done and we're talking months of rehearsals and then you do the show and then it's done. We'd do about two weekends of performances and then it's done, well when the summer came we didn't want to stop. So we all got together and we would rehearse and we actually rehearsed in the street in Cherry Hill [New Jersey] around the corner from where I lived. It was spearheaded by another guy and we were learning all kinds of musicals and songs from musicals and we would do these tributes to Broadway and stuff like that during the summer. Eventually we became a company and we would do these things. Well at that time there was a lot of issues regarding social problems and juvenile delinquency and race relations were really heating up now, and like I said, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [Malcolm X] were at least seemingly to be at odds. There were a lot of at odds things going on at that time. Theater provided this big wall for me to insulate me, this kid, from the madness that was happening outside. So rather than focus my energies on the things that maybe my parents [Jacqueline Driver Khan and Mustapha Khan, Sr.] did in terms of civic responsibility and all of the fighting for what's right and the debates and the movement and all of that, rather than trying to figure out, do I want Dr. King or Malcolm or push this button on the radio for rock or that one for soul. I was able to find this place of theater that protected me from that, that just said Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] you know you don't have to decide about that stuff. The metaphor that's so powerful that makes theater and all art so powerful is that it is a metaphor that is built on images and the telling of a story in a way that allows the audience to interpret it however they wish. Whatever baggage they come in with, whatever life experiences they bring to the table will determine how they interpret the work. Now you watch a television sitcom it's not the same way because they give you everything. Theater gives you just enough to get your imagination going from there, you see. So to me the best theater is theater that doesn't give you everything, but really give you enough to provoke an imagination, provoke a sense of determination in your wanting to interpret it your way and your wanting to go the road you think it's taking you and you may find that it's taking you all over the place. It's different from the person sitting right next to you but that is the power of metaphor that allows you to do that. To give you the distance and that's why theater was so powerful for me as a kid because it distanced me from the realities of 1968, 1969 America.
Story_ID: 449606
Speaker 1: So, do you spend a year or two with this company before you go on to college--
Speaker 2: Well, you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and is there some time in between your high school years and when you matriculate at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was now I was on two courses in terms of theater in Cherry Hill in South Jersey [New Jersey]. One was doing--being part of the white musicals, where it's predominantly white but there are a few of us black folks in it and we're having great fun and then there is this other which is the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Now in Jack and Jill after the success of our own 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart], we wanted to do more and more so both thing were happening at the same time. Just as I would go to school one place and socialize in the other. In this situation I was doing theater in one place and theater in another but the road was starting to come together, and when I graduated from high school [Cherry Hill High School West, Cherry Hill, New Jersey] I had this dilemma. We never had a choice as to whether or not to go to college; we had to go to college. But we did have a choice as to where to go. I mentioned to you there was UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and that would have taken me to film 'cause that was now exciting you see because of this theater experience, or I could go to Rutgers where theater was right there in New Brunswick [New Jersey] and New York [New York] right there, or I could go to Ithaca [Ithaca College, Ithaca, New York] where I had both theater and something to fall back on--
Speaker 1: Architecture (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which at that time for me was architecture, yes.
Speaker 1: And then what about Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Kent State was--and Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I'm sorry I would have gone to Howard too. But Kent State was a backup because in those days they said also pick a school that you know you can get into, 'cause you don't want to end up without anybody wanting you. So Kent State I knew for sure that I could get into that so that's what that was. It was the safe bet. But it was huge and I didn't know anything else about it other than it was big and that was good. There was a community theater in Cherry Hill, that area called the Stage Setters [sic.], I think it was called--Stagecrafters [The Stagecrafters Theater, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and they would do musicals every year but they were primarily adults and this one guy was a friend of my father's [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] and my mother's [Jacqueline Driver Khan]. His name was Van Bruner [Van B. Bruner], black and an architect and he was playing in 'The King and I' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], he was playing the King the role that Yul Brynner played, and I'm looking and I'm saying, my god this is great and this guy does both. So maybe I could do something like that. I remember going to him and talking to him about it, and Benny [Benny White (ph.)] came with me too, and Benny was coming to Rutgers, he was going to Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina], and so we're talking to Van Bruner and in his area which is architecture and all these models and everything it looked fascinating. But I was so hooked on theater and I asked him, I said, "What do you think I should do?" And he wasn't going to tell me what to do, but he gave me a good idea of what architecture was and I knew that my folks wouldn't let me major in theater. So what I decided to do and I remember it, I decided to go to Rutgers instead of anywhere else, and I thought let me go to Rutgers for one semester, and after that let me transfer to Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], that had a great architecture school if that's what I want. But before I go, let me first try to figure this out--
Story_ID: 449607
Speaker 1: And I went, and I went to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and at Rutgers there was a play that they were--
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969], and they were doing this play called 'The Hostage' by Brendan Behan and it was an Irish play, and I got in. I auditioned for it and I got in and I was really into it, it was a play it wasn't a musical or anything, it was a play. But on weekends I would go home because we would practice the next Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] show. So after 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart], while I was a freshman in Rutgers, we did 'My Fair Lady' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe] and every year we did a musical. We did--first it was 'Hello, Dolly!' then it was 'My Fair Lady' then we did--then by that time I had met this woman--we had met her in one of the Cherry Hill [New Jersey] shows and she was fabulous. She was amazing, she was an amazing singer, amazing dancer and an amazing actor, her name was Candy Mayfield, and Candy Mayfield was black and very dark skinned and not a part of Jack and Jill. We were doing 'Sweet Charity' [Neil Simon] and everybody auditioned and no one came close to Candy Mayfield, and Benny [Benny White (ph.)] and I said, we've got to put Candy in because by that time it was Benny, me and Candy and we were tight, in everything we did we were a team, and she was a choreographer too. It was very exciting in those days and we put her in 'Sweet Charity,' and don't you know Jack and Jill mothers did not like that at all. They said well--they said everything but, of course she's too dark. She said things like--they said well because she is not in Jack and Jiller, why should a non-Jack and Jiller be the lead. Or she's kind of crass and it was really--it wasn't her it was her character 'cause 'Sweet Charity,' she's a prostitute, she's a dancehall girl but she wants to be something else and she always falls in love and then something goes wrong and everything. One scene--she has this one scene where she has this toast with a guy who is playing her date and that's actually my brother, Rasheed [Rasheed Khan], was playing that role and they toast, and he says, "Up yours." No, he says something like a toast to something and she's supposed to say, "Up yours." Those Jack and Jill mothers got so upset that she said that, "Up yours? That's not right." So I talked to Candy and I said, "Candy listen, we're in trouble anyway but let's try and change that word for the next performance for the opening performance." So she said, "Okay, what can we say?" And I said, "Well, maybe something else, just not up yours." So she's thinking about it and she did come up with something but then she forgot it, so when she got on stage and my brother says--oh that's what, "Bottoms up," is what he says. "Bottoms up," and she's supposed to say, "Up yours," so we changed that. So this time he says, and it's opening night, "Bottoms up," and she says, "Up your bottom (laughter)." Oh no, that was the end of it, that was the end of it. Those Jack and Jill mothers, boy they were furious, they were so furious. So the next year we did 'Oliver!' [Lionel Bart], very safe about a little boy and everything and we moved Candy to another role, or I think Candy that year may have just choreographed, it was funny. But the bottom line is that around that time I realized that theater was not just about having fun, you know, that there was also something to be said for doing the very best you can, shooting for artistic excellence. I knew that Candy was excellent, but I had to deal with politics and I had not yet figured that out, but what I did know was that the two were going to compete and they were going to be part of the rest of my life. So it was a very good learning lesson and I eventually went my own way, which was about forget anybody's going to tell me to compromise because of something bogus like that person doesn't belong or whatever it is, whatever it was. Black people are the ones who were lazy and stayed in Africa. You know, all of that. No, unh-uh, from now on it's artistic excellence and I know I can do that well and that's what I was shooting for.
Story_ID: 449608
Speaker 1: So at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], that's what I did, and even though I still was not sure whether to go into theater professionally or not. I did take a lot of courses. I took set design, lighting design, I took every course I could find that was in theater because I thought that if I was going to be a director or producer I wanted to know it all. So that's what I did and I devoted a lot of my time not just to acting but to learning all of these other things. Then later as the years went on in college, I had to start thinking about what my major was going to be, and I knew I was not going to make it theater, I couldn't, but in my freshman year it was architecture I was thinking about. Then it was pre-law, then it was maybe medicine. I went through all these things, but my major I decided on was psychology. My mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] said in the beginning it was maybe political science, but really what I wanted was psychology, and I was in junior year when I decided to go into pre-law not as a major but just as a course mainly because Vietnam [Vietnam War] was going on and so was the draft. The draft was based on--your number was based on your birthday. They pulled your birthday and that was the number you would get and they pulled November 4th in the thirty-fifth try, so I was number thirty-five, okay. But I was exempt because I was in college. The deal was the moment you get out of college you're going if they've gotten to your number, and the expectation was that by the time I got to graduate they'd probably be up to about 150, certainly I was going. So one thought I had was to join the JAG Corps, the [U.S.] Army JAG Corps [Judge Advocate General's Corps] which is the corps of lawyers and if I went into pre-law, 'cause I--I didn't want to go to war. I was patriotic but I didn't want to go to war and so if I went to pre-law I would be allowed to go to law school, and then after law school I'd owe the Army a number of years in the JAG Corps. I was willing to do that and that's probably what was happening except for the fact that everybody knew what I really loved was theater. Somehow I came up with this scheme to convince myself and others that what I want to do is go to law school so I could become an entertainment lawyer, 'cause then I could control my destiny and then go back into theater the way I wanted to. It was a roundabout way, and people would look at me like, Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] is that really what you want, and I had a dean who was my main advisor at Rutgers, his name was Fred Clark at Rutgers, and he was a dean and he was the one who signed my papers and did the recommendation and he said, "Ric, are you sure this is what you want?" And I said, "Yeah." So he said okay and I submitted the papers for law school and I applied. I applied with a picture with a big '60s [1960s] beard (laughter) and all this stuff, I realized that must have been one of the reason why I didn't get in. But shortly after--just before I graduated from college, about a month before, they stopped the draft. It was a huge day for me, just huge, they stopped the draft just before I had to go, that was pretty amazing.
Story_ID: 449609
Speaker 1: So what happened after that was, I remember that summer we were, that summer after I graduated, we went to Trinidad to be with the folks, and everything was great and the day before we were to leave I'm sitting there and I'm looking at the water, and I'm thinking you know I don't want to go to law school, 'cause by that time I had gotten in provisionally to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I just had to go for another interview. I thought about it and I thought you know I don't want to do this, theater is what I want. Why spend my time in law when that's not what I want, I love law but--and I told my parents that I'm going to stay in Trinidad a little longer. So they left and I stayed there another month just to get myself together, figure out and hang out with my cousins. When I came back, I continued what my summer job was which was painting houses. I painted houses for a living, I used the family station wagon for the ladders and I would paint houses, and when I came back in September, and so I continued to paint houses, but I also was directing a play called 'Purlie,' a musical, for a combination of the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and The Links [The Links, Incorporated], which was another organization my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] was in, and they asked would I direct 'Purlie' and I did. Once again got back into the musical thing in Camden [New Jersey] and I was painting houses during the day and rehearsing in the evening. I knew I had to decide what to do, I needed a real job and my father [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] knew--one of his patients was the personnel director at CBS in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in television, and I had never done television before, I think I took one course. So I knew what a PA [production assistant] was and that was the job open, but I had no experience, but I knew this person. So I was up for it and then it finally came down to me and this other person who had a lot of experience, and I remember it was January and in the year before when I was a senior at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], they had announced that they were going to start Mason Gross School of the Arts [New Brunswick, New Jersey], which was a professional program. Of course we all auditioned and applied but not really--I never really thought that I would go because I thought I was going to go to law school and this and this and this. But that was up in the air, but I wasn't really thinking about it. Now I'm up for this job and it's not bad going into television, I'd never done this before it was exciting, it was interesting. I remember getting the call--she called her name was Campbell [ph.], Mrs. Campbell and she said, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan], you did really well but we had to go with somebody else who had experience, I'm sorry you didn't get this job." I said, "Oh man, that's okay don't worry about it." I hung up, picked up the phone and dialed the dean of Mason Gross School of the Arts, Jack Bettenbender, he was the one who founded it, B-E-T-T-E-N-B-E-N-D-E-R, Bettenbender. I called him and I said, "Can I come up, can I join?" And he said yeah. The next day I was in my car and I was on my way to Rutgers to be part of the first class of Mason Gross School of the Arts and I was, I was joining in the second semester, but I was there and I was on a road that was about theater professionally and that's, that, I just took it from there, that's what it was and from that point I knew what I was going to do and I did it.
Story_ID: 449610
Speaker 1: In your college years are you seeing any black theater besides the Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] theater that you're producing?
Speaker 2: In college--
Speaker 1: And now we've moved on to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was going to Broadway because we were in New Brunswick [New Jersey], so I was going to see 'Fiddler on the Roof' [Joseph Stein] I remember, I remember 'Guys and Dolls,' no 'Fiddler' I remember a few others, but in graduate school [Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey] that's when I really started to go to New York [New York] a lot, and that's when I came across the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], but on Broadway I saw 'Dreamgirls' and a colleague of mine--a woman who went to school with me, Sheryl Lee Ralph, she came out of Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and now she was on Broadway, she was in 'Dreamgirls' and that was great, I saw that on Broadway. I also saw--well that's when I saw 'Fiddler on the Roof,' which was very powerful as well because that was about another ethnic group that was going through a lot of struggles, the Jewish people. Then I saw 'Guys and Dolls' with an all-black cast and that was amazing.
Speaker 1: On Broadway?
Speaker 2: On Broadway and then there was 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis] with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was the--
Speaker 2: This was in the early--
Speaker 1: This is early 1970s, no this is 1977?
Speaker 2: No, this was mid-'70s [1970s] maybe. I went to grad school--I graduated from undergrad in 1973, I went to grad school starting in 1974, so between 1974 and 1977 or so, '78 [1978], you had shows on Broadway--I just remember a host of pieces definitely, 'Guys and Dolls' was in that era, sevent- mid-'70s [1970s] with an all-black cast. There was 'Purlie,' I may be mixing them up. I remember 'Purlie' for sure early on in the '70s [1970s], I remember 'Guys and Dolls' with a black cast, I remember 'Treemonisha,' which was Scott Joplin. I remember Eartha Kitt in 'Timbuktu!,' I remember Gregory Hines in 'Sophisticated Ladies,' I remember 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], I remember the musical 'Raisin' [Charlotte Zaltzberg and Robert Nemiroff] on Broadway with Virginia Capers and Joe Morton, Debbie Allen. You see--and 'The Wiz' was on Broadway during that time. If I explain to people now--if I say look, at one time there were all these musicals, they think I mean in the course of a decade, I'm saying no they were all on Broadway at the same time. It was not unusual for two or three Broadway musicals to be all-black musicals at that time. There were also plays, there was 'Don't Play Us Cheap' [Melvin Van Peebles] and 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' [Melvin Van Peebles], there were works by Amiri Baraka, the 'Dutchman,' 'The Toilet.' There were plays coming out of the Negro Ensemble Company and out of National Black Theatre in Harlem [New York, New York] and the New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York] where [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins was, all of these things were happening.
Story_ID: 449611
Speaker 1: And in my graduate year, my graduate years, I went one time to see a play in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because my mother's brother, Sonny Driver [Richard Driver, Jr.], they called him Sonny, we called him Uncle Sonny, he was kind of in the entertainment business too. What was interesting was that he wanted to be a manager that's what he wanted. When he was in the [U.S.] Army he played saxophone, so that kept him in the band and kept him away from having to actually fight. When he came out of the Army he wanted to be a manager. He really wanted to go to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], and he got into Juilliard but his parents [Helen Driver and Richard Driver, Sr.] didn't let him because it was New York [New York], and we had an uncle up there in New York and that uncle was kind of like a bad uncle. They said no, no he's just going to get you into trouble you're not going to Juilliard, so he didn't go to Juilliard but he really wanted to. He stayed in Philadelphia and he became a manager. So he became the first black manager in entertainment in Philadelphia and as the story goes, as he tells it, this guy comes up to him and says, "Hi, my name is Sam Cooke and I'd like you to manage me," he turned him down. (Laughter) He turned Sam Cooke down. A few years later this guy comes in and he says, "I'm a comedian from Philadelphia, my name is Bill Cosby," my uncle said you know a black comedian can never make it that way, you don't quite have the Redd Foxx thing and you don't have this thing. So he turned Bill Cosby down, but the point is that my uncle he kept on going. He managed other people who were never as big as those guys, but he kept on going and he's still there, and now he calls me and I'm in grad school and he says, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] there is this company coming down here to do this show by this guy named Ron Milner and it's called 'What the Wine Sellers Buy' and I got tickets because I'm in the press and I wanted to know if you wanted to come," and I said, "Sure I'll come." So I drove down there--I went down there and I went in and I saw the show and as it happened there was a reception afterwards. So I went and checked these people out, I met these people. Dick Anthony Williams was in it and this guy was the head of this theater company, his name was [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr., and the theater company presenting this show was from New York it was called the New Federal Theatre. I'm talking to Woodie King, Jr., and I said, "New Federal Theatre, is there any way I could become a part of you guys? What do you do?" And he said, "Yes, there's this workshop we do it's the--," I forget the name, it was the New Federal Theatre Black Workshop or something--the Black Theater Workshop [ph.], "and you can become a part of that if you want." I said, "Really?" And he said, "Yeah," I said, "Okay I want to do this, I want to do this," and basically what you do is you take classes and you learn there but also sometimes you're part of the plays as well. I wanted this so badly, now I'm in school so I drive back up I'm all excited about being part of this, but I'm in the M.F.A. program in Mason Gross School of the Arts [New Brunswick, New Jersey] and you really don't have time to do anything else. I was majoring in both acting and directing, so I was doing double the work and you end up having to do a thesis in each and everything. So it was really packed in terms of your school work, but I wanted this badly and I talked to Carol Rosenthal who was the head of the acting program there at the time, and I said, "Carol is there any way I could become part of the Black Theater Workshop at the New Federal Theatre?" And what she did was she said, "Look I'll tell you what I'll do, I'll restructure it so that you actually get credit for it--acting credit as a independent study or something like that." So I was taking acting classes at Mason Gross School of the Arts learning methods that are now taught at HB Studios [Herbert Berghof Studio] in New York but I was also learning methods from Dick Anthony Williams, Gil Moses [Gilbert Moses] who, god rest his soul, is not with us anymore. These were brilliant black actors and black directors and those were my teachers. So I'd learn from there and I'd learn from here and I'd put them together, and that's kind of how I started to get more and more awareness of other black theater and things going on at that time. But the other thing that happened was that I started to move away from theater for theater's sake, art for art's sake, 'cause I started to realize in working with these people that there was a lot that you can say--a lot that you can contribute by the types of work you do and the stories you tell. So rather than doing 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] and those sorts of shows, I started to build a bigger social consciousness and used my work accordingly.
Story_ID: 449612
Speaker 1: You're doing the New Federal Theatre in New York [New York] and you're getting your M.F.A., your master's in fine arts. Eventually this is coming to a close, the M.F.A. anyway, are you having some sort of understanding about what you're going to do with your master's of fine arts?
Speaker 2: Do the work. It was never a question about whether we could do it. It's a pretty amazing thing that when you are in an environment where you never doubt yourself, it's extraordinary what it does to you. Certainly one thing it doesn't do is put that question out there as to what's next, you know what's next. What's next is what you do next.
Speaker 1: More shows.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't have a choice, you don't even think about it. I was in this same group of people, you have to understand I was there and all of a sudden there were a lot of other black people there too. Sheryl Lee Ralph, Avery Brooks, the person who would become my partner at Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] Lee Richardson, L. Kenneth Richardson and more. We were all there together and we were the ones getting all the lead roles in the main productions. We would be in class all day and then after class we'd go and rehearse 'Romeo and Juliet' [William Shakespeare], but then we'd go after rehearsal at ten o'clock we'd go in a small cubby in what was called the Paul Robeson Ensemble, that we had on campus. We would be rehearsing plays by [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins and Lonne Elder III, and sometimes creating our own work and they were black. So we never gave up the other mainstream stuff, we simply added on the stuff that was specific to us and what we wanted to do. So when we got our degrees there was never a question as to whether or not we can do our own thing, we knew we could. There was never a question as to whether or not we can do mainstream, we knew we could because we'd been doing it. Getting the degree was about saying thank you, taking it and then continuing it. At that time New Brunswick [New Jersey], which is where Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey] and Mason Gross School of the Arts was for us, was about to undergo a major revitalization in the city. It's a beautiful city now but it wasn't always beautiful, but there was a year when Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.], which is the organization that has its worldwide headquarters in New Brunswick, decided that they were not going to move out of state or move their headquarters to Texas of wherever. That was a time when a lot of corporations were moving out away from urban areas. Johnson and Johnson had decided that we're going to stay here and when they made that decision they started to put a lot of money and commitment into helping to revitalize the City of New Brunswick. At that time there was an organization called CETA, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973], and that was pumping--as a federal funded program, pumping into programs that had recognized there were a lot of people that were unemployed, and it also recognized that a lot of that unemployment was due to shifts in how jobs were emerging, the shifts to computers, the shift to whatever moving away from certain mechanical trade or occupations. So a lot of people had to be re-trained. Well how do you define what hard core unemployed is, because that's how you get in. Basically at that time if you were unemployed for fourteen weeks or something, or twenty-six weeks something like that. Well that's like most actors (laughter) in the country so we said this is easy, we can do this.
Story_ID: 449613
Speaker 1: When I graduated [from Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey], I was selling vacuum cleaners door to door. I was selling Rainbow vacuum cleaners and that's how I was making a living, and when I heard about this program called CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], I said I wanted to be part of this. Even though I was auditioning in New York [New York] every day, but this CETA program can give me a steady paycheck and still do New York and that's what I did. So I went to this CETA office and I said, well what's available and there was this program and there were many programs for the arts at that time. There was one program I got into; it was eight people I think of different artistic aesthetics. So there were a couple of actors, that was a sculptor, there was a visual artist, there was a musician, there was a dancer, and our job was to go out into the community in the county and basically do what we do, wherever we can. In churches, synagogues, senior citizens homes, playgrounds, on the streets wherever do it for free and we're being paid for that by CETA. I think it was wonderful because not only was this a program for us but there were many arts programs at the time like that. It was really a remarkable time and that combined with Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] deciding to stay in New Brunswick [New Jersey] made me feel like New Brunswick is a cool place.
Speaker 2: About 1978 now? Seventy-seven [1977] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was '77 [1977], that program, that CETA program that you're in was one year old and--I mean it was one year during that time, and during that time I started to get more and more frustrated about how that particular program is working. I started to learn about how CETA worked. I was never one to shy away from getting your own money and resources to do your own thing, so I wanted to learn everything I could about CETA and that's what I did in that year. So the following year this guy I came out of school with, Lee Richardson [L. Kenneth Richardson], he and I were both in the CETA project and we were just as frustrated and we had developed a production of the play called 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' [Athol Fugard], which is a South African work against apartheid and it was being done in a time when the anti-apartheid movement was gaining strength. So we were taking the show around that was our job with the CETA program was to take this show around. And I thought we've got to figure out a way to--we could do our own CETA project maybe, and get our own funds for this and do our own thing. Now we also approached the George Street Playhouse, which was in New Brunswick. The gentleman who was running it, his name was Eric Krebs, K-R-E-B-S, who is now a producer in New York. But at that time he was a teacher at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and he was one of the founders of the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick and that was the main theater. I approached him and said, "Well listen, you know 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' why don't you guys do that?" He said, "Man, I don't know that our audience would get into that. I don't know that there is an audience out there for black theater. I would give it a try but I don't know if there is one." I said, "What if I told you that I can find the funding." He said, "Well all right, we'll listen, because maybe if we have the funding we can create a program to do build that audience we're looking for and then we could do 'Sizwe Banzi'." He said okay. So he went ahead and he decided to do 'Sizwe Banzi' anyway just not with us, but that's okay, that's okay he did 'Sizwe Banzi.'
Story_ID: 449614
Speaker 1: But I had a meeting right after that with a friend of mine who by that time was working at CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], and he gave me the ins and outs of it. I applied, sent in a grant through the George Street Playhouse [New Brunswick, New Jersey] because we needed an umbrella organization; George Street said they'd do it. I wrote the grant, we put it in through George Street, they did some talking, I did some talking, we got a grant for basically--what came up to about $230,000 in 1978 to start what was called the ethnic theater project because we weren't allowed to use the word black (laughter). We got $230,000 and we were allowed to hire about twenty two people with that money. Actors, administrators, production people, public relations, everybody we needed to start a black theater in New Brunswick [New Jersey]. We found this little hole in a wall place it used to be a sewing factory. Half of the second floor was available, it had been vacant for a long time, we got in there, we got the money--the CETA money. The first thing we did was we had to renovate, and while we were renovating we were doing workshops. We sent workshops out in the communities the same way I learned how to do it in that other CETA project, we did it here 'cause I figure you know what, we needed to break down the barriers between the community, which at that time was primarily black and Hispanic, and theater which was formal to them. We also wanted to break down the barriers between the traditional theater going audience which is predominantly white and the black theater which they didn't think they could be a part of. So that's what the workshops are for, we went out and we did workshops everywhere to teach whatever we could to people and let them know we're here. Then we did an open house and fourteen people showed up and then we did it again and I think twenty people showed up, and then we finally were ready to rehearse a show, and now this is in 1979, early part of it. The first show we did was 'First Breeze of Summer' ['The First Breeze of Summer'] written Leslie Lee and we did that show and of course because we had that funding from CETA, we didn't have to charge for tickets, it was all free, and it was a big, big hit and that was what started the Crossroads Theatre Company.
Story_ID: 449615
Speaker 1: So when do you actually become the Crossroads Theatre [Crossroads Theatre Company]? You said initially it was the ethnic theater project?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the ethnic theater project (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, when do you change to that name, and I have a great story about you being in a restaurant and brainstorming on a napkin?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: You've got to give us a little piece of that.
Speaker 2: Backing up a little bit, Lee [L. Kenneth Richardson] and I, again doing 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' [Athol Fugard], frustrated but now understanding how CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] worked, knowing we could apply for a grant, and then finally getting George Street Playhouse [New Brunswick, New Jersey] to say that they would be the umbrella organization, it being called the ethnic theater project. I guess the first thing that happened was we knew we needed to come up with a name for the theater and we were coming up with all kinds of different names, nothing hit, nothing met. At that time, because of Johnson and Johnson's [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] commitment to revitalization, they were building new roads in New Brunswick [New Jersey] all kinds of things were happening. The first play that--professional job I got as an actor in theater on stage was 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] and it as directed by Hal Scott [Harold Scott]. And that was in Massachusetts in a theater up there. I got that part right around the same time we found out that the ethnic theater project was going to be funded and I wanted to do both, they said I could do both, but I commuting back and forth, back and forth. But I remember the one day, I was in Massachusetts and I'm on a break in rehearsal and I get a call from Lee. He said, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan]," and they're now renovating the theater, "we got the perfect name." I said, "What are you talking about Lee?" He said, "Well, Dan Irwin," I-R-W-I-N, he was in the ethnic theater project, a white guy who had come out of Mason Gross [Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey] with us, and he was the stage manager in the project. He's scraping walls and stuff trying to renovate. He's looking out the window, he's seeing all these roads coming together and he just turned to Lee and he yelled out, "Crossroads," and it was as simple as that. The moment he said that to Lee, Lee saw the huge significance of it. The moment Lee told me the name of that, I saw the significance of it and enough said. Nothing had to be said beyond that. So it was just a very, very simple way with one word of saying what we're all about which is the coming together of people of many different backgrounds to experience something that could send you on your way in a better way. That's what we were all about, that's what we were trying to do.
Story_ID: 449616
Speaker 1: We were influenced in a major way by the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] and knowing them and knowing that they were black theater, but first and foremost they put artistic excellence as their main part of the mission--their first mission, artistic excellence and they always believed that black actors could be great actors if given the opportunity and that's why the theater was started. The Negro Ensemble Company busted those doors in, they broke through. We saw ourselves as the next generation, so that if our flagship broke through, our goal was to go in and do it well and take advantage of what they did for us, and maybe we wouldn't be as angry as those who came before because they had to bust through a wall. Well if that wall is already busted for us and we can walk in, what would we want to walk in with? We knew what it was, positive images of black people, positive images of black people, positive honest images of black people, and the belief that if we presented that to an audience of many different backgrounds, we could be building bridges of understanding between people, and that would be our contribution to society. In a nutshell that's our mission, that's the Crossroads' [Crossroads Theatre Company] mission and it has not changed that much since then, 1978. But that was when we came up with the name, and a year into it we realized that we were going to be a hit, that this was something meaningful. We applied for CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] funds again and got it a second year, but then we found out that we can't keep relying on CETA, we didn't want to keep relying on the government. With CETA we didn't have to charge any money, people could come for free but that wasn't good 'cause we needed a paying audience, people who were accustomed to paying. So we decided to leave CETA, we decided to leave George Street Playhouse [New Brunswick, New Jersey], we decided what we needed to do was go out on our own, and so during that second year of the CETA program which was '79 [1979], '80 [1980] we started spending time with people who could help us learn how to incorporate and start our own company. Part of incorporation is having your own mission and your purpose written out. One moment we're out having lunch, Lee [L. Kenneth Richardson] and I and we're trying to figure this out. We want to submit these papers, but we didn't have any paper, we had napkins. I took a napkin and started writing and we both started writing, and you know what I bet you those words we wrote on those napkins were the same words that became our mission and remained our mission for twenty years. It came from a napkin and a restaurant called Sir John's (laughter) in the Brunswick [New Brunswick, New Jersey] area, but it was from our heart.
Story_ID: 449617
Speaker 1: --I think that the, the starting of Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre Company], you have to understand, was in a response to there being a void. So it wasn't about, let's start a company and call it this and this is the mission or--no, we were actors. We got the highest degree you can get in terms of training for acting and then we went out there and found that the roles were mainly negative roles for black people or they were small. So something is clearly not in sync, if what we were trying to do was become part of the mainstream. We realized around that time that there were black theater companies being developed. They were small, but doing that kind of work we wanted to do, the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], the New Federal Theatre, the New Lafayette Theatre, theaters in Harlem [New York, New York]. These theaters existed, which meant that we could do it too. But it was the frustration of being actors out there doing roles and them being negative or small that really, really impacted on us to just let's do our own thing. So doing our own thing versus I know what it is, that's two different things and that's why in the first couple of years of Crossroads it was part of a CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] program at the George Street Playhouse [New Brunswick, New Jersey]. We knew what we wanted to be and who we are and our power. That's when we said we need to then go out on our own, and we have to establish our own board and our own mission and our own this and that, and that's why the napkin became so important, because that was not about how do you get a grant or how do you fill a void, that was about how do you accomplish a dream. That's what happened there. The way we started choosing shows were also coming from our frustrations as actors, we wanted good roles. It was not about let's start a movement; it was not about let's change society. In the beginning it was about we want good roles, we want to do work well; we want to apply these skills we've got at Mason Gross [Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey] to some really substantive work. The Negro Ensemble Company had done a play called 'First Breeze of Summer' ['The First Breeze of Summer'] written by Leslie Lee, we thought that was good, that was a great script it was well written. The characters were full and Lee [L. Kenneth Richardson] was really excited about this, so Lee chose that and Lee directed that. The one right after that, I thought, there is this play I really love called 'Dream on Monkey Mountain' by Derek Walcott. It takes place in the Caribbean. I don't know, I guess I wanted to do that because it was a challenging show and unlike Leslie Lee's play, which was realistic this was very nonrealistic, this was very poetic. Leslie Lee's was very much our own vernacular and we did 'Dream on Monkey Mountain' and I directed that and Lee was in it. Lee tended to like acting more than directing, I tended to like directing more than acting. So we both kind of chose the seasons together and then I would direct a lot and he would act a lot, but sometimes I would act and sometimes he would direct. That's kind of how we went, but as directors and as actors much of what we chose was coming from our need artistically to do that kind of work, that's what it was. It happened that it started a movement there, but it was never meant to be anything first other than the striving for artistic excellence.
Story_ID: 449618
Speaker 1: What does your audience look like at the Crossroads Theatre [New Brunswick, New Jersey]? Are you able to bring back black audiences, is it a mixed audience?
Speaker 2: Well, there were, there was no such thing as a black audience then in New Jersey, there was no black theater in New Jersey. Our first two years at the George Street Playhouse [New Brunswick, New Jersey] brought us in contact with an audience that was primarily white. They had subscribers and so they made up most of our subscribers. The first subscription series we put out was in our second year, and we were doing--we did a play called 'Eden,' E-D-E-N, by Steve Carter, also from the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. Following that we did 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf' by [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange, and that had been started at the New Federal Theatre in New York [New York], right. And by this time we were gaining ground, people are starting to hear about us and we said we're going to put out a subscription series. The single ticket price in those days was like five bucks [dollars]. So five bucks to see 'Eden,' but if you subscribe, we'll give you both for seven bucks. So that became our first subscription thing and we had about seventy subscriptions, I think that year. Most of them were white, because most of them were from George Street Playhouse and most black people don't know what--didn't know what subscription meant anyway, let alone going to the theater, except for going to Broadway but Broadway you don't subscribe. But we do is go to Broadway in groups. So we started to sell groups and as it turned out about half of our audience was groups and half was subscribers. Mostly white subscribers, mostly black groups and that's why for most of the Crossroads history the audience has been just about half and half.
Speaker 1: In New Brunswick [New Jersey], is that an area where it was easy for black people in the area to get to the theater?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean I've heard complaints about the Negro Ensemble, that they were downtown at St. Mark's [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] and some people complained that they were not in Harlem [New York, New York]. What was the location of your theater like vis-a-vis the community?
Speaker 2: Well, I've never heard of a person in Harlem not to be able to get around Manhattan [New York], okay. But (laughter), I do--but in New Jersey you kind of have to figure out how to get around. Either you're driving or you're taking the bus or whatever, you've got to figure it out. You can't walk everywhere the way you can in Manhattan. New Brunswick was, as I said, a town predominantly black. At the time the suburbs, the other towns around it are only a bridge away, and when I say a bridge I mean a very little bridge, sometimes just going across the street and you're in a different town. So the way New Brunswick is even though, I mean New Jersey is I'm sorry. The way New Jersey is even though New Brunswick was the city we were in, we were very, very close and very accessible to people in many other areas. So most of the black people were coming from New Brunswick and Plainfield [New Jersey] and eventually the whole corridor of Route 1 [U.S. Route 1], which included Newark [New Jersey] and Trenton [New Jersey] and Jersey City [New Jersey] and Elizabeth [New Jersey] and those sorts of towns, whereas the white people were primarily coming from Princeton [New Jersey] and Somerset [New Jersey] and Highland Park [New Jersey] all these areas in New Jersey. We never had a problem with Crossroads being accessible to anybody because people knew how to get around. So we had our audience coming from as far south as Atlantic City [New Jersey] and we even had subscribers in Connecticut and certainly people coming from all the boroughs of New York. But primarily it was because it was unique. It wasn't just that prior to that there didn't exist black theater in New Jersey. There wasn't even black theater being done in white theaters. So if you wanted to see black actors you had to go to Crossroads. If you wanted to see black stories being told, you had to go to Crossroads.
Story_ID: 449619
Speaker 1: So do you think that that unique positioning in addition to the quality fare that you are producing resulted in your being recognized by Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and also the theater [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] being recognized for a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] in 1999?
Speaker 2: What, what led to those?
Speaker 1: Is it the uniqueness of your position in addition to the quality of the productions, or put better, what things contributed to your being recognized as one of the best theaters?
Speaker 2: (Pause) From the very beginning, and I attribute this to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] as our role models, if you didn't have artistic excellence you had nothing. There were a lot of things going on around that time that were about social relevance and the movement and all of this, but they didn't have artistic excellence. I'd say that that was probably the number one thing. If you're unique, you stand a chance of getting people's attention, but if you want to create a market, once they are there in the room, once you've gotten their attention you better be really good, you better be really good, because there are many other things in the world that compete for their attention other than theater (laughter). There's got to be something about theater--our theater that allows people to want to walk across broken glass on the sidewalks, to climb up about thirty steps into a fire trap of an old sewing factory and be crammed in a non-air conditioned room to watch black theater; it's got to be something. It's not just your stories being unique; it's about you being great storytellers. I learned that from people like the Negro Ensemble Company, I learned that from people like [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, people who say your job has got to be to tell our stories and to fill in the gaps. Tell those stories but tell them well, and focused on and committed to those two things I think is what led us to the recognition we received from Rutgers, from other places and other black colleges [HBCUs] around the country and from--through the Tony Award in 1999.
Story_ID: 449620
Speaker 1: What are for you the most memorable shows? You have mentioned a number of them and they might be overlapped, but while you were at Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] officially for your tenure there what is most memorable?
Speaker 2: In terms of what I've seen while I was coming up? Well certainly 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] was pretty good but at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]--while at Rutgers I think it was the works that we were doing as part of the Paul Robeson Ensemble, black arts ensemble at Rutgers. Black students meeting in a basement doing black theater and these were not show that I knew before. They were not plays that I really ever read before, and we weren't talking about 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] or works by Langston Hughes. We were actually doing contemporary works by contemporary black playwrights. So that brought me in touch with who these people were telling the stories of today and I think that is probably--had a pretty big impact on me. The works of [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins, the works of Baraka [Amiri Baraka], the works of Charles Gordone, who wrote 'No Place to be Somebody' and was the first black playwright to win a Pulitzer Prize. These were intriguing. [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When The Rainbow Is Enuf'] totally blew my mind, totally blew my mind. The writing of Derek Walcott and the way he writes totally, totally blew my mind. These were happening at Rutgers and we were coming in contact with writers in a time of a black theater movement. It was truly a time of a movement and there were also blaxploitation movies happening at the same time, but there were writers in the theater writing about the experience of today and that had a major impact on me and everybody else at Rutgers, everybody else who are my colleagues today.
Story_ID: 449621
Speaker 1: How long were you with Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Well let's see, we started in '78 [1978] and I left Crossroads in 1999. I actually--you know when you're an artistic director of a big theater that has a lot of money, as an artistic director you can work at other places too. They allow you to go direct here and direct there and whatever and then come back and do your thing. They say, oh wow when you go to work in Europe or London [England] and then you come back you bring us so much more, it's great. But in a black theater they don't even let you out the door to go eat (laughter), especially if it's something you've started, and Lee [L. Kenneth Richardson] and I started this with hopes that we would be able to do this and other things. But primarily it was because Crossroads could never afford to pay us that much money. So we do our thing and then we'd go on unemployment or we try to get other work and that was normal, but when it got bigger and bigger we couldn't and we had to do more and more there. I remember in 1997, which was I guess eighteen years or so after starting Crossroads, I was asked to direct a play at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival in Ashland, Oregon, and it was a play written by Rita Dove [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove], D-O-V-E, and she was the poet laureate at the time and this was her first play. She was the youngest black poet laureate ever and certainly she was the first of many, many things in our life and in American history. So here she was doing this play and it was the re-telling of the 'Oedipus' ['Oedipus Rex,' Sophocles] set in antebellum South Carolina. So it was a very classic nature to it with a lot of ritual and stuff, and I was working with her on it and we were doing in conjunction between Crossroads and Oregon Shakespeare. We thought, well we could do it at both places. So we got the funding to, but as it turned out rather than starting it at Crossroads we started it in Oregon and it was totally, because of the way schedules worked and it had nothing to do with anything else. I got on a plane to go out there to direct this play, and when you go to Ashland you first have to go to San Francisco [California] or someplace like that. So on this plane it's pretty cool, people are fun, very diverse and I get on this plane to Ashland. It's all white and all older people, gray hair, silver hair and no hair, and it was like, oh my god, I'm going to a black play about antebellum South Carolina. Not only is this play dealing with slavery, but it's also dealing with the 'Oedipus' where the mother is white and the son is black and they have a relationship 'cause that's what the 'Oedipus' is about. They don't know that they are mother and son and they fall in love. I'm saying, oh my god, I'm going to do this in Ashland. It was hard enough to do that at Crossroads (laughter). In Ashland and I'm looking at that these people on this plane and I said I don't know what they are going to think. Then I get there and I start working, and I say you know what I can't care, I can't care. They may hate me but that's okay because I don't even know them and they don't know me. But something about that freed me to do my best work. I was away from my theater base, so that meant that I couldn't do things exactly the way I knew how to. I was in a whole different laboratory. But importantly I didn't know this audience, so I knew Crossroads audience and I wasn't as self-conscious, I was free, I was freed up to take the biggest artistic chances of my life and I did and I went for it. The work was great, the experience was amazing, the audience was incredible, and they loved that show so much they were so appreciative of that show. I realized it was because of the risks I was willing to take artistically and there were risk I couldn't take at Crossroads. So I flew back to Crossroads realizing that I had to make a decision and that decision was to leave Crossroads.
Story_ID: 449622
Speaker 1: I had to leave Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] if I was going to do my best directing work and that's what I wanted. So I told them in 1997 that I was leaving, and every time we were going to make that announcement to the public something would come up. In 1997 we weren't ready because we didn't have a plan in place for who was going to take my place or whatever. In 1998, I was also the president of the board of the Theatre Communications Group [TCG], which was the major service organization for all of American theater and we got a little afraid of what would happen if I said I'm leaving Crossroads at that time because our popularity was there. August Wilson was the keynote speaker at the national theater--a TCG theater conference that year that was being held at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] in McCarter Theatre [McCarter Theatre Center], and this man who I emulated, always wanted to do his works but I wanted to do his works before they went to New York [New York]. I never knew that I could so it or how, I never knew him. But now I'm the president of TCG and he's the keynote speaker at our conference, and I'm on stage with him. I'm sitting here and he's talking and saying the thing we all witnessed, all of us always wanted to say about being a black artist, but never had the words the way he did, never had the eloquence and never had the power that he had to be able to get up there and say it in such a way that blew people away. Now it caused a huge controversy--
Speaker 2: What's he saying?
Speaker 1: Well he--it was called, 'The Ground on Which I Stand' [August Wilson], and he spoke about his parents and growing up and he spoke about being importance of theater. But the fact that black theater it's not that it doesn't exist, it's alive and well. It's just not funded and that there are a lot of white theaters. These theaters who gave him his career, who were doing black work, but by doing so they're putting a shadow--casting a shadow over other theaters, smaller black theaters who don't have the same cache. Whenever a white theater does, a mainstream theater does nontraditional casting he says that's a detriment to us because how could you just--we're not ready for, I think is what he was trying to say in America, we're not ready to be color blind. Even though it's giving opportunities to black actors, it's not giving them the opportunity to tell their story. It's about telling other people's story and it became very controversial because the whole American theater movement at that time was about trying to become more color blind, nontraditional casting all of that. What August was saying was, no the black theater institutions need to be supported. I'm sitting there with him and then after that he calls and says, "Look, I have a play 'Jitney' [August Wilson], it was the first play I ever wrote, but it never went out anywhere and now we're talking about maybe doing it again, and my partner Ben Mordecai [Benjamin Mordecai], who was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] would be interested in talking to you, if Crossroads would be interested," I said yeah. So that year Crossroads did 'Jitney' before it went to New York and August Wilson lived for a month, while we rehearsed, in New Brunswick [New Jersey] in my apartment building, August Wilson, and we did 'Jitney.' And I knew that wasn't the time to tell people I was leaving either. Then we find out we're up for the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], and I remember meeting with a person who wrote for the Newark Star-Ledger [The Star-Ledger], his name is Peter Filichia. I asked Peter, "Peter, if I tell people that I'm going, do you think that will cause problems with the Tony," and he said it probably would. Because if they gave you the Tony knowing that you're going to leave, and not knowing what was going to happen at Crossroads after there would be a lot of shakes in the community, because every year only one person--only one theater could get that Tony Award and would this would be a waste. So even though it was commemorating our history, the Tony Award is not about history only, it is about your future as well. So once again the Tony Award came in 1999 in June, but I knew I was leaving in a matter of months and still was not able to tell people. And then when we got the Tony Award, now I definitely couldn't tell people because then people would think I'm just grabbing it and getting out of there, you know. And people didn't realize that this had been in place for, you know, for two years now internally.
Story_ID: 449623
Speaker 1: So, what I did do in the interim was put in place a team that I thought I could really count on. Andre Robinson [Andre Robinson, Jr.] who used to be a managing director at Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey], now brought him back from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to be the producer, managing director, and Hal Scott [Harold Scott] who was a director and who was an associate artist at Crossroads, who was the director of the first play I ever did professionally, 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] in Massachusetts, Hal Scott directed that. And Hal Scott was the head of the directing program now at Mason Gross [Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. I said, Hal be the interim artistic director so he did it; put those two people in place. We made the announcement that I was leaving, but we made it around the same time the press started to wonder why Crossroads could win a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] one month and have money problems the next. So rather than the press conference being about me leaving and this being a happy occasion, something to celebrate and these two people are going to take over, it became about wait a minute Crossroads is going to go under, is Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] ditching knowing that we're going to go under. You see we were doing at the time a play called 'Play On!' [Cheryl L. West]. It was to commemorate Duke Ellington's birthday. It was directed by [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields, and it starred at Crossroads, Leslie Uggams and Stephanie Mills. Those were the two stars. My board, I remember they would always tell me, "Ric, can't we get stars so it could be easier to make money," and I thought that year I'm going to leave them with a strong season. I'm going to leave them with the Tony Award they got in June, with a play called 'Homework' by Kim Coles in September. 'Play On!' with Leslie Uggams and Stephanie Mills in December. Our first Latino play we did called 'Yellow Eyes' [Migdalia Cruz] in February. I'm going to leave them with something so strong that the momentum will just carry Crossroads on. But instead what happened was the set came for 'Play On!,' and we didn't have enough money to pay for it, because a bank loan, a bank loan to cover a debt that we had at the time had not come through yet, and 'Play On!' was a very expensive show. All of our money was sunk into this and we knew it was going to be a hit once we opened but we had to get to opening. We had a week of previews for that show and a week before the previews the set comes, it's in the truck, we don't have the money they took the set back. Leslie Uggams, Stephanie Mills in rehearsal, we can't afford the set, they took the set back and then what we did was we decided, okay well what we're going to do is we're going--let's just cancel some of the previews so that we can catch up because we did eventually get the money and we did pay for the set. The set came back, but we were behind so we cancelled some of the previews, that's okay things happen like that. But then we had to cancel more, we cancelled the rest of the previews and decided our first performance was going to be opening night. We figured we're going to be ready, it was going to be a strong show, it will be all right, but I didn't want to risk our cast and our stars not being confident in the show, 'cause they had less time to tech. So it's okay, we'll open on time. But see at that time in those days, and even now, reviewers tend to want to come before you open. They come during previews so they can get the article written and everything and getting it out on the day of the opening. So cancelling the previews meant telling the reviewers we're cancelling. The reviewers call and they say why? Why are you cancelling? They called me, this one guy Peter Filichia calls me and I happen to be in rehearsal so somebody else picked it up in the office.
Story_ID: 449624
Speaker 1: So the person in the office [at Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] answers the telephone and says to the press--
Speaker 2: (Gesture) In a very frustrated way, because everybody was frustrated at that time, says to the press, this one press guy [Peter Filichia], says, "Well, the company with our set said if you don't give us the money now we're taking it back and they took it back and that's what happened." So this same guy from the press calls me later in the evening, he says, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan], I got to tell you something, he could have told me anything, he could have made something up, he could have said the set fell off the truck but because he said that, it's news and I've got to report it." So the next day he reported it and he reported it, and it was another theater company who had built the set and it was doing us a favor too. They were really supportive, but they couldn't go out on a limb like that and so he did this article that exposed that, and the moment he did that all attention went away from this brilliant show that was about to be done ['Play On!, Cheryl L. West], into how can a theater company that wins a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] now be broke? Well, here's the thing, black theaters are always broke. We were always broke. It wasn't like it just all of a sudden happened. When we won the Tony Award we were still broke, when we, that same year opened on Broadway with 'It Ain't Nothin' But the Blues' and got Tony nominations for that we were still broke. We still came back from a Broadway show that had amazing reviews to now try to figure out how to do payroll--meet payroll in New Brunswick [New Jersey]. All of these still exist, nothing all of a sudden happened but it was news. It was news because it was the first black company, they won this Tony Award [Regional Theater Tony Award] and now it's broke right, so it became a story.
Story_ID: 449625
Speaker 1: In the meantime I had already planned to have a press conference and I was working with a really wonderful pastor in town, Buster Soaries [DeForest Soaries], who was a pastor at First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Lincoln Gardens] in New Brunswi- in Somerset [New Jersey], and he was also the secretary of state of New Jersey and we worked together. He said I'll be there and we'll do the press conference, and because we just got this loan I told you about from this bank, a wonderful bank in New Brunswick [New Jersey] called New Millennium Bank, and they had agreed to give us a loan 'cause they knew Buster Soaries, and they thought that with this loan rather than dealing with all these creditors all the time it would consolidate all of that and allow us to be a free Tony Award winning company [Crossroads Theatre Company] and that was great. So we were going to get this, we were going to make this announcement and this is going to be great for the bank, and within this announcement also announce that I'm leaving. So essentially what we're doing is putting something bad and something good together, but in a way that looks good and we're all going together. It wasn't like I was leaving for good, I was going away and I'll come back and I'll still be connected with the company in some way, maybe direct and stuff like that. So it was going to be a good thing but when this guy [Peter Filichia] wrote this article about how 'Play On!' [Cheryl L. West] was not going to happen because we're broke there started to become a feud between two newspapers, the Home News [Home News Tribune] in the New Brunswick area and the Newark Star-Ledger [The Star-Ledger], which was the state's main paper. So when one person did one thing another wrote another the next day and then another and another. All digging up dirt, 'cause all they knew was there's going to be a press conference, but they didn't know what it was going to be about. So every single day leading up to that press conference which was happening in a week, which was a big mistake it should have happened the next day. Instead a week gave the papers time to try to scoop each other to the point where once the press conference came there was no news. That was their goal and it got uglier and uglier and uglier. The press conference, thank god, turned everything around for two reasons. One, because 'Play On!' was a hit by then, and two because Buster Soaries is brilliant and he was able to inspire people. That morning he had contacted some of his clergy around the state so that he could announce at the press conference that all the black clergy in New Jersey is coming to aid Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and I happened to know somebody at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], contacted him, he contacted all the chapters around him and we announced all of this. So the headlines in the paper the next day were people standing in line for Crossroads and that was great and that was it, and once that happened the next week I was on a plane to Trinidad, because that's when I left Crossroads. But I left Crossroads with, the last thing I was doing was carrying a plant out of my office and the music from a 'Play On!' matinee was still going on, and I like to say that I left when the music was still playing because it was and that's when I left the theater, that's when I left. It was in December of 1999.
Story_ID: 449626
Speaker 1: Now, I'm in Trinidad and I'm hearing stories about Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey], but I'm saying, you know I've got to stay out of it they've got to run it their way. What I didn't realize, and I think this is one of the biggest lessons I've learned, is that just like money can't make happiness--can't buy happiness, money can't destroy you either, money can't deny the legacy of a great theater company like Crossroads. People at that time, and now even, look back at that period where we had a Broadway show, we had a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], we had great stuff on stage but we just couldn't afford it. So everything we did we kept going, building up a debt. It is somewhat true, when I left Crossroads there was a debt, but there was a lot of in-fighting because the question was who was going to lead the company, and everybody wanted to be me, everybody wanted to be Ric Khan [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan]. When Ric Khan didn't even want to be Ric Khan. We started Crossroads with two people at the head not one, and when Lee [L. Kenneth Richardson] left in the mid-'80s [1980s], I started a program called The Associate Artists program to bring together other artists to create an artistic collective. I was never interested in being the head person, and in that collective was George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe], Anna Deavere Smith, Hal Scott [Harold Scott], Avery Brooks, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange, Mbongeni Ngema from South Africa, extraordinary people. I never wanted to be that, and then I'm away in Trinidad and people are feuding because they want to be that one head person, I'm saying you're crazy, this is not about one person, but they fought and they fought and they fought. When I say that, in December of '99 [1999] people pulled together and lined up to support to Crossroads, I mean with major money. Basically the money that was on the table would have bailed Crossroads out in a second, that was it, because no one wanted the Tony Award winning company in New Jersey to go under. They put up money, they had meetings with Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] and the state and the governor all these people where they said okay I'll take this part of the debt, I'll take this part of the debt. So money didn't destroy Crossroads, money didn't cause it to close its doors, but that's what they said, that's the only thing they could say because what they were ashamed to say was that they just couldn't get along, and that is a problem that has been historic with us as black people. We always--I shouldn't say always of course not always, but too often we put so much focus on pulling the other down to make sure that no one gets there without you there too. Sometimes we want to be the first and that's fine, but too often we don't want somebody else to be the first and we put more energy in the pulling them down or keeping them--in this situation we had the largest black theater in the country with a budget of over $3 million funded by foundations and corporations nationwide, supported by over three thousand subscribers, doing works that were going to Broadway, works that were going to New York [New York], works that were being published. We were producing interns who are a result of a combination--a partnership between a professional theater company and the historic black colleges [HBCUs] around the country. We were creating amazing new artists while at the same time supporting the new works of August Wilson and Ruby Dee. We had given wings to George Wolfe, who then went on to run The Public Theater in New York. Anna Deavere Smith and people who would become incredible artists of our time, but we were in New Brunswick [New Jersey] fighting each other--ourselves the staff and the board. People were splitting and they were yelling at each other and cussing each other and telling stories, until finally in September of 2000 at a board meeting it was decided that Crossroads would close its doors temporarily so that they could focus on the debt, get the debt together.
Story_ID: 449627
Speaker 1: Now you have to understand too, the mainstream America in a very con- conservative economic climate, especially when it comes to funding of the arts, a board being able to say we're going to close down the doors to get our act together internally first is actually quite impressive, it's actually quite impressive because people look at that and say you know what they're facing their own demons that's good, they're pulling themselves up by their own bootstraps, how American. But inside it had nothing to do with that at all. Does debt make it hard, yeah, yes it does, but a lot of people have debt but they maintain integrity and that's what works them out of that debt. They work together and that's what works them out of their struggles. In this situation it didn't matter how much money people put down on the Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] table, if the people in that room around that table are not getting along the money will go to waste, there will be no plan. So Crossroads never got the money that was on the table because all the people with the money was asking for was a plan and they were able to produce a strategic plan. The reason that I talk about this a lot is because it is not to explain a period in time at Crossroads, it is not to explain away debt. Debt is not a good thing. I know when I've made mistakes. When I've made mistakes financially it's because I've spent more money than we could afford, simple, but sometimes I didn't, sometimes I did well but I did make mistakes. The debt was not caused by me or by me alone. The debt was caused by the fact that the year we moved into a brand new building, that cost triple the amount of money we had, we also were cut in half in terms of our money from the arts council [New Jersey State Council on the Arts] because in that year New Jersey went into a recession. It was the perfect storm for Crossroads and everybody hoped that we would do well in the building, but we built up a debt in those first two years because we had much less--we had $300,000 less in state funding and we had about $500,000 more in bills and we didn't know how to do it. We were operating before in a little loft now we're here, we didn't know how to do it. Our union laws changed, our scale changed everything went sky high and we didn't know how to handle it. The board of Crossroads in the new building was the same board in the old building. They were no more powerful just because we moved in a new building. They didn't have bigger pockets, we just didn't know and we did our best to grow, we did our best to learn but we didn't know.
Story_ID: 449628
Speaker 1: So by the time I left, I knew how to do good work, I knew how to do work that meant something, I knew how to help new artists emerge, and we got the Tony [Regional Theater Tony Award], and also I knew that after twenty years I wanted somebody in there who could do it better than me. So when I left, I left feeling really good, like I accomplished something and we all felt good, we just didn't have a plan and with only an interim team in place, a fractured board and me in Trinidad saying they've got to find themselves, they have to learn how to walk on their own, they didn't. They stumbled, they fell and they blamed it on the money. We as a people do that so often and that's why I talk about it. We don't get to the real lesson, which is internal, it's within, it's about integrity, it's about us finding out, learning how to get along. History will show so much strife not between black and white people as much as between black and black people, so much strife. The year I left, while I was in Trinidad we did our first Latino play called 'Yellow Eyes' by a woman named Migdalia Cruz, and I had worked with her as she was developing that piece for a couple of years. I was so proud, even though I wasn't going to be there, I was proud that Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was going to do this piece because we have to, if we're going to be called Crossroads, we have to understand that the play we do can't just be about black and white people, it's got to be about black and other brown people too, all kinds of people. Here we're going to do this. But I had staff members saying I don't understand why we're doing this play. We fight each other too much, and then we turn around and blame something else. So I want to be clear money was an issue. The debt at Crossroads was huge compared to what our budget was, and it became impossible to make ends meet after a while. It was time to close the doors when people just didn't get along, and didn't want to work together to try and figure out how to get to that impossible dream whatever it was. It was always impossible quote unquote, it was always hard, we were always working with a little less than what we had because our dream was so high and we were brought up to believe in dreams. We just weren't prepared for what was going to happen when we moved into that new building, and you know who else wasn't prepared the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC]. When they moved into a building out of St. Mark's [St. Mark's Playhouse, New York, New York] and in to Midtown [New York, New York], they weren't prepared and all of a sudden things went sky high, and it wasn't a company leading the organization anymore it was a building and that's what happened at Crossroads too. So when I look back on the Negro Ensemble Company and I say, well was it really all about money? From what I understand no it wasn't. That too was about the changing of leadership, the moving from being a founder to an institutionally driven theater company. The infighting that is caused by all of that pressure, the pressure is not all about money. The pressure is about what do you envision for the future? Do you have a plan and does everybody buy in to that plan and if you do then you work through the debt and you get to that star that you aimed for. But if you're not all working together you will never get to the star, you won't get to the moon, you won't get across the street and so it closed and the mighty, noble reason for closing to get ourselves together or pull ourselves up. After two years they still couldn't figure it out. They still have not gotten rid of the debt because they didn't--they still were not cohesive behind good, strong leadership and more importantly vision.
Story_ID: 449629
Speaker 1: So, I was asked to come back and I came back in, I think 2003 or so. I tried to help them a little bit and then I started my first season with them in 2000--for the 2003, 2004 season. It was a small season, but it was a beginning again. It was not building focused, we didn't have a large staff, we only had a couple of people, but it was an exciting and interesting time for me because it was challenging again. It was about, let me see if I can play my role in helping to build it back again. Helping others who by that time had come back to try to do the same thing, to build it back up. Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] was not the only thing I was doing at the time. So I did bring perspective that I might not have had before. But it's been a slow climb to today, but Crossroads is back and it is doing well and this year was the first time in ten years Crossroads took a show to the National Black Theatre Festival in Winston-Salem, North Carolina in July of 2007, at the center in North Carolina to open the whole festival was the Crossroads' production of Glynn Turman in 'Movin' Man.' So there's a lot to be proud of. I look back on things and probably the most important thing I look for are the lessons.
Story_ID: 449630
Speaker 1: There's always this (background noise) question that comes up when you've reached a point of recognition like the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], which is what's next, and if your mission was driven by a void in the beginning, like it was with Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] that there was a void, there weren't opportunities for black actors well now there are. There are no theaters that do black works, well now there are. Our stories are not being told, well now they are. So if you're doing that, if it's happening what next? If that's your mission, then you've accomplished your mission, so what next? It's not that you have to answer that for other people, you have to answer it for yourself because that's what drives you through the rough times, it drives you through the night, is what must you do? What is your mission? What is it that you must do the way a Don Quixote would march into hell for? For heavenly cause, what is your heavenly cause and Crossroads hit that point where it had to ask that question. We just didn't do it well in answering it. The Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] had reached that point and might not have done it as well as it would have liked. The Market Theatre [Johannesburg, South Africa] in South Africa, famous for works that were about anti-apartheid, well what happens when now Mandela [Nelson Mandela] is your president, now what is your mission? They had to go through that. I didn't have the answers for Crossroads, but I knew the answers for me, which is I wanted to go back to finding that artist in me again that's what I wanted, and that's why I needed to leave. It was hard leaving my baby, quote unquote, but I wanted that baby to stand up and walk and run and all of that, but more importantly I needed for me to find the artist in me again, the human being again, the person who comes away from the back of the desk and who may not necessarily know what his future is going to be, but just like any artist is open to it and if you run an institution you have to have a plan. But sometimes that goes against the grain of creating good art, and so I wanted to learn about who [HistoryMaker] Ricardo Khan was without a plan, without an institution, without a box so to speak and get out there. And when I left Crossroads that's what I went to find.
Story_ID: 449631
Speaker 1: A large part of what I wanted to do, knowing that 'Yellow Eyes' [Migdalia Cruz] didn't do well at Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] because people didn't understand why Crossroads was doing a Latino show, was to become more international in my work, and starting the World Theater Lab, which is a company that has no walls, that has no unions, that has no funding, that has no box, no building nothing, just a desire for me to work with other writers in and around this country and the world, is part of what I want to leave in my legacy. That as black people in this country our roots span the globe. They are not just there to define us as, "I'm So-and-So from the block," or, "I'm So-and-So from New Jersey or Brooklyn [New York] or United States," because if you do that then you are always defining yourself in relation to a legacy of slavery. What I'm looking for is something broader, something more empowering and I do find that when I talk to other immigrant groups and other people, black people and brown people from around the world, that we have a lot in common. There are amazing doors that need to be opened and there are eyes that need to be opened, in the same way Malcolm [Malcolm X] opened his eyes when he left the country and found other people who were like him. No they didn't look like him but inside. I'm looking for the inside, I'm looking for the common ground and I'm hoping that that can be shared in a contemporary way. But the other part of it and--so that's one of things I do now, but the other that I wish I could have done better at Crossroads was leave strong leadership for a next generation. I was never able to groom a next generation. So I find myself now, working at the Lincoln Center--at the Lincoln Center Institute [Lincoln Center Institute for the Arts in Education, New York, New York], which is devoted to young people. I work with interns there who are high schoolers trying to learn while they work with me as we present--produce work, new works about the Tuskegee Airmen about apartheid about the Negro baseball leagues, these sorts of plays that go out to the schools as well as work at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]. And I love it because I feel I'm part of creating that new generation, and I am a visiting professor at the theater graduate program at the University of Missouri in Kansas City [University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri], and I am part of helping to train a new generation of people. Will they come up to become what Crossroads was or me or whoever that doesn't matter to me. Do the writers in the World Theater Lab aspire to create works that will become great theater works, that doesn't inspire me? What matters to me is that we can use our talents, our connections, our desires, our work to make people fuller people, students that are citizens. Writers more, better collaborators no matter where we're operating. Whether in Johannesburg [South Africa] or in London [England] or in New York [New York] at The Lark theater, these are the basis of the World Theater Lab. But also in Kansas City [Missouri] these young people who are in a professional theater training program, I want them to be better people. The kids who come to be interns at Lincoln Center who work with me, I want them to be better people and the works that we do at Crossroads, I want to see that inspire the next leadership team at the Crossroads Theatre Company, so that while I'm always going to be connected perhaps as just a consultant and advisor but I want to see its future bright and I want to see it develop for a new world.
Story_ID: 449632
Speaker 1: See, I think that it was our first year, I think I was one year old something like that and my parents took this picture. This is me and they turned it into their Christmas card for that year. We were living in Arlington, Virginia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About what age are you there?
Speaker 1: I think I was one, I think I was a little over one years old. Does that look like a one year old person?
Speaker 2: Maybe two.
Speaker 1: Maybe two, one or two I'd say one or two we were living in Arlington and my father and my--parents were still involved with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: If he'll ask you, "Well, how old was that person?" You'd say, "Well, I say it's about that big." I was about that big, I was on a bike and I think that was Arlington also. The first born, little Ricky [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Those are my grandparents on my mother's side. That's my papa and my nana and nana was from--Helen Driver from Jersey City, New Jersey and my papa was Richard Driver, Sr. originally from Arli- from Virginia. I don't know where that picture is taken but they sure do look sharp.
Speaker 1: That was in Trinidad when I left Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] I took a one year sabbatical. I didn't plan anything, I just said let me just go with the flow and be open to whatever happens and the Ministry of Culture [Ministry of Community Development, Culture and the Arts] in Trinidad heard I was there and I wanted very much to reconnect with artists and art and I wanted to connect with the artists down there. These are students, people, adults who were learning directing and I was teaching a directing workshop in central Trinidad, Saturday morning.
Speaker 2: That--those are the brothers. Those--that is my brother Mustapha, Jr. [Mustapha Khan], Amir [Amir Khan], me and Rasheed [Rasheed Khan].
Speaker 1: That had to be at a family outing. One of those July 4ths that my father loved so much. That's my father there Dr. Mustapha Khan [Mustapha Khan, Sr.] and he is flanked by my brother, Mustapha, on one side and my nephew, Shane [Shane Khan], S-H-A-N-E and above is my sister on the left that's Sherena [Sherena Khan] and Sherena is Shane's mother. There is my mother [Jacqueline Driver Khan] on the right posing sharp and I didn't realize that the dog is there too, Lucky. Lucky.
Speaker 2: Well now this is in New Brunswick [New Jersey] on the site the new Crossroads Theatre Company was built and I was standing there, I would say that that's probably the stage where I'm standing or what was to become the stage, New Brunswick Crossroads Theatre.
Speaker 1: Well you see at Crossroads we--it was a gathering of great wonderful souls and spirits, people from all over the country. You see, in this case you have three very prominent artist, in the middle is August Wilson, you know, the Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Drama] winning, Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] winning playwright, who is no longer with us but he is still the greatest American playwright, and to his right is Walter Dallas who is the artistic director of the Freedom Theatre [New Freedom Theatre] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and to his left is [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison who is a writer, playwright and educator.
Speaker 2: Wow, when Crossroads opened its doors to the new building the first thing we did was we put down a time capsule and it's to be opened in the year 2010, and in that time capsule are the original programs of all the shows we did, a couple of the scripts, probably 'The Colored Museum' [George C. Wolfe] script is in there, the very first draft. We also have a video of the staff back then talking to the staff of 2010 and I'm there with [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas, who's there on the left.  She was an associate artist and great friend of Crossroads and on the right one of the member of our guild.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, Smokey, he did a benefit for Crossroads years ago, wonderful guy.
Speaker 2: That is Rosa Parks, gosh the mother of the movement, inspiration to me to Crossroads to all of us. We did a play about her and she came and she didn't just come to see that one show, she was there with us the whole weekend.
Speaker 1: And we were, we were out at dinner at our restaurant in New Brunswick and I kept on moving her around because I didn't want her in the chill, I didn't want her here, I didn't want her to die. You know what I mean?
Speaker 2: While you're out with me please don't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah and we sat there--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): How old was Rosa Parks at that time?
Speaker 1: She had to be in her eighties and she was there and she was--we were sitting around a table and the food comes and all I could think about is, god let her food be good and she looks at her food and she looks over at me and says, "You going to eat that?" (Laughter) She started eating off my--yeah, I said she's real, she's just real, it is great.
Speaker 2: This is Hal Scott [Harold Scott] who is no longer with us, but Hal Scott was the director of the first professional job I had as an actor in 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] in Massachusetts, and he also became associate artist at Crossroads, he was also a wonderful director and headed the directing program at Mason Gross School of the Arts [New Brunswick, New Jersey] and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee was also an associate artist at Crossroads and she and Hal had collaborated on a couple of shows together.
Story_ID: 449633
Speaker 1: That is the governor--then governor of New Jersey, then Dr. Penelope Lattimer who is the--oh I should say these names, right? Governor Florio [James Florio] was the governor of New Jersey when Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] moved into its new building, Dr. Penelope E. Lattimer was our president of our board but she had been president for a long time and one of the greatest supporters and leaders of Crossroads and to my left is Bill Cosby who called us one day and, just out of the blue, and said, "How can I help you?"  We didn't know him, I mean personally and he didn't know us but he wanted to be a part so he came and I thought he was going to do just one performance. He ended up doing five performances as a benefit to Crossroads. One in the new building which seats three hundred and then the other four he did in a theater that sat two thousand, so he really got us a big financial jump start in the first year of Crossroads in the new building in the first season. We did anything and everything we could to get that theater open in time and Cruise [ph.] worked around the clock to get it open. This is happening on that night, his first performance there and it was the first performance of the new theater and we finally got everything ready, we got the audience in, they were still in the lobby in the reception while we were laying down carpet in the new building--in the theater itself. We finally opened theater doors, we'd hoped and prayed that people wouldn't touch the paint too hard and everything was going perfectly and we thought we had them fooled. Cosby comes out and the first thing he says to the audience is, "Man it looks like Las Vegas [Nevada] out here this place is so beautiful. But back stage (laughter) it's like Alabama," and then all of a sudden everybody just jumped and the bottom line was that we only had time to get his dressing room cleaned but he had a lot of fun while he was with us and he also stayed with us that entire weekend.
Speaker 2: Lloyd Boston became the, one of the leading African American designers of clothes coming out of Tommy Hilfiger's team and Lloyd is from New Brunswick, New Jersey and we saw him grow up as a kid and then he launched a new book ['Men of Color: Fashion, History, Fundamentals,' Lloyd Boston] and this was at the launching of that book at Crossroads and they somehow convinced me to let them dress me in some hip hop stuff and be part of this whole fashion show or whatever you call it (laughter) and so I was hip hop or whatever you call it that night.
Speaker 1: That is my dad [Mustapha Khan, Sr.]. My dad goes bowling every Wednesday, we're at the bowling alley and that was Wednesday when we decided to take some pictures. There is a score you see on that monitor there, but I don't know what it is, I'm sure you can't get it but the point is my father must have been proud because (laughter) he wanted to make sure that we got the score in there also, Wednesdays bowling.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, you mean on the TV monitor.
Speaker 1: That's a bowling monitor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No it's not in focus.
Speaker 1: No, yeah I'm sure; I did do a three hundred game though.
Speaker 2: Well that was the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] that was given to Crossroads when it won in 1999 for the Most Outstanding Theater--Regional Theater in the country [Regional Theater Tony Award] and it was the first time that a black theater or any theater of color received this particular Tony Award, so it was very special and I was able to receive it on TV from [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad who is a big supporter of Crossroads.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is inscribed as the name of your theater or it just says American Theater (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so--yeah for the--
Speaker 1: How many of these did you get?
Speaker 2: You know--oh here it is, yes, inscribed on the back.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you mind reading what it says there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This actually is a duplicate you see because this one I got as a duplicate for Crossroads to keep in the lobby but then when the theater closed they said, "Ric [HistoryMaker Ricardo Khan] hold it until we're,"--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The League of American Theaters and Producers [Broadway League] and the American Theatre Wing present the American Theatre Wing's Tony Award to Crossroads Theatre Company, Outstanding Regional Theater, June 6, 1999.
