Story_ID: 83440
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers; videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Samuel "Billy" Kyles; S-A-M-U-E-L, B-I-L-L-Y, K-Y-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: And can you explain the name, Billy, if your name is Samuel.  How do they get Billy?
Speaker 2: It is interesting.  When I was a boy, my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] was a minister.  My mom [Ludie Kyles] said I use to preach all the time.  I use to find dead birds and bury them, I'd baptize the chickens and the--and all that.  And there was a famous preacher out in those days, Billy Sunday, so my mom started calling me Billy.  My given name was Samuel Lee, and I only knew Billy until I started school and they started calling me Samuel.  My brothers tease me very often about being named after a southern Baptist white preacher and I'm Mr. Civil Rights in Memphis, so--but I had my name legally changed to Samuel Billy because many of my friends knew me as Billy and others knew me as Samuel, so--and it's not uncommon to have two first names in the south like Bobby Joe and Willy May.
Speaker 1: And another point, though, that I have noticed and tell, you know, and confirm this.  A lot of people in the south have more than one name, they have a given name and they have another name people call them by, and we're always surprised what they're real name is because people use their other name a lot.
Speaker 2: That's true.  It's usually a nickname and they get stuck with it and that's what people call them.  I had made some, whatever, a remark in Memphis--in Chicago as a singer before I was preaching, and I would sing under Billy Kyles and people knew me as that.  I can almost tell where people knew me from when they talked to me or called my name.  If they said, Samuel, I knew they weren't warm and fuzzy friends, but if they said, Billy, I knew they were.  But it was always confusing to other people because they would put Reverend William Kyles, and I wasn't William at all, so that's why most of the time I will list Samuel Billy so I get both groups that know me either way.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  All right.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 26th, 1934 and I was born in Shelby, Mississippi; a little town about ninety-nine miles from Memphis [Tennessee].  I have five brothers now.  My dad was a minister who had four churches.  It was not uncommon.  Each Sunday you--he would go to a different church.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about him.  But we're--I'm trying to get us, I guess, get the slating done.  You know, I kind of diverted there asking you about your name, but what is your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I am a minister of Monumental Baptist Church in Memphis, Tennessee for forty-three years, and I use to wonder as a young preacher--I would see a sign saying, "help us celebrate our pastor's 40th anniversary," and I would say to myself, why would somebody want to stay there that long, and I found out.  You don't know where the years go, they go so quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we--oh--I'm sorry, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, as far as I can tell, is February the 14th.
Speaker 1: Thirteenth?
Speaker 2: Thirteenth, I'm sorry.  My schedule is unreal--2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois at The HistoryMakers' headquarters, 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 83441
Speaker 1: Now, before we get into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that we always ask.  And they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food, I like fruit; apples, oranges, grapes.  I think grapes would top the list.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Warm climate places; the islands, Polynesian Islands, Greek Isles, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I say it very often to my congregation and to other people; "Don't you dare give up, no matter what life has dealt you, hold on," and they give me little cards and--you said short answers, okay.  "Don't you dare give up."
Speaker 1: Well, you can explain it a little bit?
Speaker 2: No, it's something that comes back to me in many ways.  People who say I had to have--I had surgery and my relatives could only go to the operating room door, and I can hear pastor's voice saying, "Don't you dare give up," and it seemingly has helped a great number of people through--and myself, too, included, through difficult times in their lives.
Story_ID: 83442
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  How far can you go back in your family once--in terms of ancestry, how far can you go back and--
Speaker 2: Regrettably, not very far.  When I was growing up, there really were no family reunions in those times.  I'm sixty-eight years old now.  I can remember both of my grandmothers, but not--I have no knowledge of grandfather.  I know that on my mother's side, her father was as much as Indian, but I don't know what.  My son, my youngest son, has been asking questions like this and I'm embarrassed not to have that information.  My mother's mother looked very Indian and, you know, and from Alabama there were a lot of cases where blacks married Native Americans, but I can remember both grandmothers, but I don't have any knowledge of either of my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Are there any stories that have been passed down through the family about what life was like, you know, during slavery or during the Civil War or reconstruction or--
Speaker 2: Not in my family, no.  The most--one of the most interesting stories I remember about my Uncle Buck.  I remembered Uncle Buck, he was my mother's uncle, and he looked just like a white man.  Uncle Buck just decided to live black, but he could have lived white as easily, and his brother, my mother's father, had a Winchester rifle and said that he was really good with that.  I mean, I don't think he was killing people.  I guess, as a hunter, he was good with that rifle.  My mother's mother, I use to remember her hair changing colors not because of age but because of almost of seasons, it attracted me.  But Uncle Buck, never a religious person.  I remember him having been baptized in a tub, in a bathtub.  He was too sick to go to church.  He wasn't a bad person, he just never embraced any particular religion, and I could remember as a kid where they baptized Uncle Buck in a bathtub, but--and he didn't, you know, he didn't--I don't think it--I don't know of any time that he tried to pass--that he passed or--as we call it in those days if you--some people could live on both sides.  He chose to go ahead and live black.  I don't have any of those other stories about treatment.  I know my father [Joseph Henry Kyles] said he was so glad to get off the farm, that he washed his face in a tin tub and said he would never go back to farming, and my mother who was younger than my dad, they met and married and she said I don't want to have any kids, but if I have to have some I want all boys, and she had all boys.  She was a mother of seven boys.  But the stories of what happened on the farm or what happened sharecropping or that sort of thing, I don't know if they owned their own farm and--I just never--we never talked about it.
Story_ID: 83443
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family.  Where was your mother [Ludie Kyles] born and what--
Speaker 2: In Alabama, I don't know what city, but she was born in Alabama, and I'm not even sure how she and my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] met.  I think part of it, probably, had--well, part of it probably had to do with all boys.  Boys don't think about having, you know, certain things they don't--girls probably would have asked, how did you and daddy meet or something, but since we were all boys, that never came up with any of us, really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what kind of person was she and what did she--did she go to school in Alabama, or was she able to do that or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I understand it, she and my dad met--I'm not sure how they met or where, and I don't think it was anything like love at first sight, as much as she wanted to get away from home, too.  Eighteen, she wanted to get away, and so they married.  Mom, she was an ultimate homemaker.  I always remember her as that.  She just made a great home for us.  She was gorgeous like everybody's mom.  She was truly gorgeous, and they called her queen, her brothers and sisters.  She had, oh, at least seven brothers and sisters, and they called her queen.  She was the queen.  They called her queen, and I don't have that many memories of Shelby [Mississippi] where I grew up because, I guess, I was about four or five when we left, left Shelby.  But I do remember growing up, you know, in just a wonderful home environment.  She never worked.  She was strictly homemaker, and one of the things that continues to occur to me is that she did this--and when my father died here in Chicago, she hardly knew how to go and pay her light bills.  She didn't know where you go to pay your light bill or utility bill or--she didn't have any of those skills at all.  She had to develop that afterwards because she was strictly the homemaker.
Story_ID: 83444
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father [Joseph Henry Kyles].  You know, what was he like and, you know, where did he come from?
Speaker 2: Dad was rather mild mannered.  Mom [Ludie Kyles] was taller than he was, and he pastored four different churches.  I don't know when he came into the ministry or--but I know some of his contemporaries who are still living as a matter of fact.  And he was always thought of as a, you know, great guy by his contemporaries.
Speaker 1: Did he grow up in Shelby [Mississippi], too, or--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Mississippi; Shaw, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I meet a lot of people who knew him from Shaw, and they'll say, you know, you're Reverend Kyles' son, did your daddy come from Shaw, Mississippi?  I think he grew up in Shaw, Mississippi.  And he worked his way up through--I think his education level was eighth or ninth grade, and he worked his way up through the ranks to be one of the leaders in the convention and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 83445
Speaker 1: It is said that--
Speaker 2: The National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 1: The National Baptist Convention, yes.  It is said that when Dr. Jackson, J.H. Jackson, who was here at Olivet Church.  Whenever he was having a pretty rough day, he would call on my father to pray to the convention and calm it down, and my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] was a great prayer in the National Baptist Convention.  What was so interesting is that we moved--he thought--I've heard him say this--he said, "I better get my boys out of Mississippi," and so there was a plane crash with ministers on board; L.K. Williams, who was the pastor of Olivet here and a Convention President; National Baptist Convention, here in Olivet Church here.  That was T.H. Haynes.  There were several preachers on the plane that crashed and that left that--churches open for pastors.  J.H. Jackson got Olivet, my father got Mount Pleasant [Missionary Baptist Church], one of the fellows--Haynes was on the plane, and he and J.H. Jackson were friends and contemporaries.  Olivet was not far from Mount Pleasant.  Mount Pleasant was at 31st and Cottage Grove; Olivet was at 31st and South Parkway then.  Now, it's King Drive, and so as a boy I played basketball and games at Olivet Church that other churches never had.  Olivet was one of the progressive black churches in America.  They had dance groups and all that in and at the church, so they were contemporaries.  When my father gave up the four churches and came to Chicago and was elected to this church--I'm not sure what year.  It was in the 40's [1940], and so I went to school here, Douglas Elementary School. For a while, Wendell Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and it was going very well at the church.  My dad grew the church and all that, and then he was stricken with cancer and died in--we were living in the church parsonage a block from the church.  We were on Rhodes and the church was on Cottage Grove, and he was sick a long time with cancer, lung cancer, and it was very hard on all of us, you know, when he died.  I had just gotten in high school when that happened. But dad was, he was very mild mannered, but firm.  You know, I don't remember getting a whipping from him.  He would appeal to my mind, and I was not preaching when he was living.  I was doing some singing, but Mount Pleasant [Missionary Baptist Church] was a warm and loving church.  It's still going.
Speaker 2: Is it a large church or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a large church, and that's all he ever did after he--after he left the farm, he was just pastor.  He never worked any place else.
Story_ID: 83446
Speaker 1: Another--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now-(simultaneous)--you go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, another interesting thing was that I never saw my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] in sport clothes.  He always had a shirt and tie on.  If he went hunting he'd put his hunting suit over his shirt and tie.  I never ever saw him.  And pretty much--it followed with me.  My kids had to start buying me sport clothes once I was in the ministry.  Daddy, you're going to wear that, you're going to wear that?  And it just rubbed right off on me.  I mean, now, I wear a variety of clothes, but I never saw him.  If he was going fishing or going hunting or wherever he was going he had a shirt and tie on all the time, and I remember they were going--there was a National Baptist Convention in California, and they'd have a train that had two or three cars reserved for them, and he was always selected to preach on the train.  You'd preach--you'd have sermons all the way out to California and always he was selected to preach.  And for a time I traveled with him just as a kid.  I mean, I loved to go to the conventions and I'll be up in the balcony or something, and he was very much involved in it.  But I have just strong and warm memories of my father as short as that was.  He was only fifty-one when he died.  And then the church elected the next pastor after my dad--who was not that kind to us.  The church wanted to be, but, you know, there were no retirement programs and all that.  The church wanted to be kind, but he wouldn't allow them.  And so it did something to me.  I kind of left the church, but eventually I did come back and then I said I'd never live in a church parsonage.  I'd always have my own house because we had to get out and there was some difficult years behind that, but mom [Ludie Kyles] got us through it and made me grow up fast, grew up real fast.
Story_ID: 83447
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about growing up in a sense.  I mean, you told me something already, but I want you to reflect back and maybe tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells and growing up from whatever you can remember of Shelby [Mississippi] and then Chicago--your first impression of Chicago (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, once, I guess--I don't have a lot of memories of Shelby.  I do remember school for a bit, because they called me Samuel, because it was written, and I didn't know who they were talking about.  I would not answer sometimes.  And then we lived very close to a funeral home, Hank's Funeral Home.  I don't think it was across the street, but it was somewhere near, and I've gone back to Shelby maybe two or three times as close as I am, I don't go that often and they tried to get me to come back because a native son--because Shelby eventually elected a black Mayor and had big dealings.  I remember church, St. Andrew's church.  That was our church.  I have memories of that.  And I remember once someone got stabbed near the school in a fight, and they died.  I think a woman stabbed her husband or something like that, and I remember my mom [Ludie Kyles] said I preached about the blood because blood was all over the sidewalk and I just preached about the blood, about the blood.
Speaker 1: You preached about it as a--
Speaker 2: As a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like I use to--
Speaker 1: That's why she called you Billy Sunday, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.  I could just see that blood on the sidewalk, and it was so interesting because--if I just fast forward.  I'll get to that when you ask me about it, but I remember that and really no, no unusual or outstanding things I remember that much about Shelby.
Speaker 1: But it wasn't the farm--simultaneous--you all were in town?
Speaker 2: No, we were in town, yes, yes and had a nice house.  I think my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] had it built or something of that sort, but nothing--I don't remember anything racial at all.  We lived the way we lived, and I hardly remember white people in Shelby.  I mean, they were there, but I don't remember anything particular that happened, no black skin beat up or put out or things of that sort.
Story_ID: 83448
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Chicago [Illinois]?  Now, is it--how old were you when the family moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Four or five, I guess.  All the buildings--one of the things that struck me so much how the buildings all went together.
Speaker 1: Close together?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I went out to play one day, and I couldn't--I didn't know what house I lived in because they all looked--the row houses looked alike.  And I'm sitting outside, you know, wondering how--where's my house, and I'm just over across the street playing ball in the lot, and I couldn't find my house.  I think eventually somebody came out.  We lived in the church parsonage.  We lived on the second floor.  The first floor, one of the deacons lived with his family, and he was responsible for upkeep of the house, I mean, the building and fire in the furnace.  I remember that; that you had to go down there and put coal in the furnace.  You could walk around to the church and--Chicago was so huge.  I mean, all this stuff going on and then we were kind of settled in and I got--my oldest brother worked at a candy store on 31st Street and eventually I went to work there.  It was kind of a soda jerk or something, and I remember the 31st Street beach.  Every kid that takes a bath thinks he can swim, so I'm at 31st Street beach with my older brother, and I jump off this thing because I know I can swim, but I couldn't swim a lick.  And, oh, I went under.  When I came up, I fought my way back to the shore.  I remember once I was at the beach--I don't know why I had my good shoes at the beach, my Buster Brown shoes, but somebody stole my shoes and it was close--it was Saturday before Easter so I had to beg dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] to take me to the store again and buy me some more shoes.  I remember the fights of Joe Louis, and I almost quit my job because they were--the candy store was owned by some Greek brothers and they had all kind of nuts and--and they even made candy at the place, and they didn't want me to go home because when Joe Louis fought, or Sugar Ray Robson, the streets were clear of black people.  You were right at somebody's radio listening, and I wanted to go home and listen to the fight and he wouldn't let me.  So I said, "I quit," and I went home, but he hired me back, to hear the fights.  And then later on one of my dad's members had a little television, and it wasn't far from the candy store that I worked in, and I used to go up there and watch TV if there was something spectacular going on.  It's funny how these kind of memories come back to you, but I also remember, you know, it didn't occur to me until I was a grown man that I lived in a ghetto because we had school and churches and stores--sociologists had to tell me that I lived there.  We had everything that a neighbor--a community and a neighborhood had.
Story_ID: 83449
Speaker 1: We never thought about living in no poverty or anything of that sort.  We just lived, and it was--I remember a man on the corner who had skins. He had a little cart, and off that cart--skins was the outside of the hog.  The skin of the hog where they scrape all the fat off, cook them.  Now, everybody's got them.  I mean, the bread companies and stuff, they have skins.  But this--it's where it started in the black community, and they were the best skins.  You get a bag of skins and hot sauce, and then later on you can get tripe, some of the inners of it--not chitterlings but the tripe, of the hog or the cow or the whatever.  And why I remember that is I said, now, if he could have--I'm sure he didn't make any more than a living out of it.  He had this--he had hot dogs and all that stuff on the corner, and then these companies come along and they find a way to cook them fast and blow them up, and they make millions out of it, but it started right there on the corner, 31st and Cottage Grove, and 31st and Rhodes.  But it was a good community, rarely was there violence.  I remember mom [Ludie Kyles] and dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] got into a discussion about whether I could have a motorbike.  I wanted a motor scooter.  That was the big thing, a Cushman motor scooter.  If you had that, you were big time.  And dad was going to get one, but mom said, "No, that thing is too fast for him," but she did let me get a motorbike, and I don't know the difference in a bike and a scooter, but she said you can get a bike but you couldn't get--I let one of the guys in the neighborhood ride my motorbike, and he went off and got hit by a car, busted his leg all up and another guy, E.C., big strong guy came walking down the street with my bike on his shoulder and it was bent together almost, and C.W. had gotten hit by a car and my mother said, "See there." And I said, "Yeah, but if it had of been a scooter, it wouldn't have been torn up as badly."  I wouldn't think about C.W.'s leg, I was thinking about my bike.  The Staple Singers also lived in my neighborhood.  We were friends.  Sam Cooke lived somewhere in the neighborhood, we use to sing up under the street lights together.  And I have warm and loving--and the people of the church, you know, how they treat the pastor's kid.  I loved that, and they embrace me because like any other kid, I tried to slip out when it was preaching time, too.
Story_ID: 84272
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're rolling again.  But, I wanted to ask you about some of the people in the neighborhood that you mentioned; the Staples Singers and the Staples family.  You know, what were they like, and --
Speaker 2: Great people.  We'd--and Mavis was such a phenomenon with that deep voice she had, but they could sing--I mean, they could sing everything, really, folk songs and gospel songs and use to sing in my dad's church [Mt. Pleasant Missionary Baptist Church], but we were great friends, the whole family.  I would sing with them sometimes, not out publicly, just in rehearsals, I would sing with them, and I--I was a high tenor in those days.  As a matter of fact, earlier I was almost like a soprano and then--I enjoyed rehearsing with the girls, and when I got really big enough to appreciate it, my voice changed so I had to rehearse with the boys.
Story_ID: 84273
Speaker 1: Sam Cooke and I--I love just singing with anybody.  I'd sing--
Speaker 2: What was Sam Cooke like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --under the street light.  Sam was a little bad boy (laughter), always in trouble.  Not with the Lord or anything, but girl-wise and otherwise, he's--he was--but he had, you know, a voice of the Century, really.  He really did.  And singing with the--a group called the Highway Q.C.'s, and they graduated from that to the Soul Stirrers, who were already quite prominent in the black community nationwide--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --the Soul Stirrers.  And when Sam went to the Soul Stirrers, he stayed with them until he got this offer to sing what they call secular, and he grabbed it.  And his first--I think "You Send Me" or something like that was his first, and he just zoomed to the top, just zoom.  I didn't see much of him after that, but whenever he would see me, we were always cordial and he hit it really, really big.  It was such a tragedy to lose him and that voice.  I mean, I play some of his records now just to let the kids hear him and know who he is and who he was.  Tragic death, tragic death.
Speaker 2: Yeah, his music seemed special in the sense that there was always a story or sentiment in the music that--a lot of times that really--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: --struck people deeply.  You know, "The Chain Gang" and--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: He hit it really big, and in those days it was--I mean, a lot of debate because they're always trying to get Mahalia [Jackson].  Mahalia, I knew quite well because she was singing at my dad's church [Mt. Pleasant Missionary Baptist Church], too, and come by the house very often.  She, they tried to get her to sing secular and she just wouldn't--they offered her all kind of money, and she said--she wouldn't do it.  So there was always this debate about, have you gone to the Devil now?  Is Sam going to the Devil, and then he was one of those pioneers for the crossover, when it was really a crossover.  And, I mean, nobody assumed that he went to the Devil.  He's just singing another song, and then when the Staples [Singers] did it, they started doing--but they did a lot of movement songs and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and protest songs and the foc--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: And Sam Cooke singing "Change Is Going To Come" [sic, "A Change Is Gonna Come"
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was--a lot of people in the movement took that up as a--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --anthem, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And then a push with the Staples Singers and all their great hits.
Speaker 1: I had a close relationship with Stacks records during those times, too, when they started recording with Stacks.
Story_ID: 84274
Speaker 1: But in Chicago [Illinois], I grew up in this wonderful environment of music.  Chicago--they were trying to say Detroit was the mecca for gospel singing, but Chicago really was.  You had Thomas Dorsey here--
Speaker 2: He was father of gospel music.
Speaker 1: Father of gospel music, yeah.
Speaker 2: He wrote a lot of the gospel hits.
Speaker 1: Yes.  The Roberta Martin singers. Roberta Martin was a pioneer, and she had a youth group and I sang with the youth group for Roberta Martin.  I just loved it.  I remember the first time I rode in a Cadillac, it was her car.  And the sad part was nobody saw me.  I couldn't see--(laughter).  There was nobody to see me get out of that Cadillac.  I said, "Oh, My God." (Laughter)  They picked me up at home and then dropped me someplace, drop me at home, and I couldn't do it.  And, you know, The Caravans and James Cleveland.  James Cleveland and I use to church hop.  They call it church hop.  Everybody had a broadcast after eight o'clock.  We'd go to this church and leave there and go to that church; go to Clarence Cobbs, go to Reverend Thurston's, go to All Nations Pentecostal Church and sometimes we just come on up and sing with the choir, hadn't been to rehearsal or anything.
Speaker 2: Well you're naming all these legends of--in the music and in the church community.  National legends here, you know, I mean gee-whiz, that's a--
Speaker 1: Always--
Speaker 2: --must have been a really exciting environment.
Speaker 1: It was thrilling for me.
Speaker 2: Music itself was just driving music.  I mean, just some of the greatest music, I think, produced--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And it's so interesting now--(unclear) the same conversations that went along with--the same conversations that went on with whether Thomas Dorsey had put this rhythm that was unchurchy.  It's happening now, are these artists putting a different rhythm that's unchurchy, and so it goes on.  It goes on.  He was criticized as much as Kirk Franklin and that group is criticized.  "Oh, Kirk started out so well, I mean, he just started out with all these beautiful songs.  Now, he's got all this stuff, all this junk."  They were saying, "Thomas, he's got too much rhythm in it--he can't--they can't--you can't do that in church," and that argument goes on, but people gravitate to it.  Mahalia was--she was a card.  I just loved Mahalia [Jackson].  She was just so herself and loved to cook.  She'd cook for you.  She and Aretha's father were great friends, and I was great friends with her father and Aretha [Franklin].
Speaker 2: There was a lot of fellowship between Detroit and Chicago?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  James Cleveland went to Chicago--went to Detroit for a while and directed Reverend Franklin's choir.  He stayed there for a while.  When I started preaching as a young person, Reverend Franklin tried to get me to come to Detroit and live and be his assistant pastor, and go to school there and all that, but I didn't have any feel for Detroit, so--
Speaker 2: And this is Aretha Franklin's father, C.L. Franklin--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And James Cleveland is famous for the football game of life and other--
Speaker 1: Yes.  James--James was a genius.  He just really was.  The thing I had to get guard against, however, you know, with all this musical involvement, once I declared, and I always knew I would, I mean, it was--you fight it.  Kids do that.  A lawyer's son may not want to be a lawyer just because everybody expects him to be a lawyer.  You go through that, and everybody thought I was going to preach, so I said, "I'm not going to preach," and I eventually acknowledged my call and I did that.  But it was--I mean, I got all these opportunities, so many of them.  I did not want to be known as a singing preacher, however, because it was my notion that people really don't take singing preachers serious.  They say, hurry and get through preaching and sing.  I didn't mind being like Reverend Franklin, a preacher who could sing.  It's altogether different, and so I was--I was almost paranoid to the extent that once I started preaching, don't insult me by asking me to come sing at a funeral, you know.  I'm a preacher, and so I followed that until I found out that, I think, I had to establish myself as a preacher, so every now and again I would sing, and I do now to some extent, but not--I'm not featured as a singer.
Story_ID: 84275
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school.  I didn't--we went all through your youth without talking about school at all, but you went to Douglas Elementary [School, Chicago, Illinois] --
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was a patrol boy at Douglas that helped put a red light that is still there on South Parkway, now, King Drive.  I was a patrol boy, and I loved being in elementary school, Douglas school, and I was a part of a delegation that went downtown.  We sat out there and counted cars, to see how many cars went by, I think, it's 34th Street now--30--it's 33rd Place or--either 34th, anyway.  Anyway, Cross and Parkway, South Parkway, going to Douglas Elementary School.  I remember the Principal was white, Miss--French-sounding name, and I remember always volunteering my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] to drive this--to do something--my mother [Ludie Kyles] to chaperone or something.  I was always the volunteer, just very much involved.
Speaker 1: Is that it by Hartsell (ph.) Memorial, is it?  I mean, on 31st?
Speaker 2: It is a church near there, yeah.  I'm not sure which it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had fun.  I can remember some of the teacher's names even after--
Speaker 1: What was some of the ones that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --all this time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --would stood out to you?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What were some of the teachers that stood out?
Speaker 2: You have this notion that teachers, you know, maybe don't walk on the same plane that you walk on like they're just--they really are human beings and--at that elementary level.  You see them as almost not human, that they are super human or something because they're the teachers.  I mean, they're the ones.  And then you develop--I mean, one experience I had at Douglas, was the--well, two, I remember.  One was, we had a school play or program, and I was going to sing on that.  We were singing, "All day I face the baron waste without a taste of water," and I was supposed to say, in my high tenor voice, "Water," (laughter), and I practiced that alone, and would you not know that when we did that thing I could not get water out, I couldn't get it at any key, let alone that key.  And I was so hurt and so embarrassed.  Nobody paid it that much attention, I guess.  The other was Jackie Robinson came to our school, and I was chosen as one of the persons to ask him a question.  So I was able to ask Jackie a question, and it was big time, Jackie Robinson at Douglas School.
Story_ID: 84276
Speaker 1: And there are other lesser memories that have--don't have the impact, but I also--I really like to talk about that and that traffic light.  That's been over fifty years that that light is still there.
Speaker 2: So, you all had to organize people around it and count the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we went down--
Speaker 2: --simultaneous--through there?
Speaker 1: Yes.  We also had the Chicago motor club to help us, and we met the traffic engineers downtown at the Chicago motor club.  We counted cars--the teacher who was over the patrol boys put the whole thing together because it was dangerous.  I don't think we had a crossing guard in those days.  I don't remember, but it needed a light because that street carried a lot of traffic, and just trying to come from where I live, you had to cross that street.  If you were at 31st Street there was a light, but 33rd Place or 34th, there was no light.  And so we sat out there for, like, maybe a month and counted the cars going--because you had two sides to deal with, and so we made this great presentation.  Another thing I remember about the patrol boys, we'll have inspection on Mondays, and you had--and your patrol belt had a white belt that goes across and enter.  It had to be clean, white beautifully cleaned, or you could not serve that week, and I remember trying to clean mine in a hurry and got bleach all over my hands and blistered and stuff, but I loved being a patrol boy.  And my mom [Ludie Kyles], she would pump me up and all that, but it was--it was refreshing to even have those kinds of memories, you know, after so long.  And to see what's happening in schools today, even in elementary schools, you got to have metal detectors to get in school.  That's a, that's a heck of a thing to have to contend with.
Story_ID: 84277
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Tell me about high school.  Now, you went to Phillips?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wendell Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] is not far from Douglas [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  My oldest brother went there, too.  I was in my, perhaps, my second year.  He was on the basketball team, and I could jump high, but I couldn't handle the ball well because I had small hands.  But I was a leaper, and they tried to teach me track, but I wasn't too good at the things you--
Speaker 1: The hurdles?
Speaker 2: --the things you--hurdles, yeah.  I couldn't do the hurdles, and there were some noted people coaching track and all the sports, Jim Brown was an Olympian, not the Jim Brown that we know, but Jim Brown was--and there was another guy, Ira Murchison, who--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who set records for--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in the Olympics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'69?
Speaker 2: But coach--the coach let me on the team because of my big brother, and I had a chance.  I tell all my kids, I had a chance to play in the--not the stadium, but the--the one where the stock market--stock yards were out there--Amphitheater.  I played about a half of minute, maybe a minute, but I played so I got my name in the book, and they had me in the book.
Story_ID: 84278
Speaker 1: Along about--I enjoyed high school, being in high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and that's when dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] got sick.  Dad got sick, and it was very difficult, very difficult.  Mom [Ludie Kyles] had to have--we had to have somebody to help her with dad 'cause he was strictly in the bed.  And it was almost like all that fun I was having, and I remember his death because I'd been at home and wanted to be there when it happened, and I went to the store for something on a Saturday morning, May the 11th, 1951.  I went to the store to get something, and when I came back the nurse said, "Billy, daddy is gone."  I said, "Oh, my God, I wanted to be here."  And I remember that again because my wife--we had a carnival at the school that night, Friday night, and she danced.  I didn't know her.  They had a carnival, and she danced that night and I asked the guys, I said, "Who is that girl?"  They said, "That's Gwen Hart (ph.)."  I said, "Wow, does she go to Phillips'?"  They said, no, she didn't go to Phillips.  I said, "I got to meet her."  And so in the course of the evening, I did meet her.  And I had planned to see her the next week and get to know her, and that was the Friday night before my dad's death.  She never met my dad.  I met her Friday, and dad died Saturday.  And I remember the funeral was so long.  It was a long funeral.  A long funeral.  As a matter of fact, I was saying earlier, the minister who came behind my dad was not kind to us.  He came by the house one day, and I have an aversion, now, to passing out cards.  This minister came in and said, "Reverend Kyles, I heard about your illness."  He was from Mississippi. He said, "I'm a fellow Mississippian and I just want to know if there's anything I can do to help you."  He was shabbily dressed, and my dad said, "Yeah, well, this associate been carrying on, but I'm sure we can find, you know, something that you can help us do.  Here's my card."  He took the card immediately and walked around the church and gave it to the deacons and said, "Reverend Kyles sent me around here to preach today."  So he came in on a lie.  My dad did not say that, and he had my dad's card.  So they wouldn't, you know, not allow him, and he preached quite well.  And the people enjoyed him.  My dad had had the deacons to take him downtown and buy him clothes. He didn't have any (unclear)  And he carried on, the period that my dad was ill, and then at the death of my dad they elected him as pastor, and that's when he said to us you have to leave the parsonage.  They had promised to give my mother my dad's salary for a year-and-a-half's salary for six months.  He cut it off immediately, and I was so angry.  I was so angry.  The people really didn't want to do that, but they were not the kind of people that would fight the minister, and they did not.  They didn't fight him.  I guess he lasted about two years, and then they unelected him.  But I remember that, and I remember he didn't want to pay for the funeral, but they did that.  They just did that against--well, he wasn't pastor then, but he was recommending that they not pay for it.  I never really understood that.  I never knew what happened to him after he lost--after he lost the church, but it left such a hurtful bitterness in me as a young person.  And so what happened was my older brother got married, and after dad died, as I said, my mom didn't know how to go downtown to pay her bills, she just--she was strictly housewife.  The ministers in town did come to her support, came to her support, came to our support.  I was the next oldest, and we moved into the projects for a couple of years, I guess.  And I left--
Speaker 2: --how long did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dearborn homes, I guess.
Story_ID: 84279
Speaker 1: And I left school to go to work.  I said, I can't, I can't do this, I mean--
Speaker 2: Did you finish Phillips (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, I finished at Central [East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Indiana] because it was a private school downtown, and then when I went--I went to Northern Seminary.  I didn't stay for the degree, but I got some great training there at Northern Baptist Theological Seminary.  But living in that project, you know, the pastors helped as much as they could, but you can't do it on a sustained basis.  The ministers were just very kind to my mother [Ludie Kyles], and it was one of those periods where I would say--I could tell people, "Don't you dare give up," you know 'cause there were--I had younger brothers, so I became sort of like the head of the family then.  And we got through it.  Mom eventually remained a minister again.  And it was so interesting, everybody--she thought she was through having children and with my step dad, she got pregnant, and you couldn't tell by ultrasound at all back then.  So she had been the mother of all boys, I said, "Wow.  I wonder will this be a boy." (Laughter)  It was a boy.  So she's a mother of all boys, and she said that's what she said when she married my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles].  I don't want any children, but if I got to have them, I want all boys.  And she was just great.  She loved giving nicknames to people.  She would give you a nickname and you would get stuck with it.  I have a niece now, I don't even know her real name because mom called her Sally Sue, and I call her Sally--it's my brothers' daughter, Sally Sue.  She'd give you a nickname and it would stick with you.  Everybody had a nickname.  And there was one thing she said, and when I share it with people, they say, "Oh, wow."  Some lady called up my mom and said--talking about my older brother, "Do you know Cleo had my daughter out 'till midnight or something."  She said, "Well, darling, all I can tell you is when them's bulls out, you better keep them heffas in." (Laughter) And she always had quip like that.  She loved telling--she was a great joke teller, too.  Mom could tell a joke.  And the people at church just loved her.  I mean, she was, she was loved like that.
Story_ID: 84280
Speaker 1: And I could not, you know, just do the welfare thing.  I went out and got a job, and I worked, and then I married.  I got married early, twenty years old, nineteen or twenty.  Just made me grow up much faster, and she [Ludie Kyles, mother] was doing well with her new husband and the boys are doing well, and then I--when I told her I was going to accept my call to the ministry she cried.  And the night that I preached, in those days they call them trial sermons, introductory sermons.  In those days, young preachers couldn't preach in the pulpit, I mean, if you were just starting out, so I had to preach my introductory sermon from the floor at our home church [Mt. Pleasant Missionary Baptist Church].  By this time, we had another pastor, but he was ill.  He stayed about nine months and just--the church just blossomed.  And he was ill, and he said, "Well, I was going to delay your preaching until I could be there," he said, "But I know you're going to do all right."  I stopped by the hospital to see him on the way, and I had to do that on a Monday night, I couldn't do on Sunday.  I had to preach my introductory on a Monday night.  The church was packed for that period, and I preached my--my mom said, "Aren't you going to preach that sermon to me first?"  I said, "No, you have to hear it when everybody else hears it."  And it was a sermon my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] had preached and somebody had it recorded.  So I took the topic and built a sermon around that, and I preached that night and everything went quite well.  The night that I preached my introductory sermon, the pastor, Reverend Madison, died.  And the church had me to carry on.  I preached one sermon, had me to carry on after his death, and so I really had to get busy.
Story_ID: 84281
Speaker 1: I was trying to go to Chicago Baptist Institute once I decided I was going into ministry, and I did go there for a while.  And then when they started searching for a pastor, they ran me against the person they had chosen that had preached and they wanted to have a vote on him.  So the vote was between Reverend [H.R.] Jelks, who was in Memphis, and myself.  I never campaigned, and I never knew this 'till later, my mom [Ludie Kyles] campaigned against me.  She called the key people in the church and said, "Don't you all do this to Billy, you will stunt his ministry.  It's too much for him.  Please don't do this."  And so I think I did win the election, but they discounted the young adults' vote, and the young adults got angry and wouldn't go in the choir stand, they wouldn't do all that.  So I came in one Sunday morning, I said, "Reverend Jelks is our new pastor, and we're going to follow him and this church is going to move forward."  And so I said, "I want all these young people to come right now to this choir stand and they did," and I was, what, nineteen then, I guess.  I don't know.  And Reverend Jelks became the pastor, and I was an assistant at the church, and I had a wife and child and going to school and doing the whole thing.  The church was so much a part of our lives.
Story_ID: 84282
Speaker 1: One of the ways I got to Memphis [Tennessee] was Reverend [H.R.] Jelks was from Memphis, and when he became pastor at Mount Pleasant [Missionary Baptist Church] in Chicago.  He was a great old man, but he never--he never said to me that you don't need to go in one of them white schools, boy, all they're going to do is mess you up, and I wanted to go to Northern.  And so another church had offered me the opportunity to go to Northern, Tabernacle Church, Dr. Louis Rawls, and so I went to there.  We never fell out or anything, I just want--
Speaker 2: That's the father of Lou Rawls, entertainer; another singer, right?
Speaker 1: Relative.  He's not really his father--
Speaker 2: Not his father, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But I went to Tabernacle, and then I was going to Northern.  But Reverend Jelks organized the church that I pastor now in Memphis.  The church that he was pastoring in Memphis, and when he came to Chicago, some of the people in that church, not right away, became dissatisfied with what was happening and they organized a church.  And he was, like, "Boy, you're going to the convention?"  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Go down there and preach to these folks I got down there."  That's all he'd ever say.  Sometimes, at a morning service, he would just turn around and say, "Boy, you come preach."  And you had to get up and preach Sunday morning, and that's the way he was.  But it was--he was as liberal as anybody toward young preachers, and most pastors were not.  As I said, you couldn't preach from the pulpit.  So many things you couldn't do, but he was even at his older age, he was very, very liberal.
Story_ID: 83461
Speaker 1: We were talking about preaching trial sermons--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Reverend [H.R.] Jelks, who is the organizer of the church that I pastor.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name, just so we have it.
Speaker 2: J-E-L-K-S.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  While you're at it, just for the transcription, we should probably have him spell "Soul Stirrers."
Speaker 1: Oh, I know how to spell that.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  It's for transcription, Larry.
Speaker 1: I know, but we always look at it.  We always look at that again--I mean, everybody knows how to spell that.  That's no problem.  Go ahead, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, he was the one that organized the church where I am in in Memphis [Tennessee], and although I was at Tabernacle, he called me up and said, "Boy, are you going to the Sunday school congress in Memphis?" I said, "Yes."  He said, "Well, I got some people I want you to preach for down there.  I just organized them into a church, thirty-four people.  They're good people.  Just preach for them while you were there."  And I did, and that was the beginning of my getting ready to go down there.
Story_ID: 83462
Speaker 1: But that whole church experience with that new pastor after my dad [Joseph Henry Kyles] died, just left a, you know, a--just a bitter taste for me, and I said I would never put myself into a position of living in a church parsonage again.  I would have my own house and have some kind of retirement program and all that.  But I started coming back to Mount Pleasant [Missionary Baptist Church] every third Sunday in September.  That was my day called Billy Kyles' day, and I'd come back and they'd cook a lot of food and just--I don't care who was speaking or what was going on, when I walked in they start clapping and standing up, so I tried to wait between speakers to come in.  But the nourishing that they gave to me as a young preacher and as a pastor's son, it's invaluable.  I mean, it really is.  One of the things I couldn't wait to do, and I do this when I come back to Chicago and some of them are in the audience.  I couldn't wait to call them by their first names, and I would do it from the pulpit.  And I would tell them, I said, "When I was a little boy and all y'all helped me to grow up."  I said I wanted to call you by your first names so bad--'cause, you know, in our tradition you couldn't do that.  If my mother called you Lucille, I had to call you Miss Lucille.  That's why in our tradition you have a lot of kids saying, Mr. and Mrs. first name, not Mrs. Jones, but Miss Lucille 'cause you call them what your mom--or Mr. Robert.  And I could not wait to get grown to call them by their first names, and they loved it when I would do it from the pulpit.  I said, "I see you in the audience."  I'd be in another church preaching or something--I said, "I see you in the audience,"--a young woman that helped raised me or woman that have raised me.  As I said, I always wanted to call you by the first name.  I said, "Lucille, come here girl."  (Laughter) And they just--they loved it, they loved it, and then they would say, "Billy, I mean, Billy--I mean, Reverend Kyles."  Usually I'll say, call me Billy, I don't care about that.  But it was wonderful.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 2: This raises an interesting subject I never thought of, really, that much about before.  But is there any other setting that you know of, outside of the black church, where young leadership can get this kind of nurturing and appreciation?
Speaker 1: I don't know of it, if it is.  I don't know.  And it's wonderful, because would you--even if I didn't preach, you know, worth a nickel, they just boost you up, you know.  "Oh, you were wonderful, come here, give me a hug;"  Oh, you sure did preach."  And sometimes you kind of knew it (laughter) you didn't do much, you didn't put it together, but that kind of nurturing and caring--
Speaker 2: I don't really--(simultaneous)--in a secular world or political world, it doesn't seem like you can get that kind of appreciation--
Speaker 1: No, you--no.  Especially in a political world, you couldn't do it.  You mean, you can grow up but not--not that kind of nurturing and--and it was--I mean, straight across the board.  Straight across.  I mean, they didn't hold back and would support you and encourage you.  I was--I just, you know, I was so blessed.  I really was.  Still am, but I mean, I was just so blessed to have--because you learn and if you can work in that environment--once you deal with people at that level, it prepares you.  Skills are transferable.  You learn, you know, how to do a Sunday school class, or do a choir, or be an usher or whatever and learn how to handle people.  And it's strictly volunteers, not like you can fire somebody.  Volunteers don't have to give notice.  They just don't show up, so to be able to get them to give back and to be a part of.  If you can do that in that church setting, you can do it anywhere.  You can do it anywhere.  And that's what has helped so much in my life, that I been able to, you know, appreciate--and I always respect and appreciate my audience's intelligence.  I don't go with them like they don't know what--what they're doing and they know--I said, there's much more information in that audience than it is up in this pulpit.  Believe me, much more information.  Like we talked earlier, those individual stories, and it's--it helped to prepare me for, you know, for my life's work. And especially, you know, that's us, Billy.  That's our baby, that's our son, you know.  And it just-just--it just means so much.  It does a great deal for your self-esteem.
Story_ID: 83463
Speaker 1: Now, when did you officially become ensconced in that--the church in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: 1959, when the National Baptist Convention-- the teaching arm of the convention is the Congress, the National Congress.  That's the teaching arm.  You have as many people attending the Congress as you have attending the convention, but it's mainly for laypeople to go learn classes and all that.
Speaker 1: And the convention, just for the record, is the largest--this is the largest black organization in the world, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Where thousands of people coming to the convention every year from all over the USA [United States of America]?
Speaker 2: Right.  From all over the states and foreign countries now, yeah.  And they've had some difficulties.  But I went to Reverend [H.R.] Jelks, the pastor of my home church, Monument--Mount Pleasant [Missionary Baptist Church], asked me if I was going to the convention, and I was.  I was driving down, and so he said, "Well, I got some boy--I got some people who I've organized into a church," he said.  "And I want you to preach for them while you're down there."  They didn't have a church, building or anything.  They just--he had just organized them like March, and this was June.  He tried to get them to go back to their church, and they said, "No, we're not going back."  So, he said, "Well, just preach for them while you're there."  And it was so interesting.  The Saturday I got there, I drove down, had a little blue '59 [1959] Chevrolet, and I drove down to Memphis [Tennessee].  And interestingly enough, again, they were no ho--you couldn't stay in hotels and all these thousands of people would come and you'd stay in people's homes.  So I stayed in someone's home, found a house.  And he gave me the names of some people that I should see while I was there.  And we joke about it now.  It was Ida May, Julia May and some other May, and I call them nicknames.  I said, "The May sisters," and when I went to try and find them, they were all going fishing.  They had all gone fishing, so I couldn't find them 'till late that night.  And they didn't tell me then, but they tease me now.  They said--well--when they met me they were very kind.  We were--they had a place they had rented to have service.  So I showed up, and they said, "My goodness, what did Reverend Jelks send this little boy down here for?"  (laughter) I said, "A lot of nerve talking to me.  You didn't even have a collection plate, and you're talking about why did he send this little boy down here."  So we had fun with that.  And so they--apparently, after the morning service, they called him and said, "Can you get him to stay another Sunday?"  So I stayed another Sunday and preached again.  And then they started--I came back to Chicago and they started talking about, you think we can get him to come down here--now, they didn't have a church, they didn't have any numbers, they didn't have anything.  But the way things work, I was looking at the south after the Greensboro kids sat in.  I was looking--I said, you know, something great is go on down there and I want to be a part of it, and this is my opportunity.
Speaker 1: Now, you talk about Greensboro [North Carolina].  Can you give us--
Speaker 2: Oh, where the--where the students sat in at the lunch counters.  The first--beginning of the sit-ins was in Greensboro, North Carolina.  And I said, this is the beginning of something great here.  And I want to be a part of this.  So I started thinking about it, and it just came to me as clear, this is the opportunity.  And I didn't have to move my family right away and all that, because they didn't have a church or anything, but I--so what I did, was they elected me as pastor, I was twenty-four.  They elected me and I would--I started going down every other week.
Story_ID: 83464
Speaker 1: I started meeting and doing things and looking for a church 'cause the place that we were renting, the guy would double rent.  He would rent to us as the church and then rent to somebody else as a dance.  And the dance people trying to rush us out so they can--so they can have their dance.  I said, why you--how--you can't--he said, "All ya'll can work it out, get through having the church and then have the dances." I said, we can't do this.  So we finally got a funeral home that was available.  It was a house, they made a funeral home and we took that.  And interesting thing, I was going every other--I'd take the train.  The train fare was $9.00 clergy rate from Chicago to Memphis, and I knew every stop along the way.  But we had a black bank--we have a black bank in Memphis, and this funeral home was going to cost like $19 or $20,000.  I didn't have many members 'cause they only started with thirty-four, but I called the president on a Sunday evening, Masell Walker (ph.). I called the president of the bank at home and told him who I was, what I was doing and I needed his help.  I wanted to borrow some money to buy this church.  And he said, "Young man, I don't know who you are, but if you got nerve enough to call me on a Sunday morning at my house," he said, "You have some men down there tomorrow morning at ten o'clock."  And we went down there and they gave us our first loan to buy this building, and we were off and running.
Story_ID: 83465
Speaker 1: But what I noticed was, if I'd go every other Sunday, by the time I built it up here by the next Sunday, it had gone back down.  So I said, soon I've got to start going every Sunday.  And then by faith, we moved in less than a year.  I brought my family to Memphis, and everybody but my mother [Ludie Kyles], thought I was losing my mind.  They said, you are in the promise land, Chicago, why are you volunteeringly going back to Egypt, Memphis.
Speaker 2: That's, reverse--that's reverse, of what most people were still doing.  They were coming to Chicago, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Memphis is an Egyptian name to a-a Greek name for-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  Yeah.  Mother was the only one.  My pastor, my friends, my brothers, said, "Man you got to be crazy."  Everything in Memphis was segregated.  There was nothing integrated.  The train station was segregated.  You had to go down to--legally, they couldn't separate you, but the porters that learned how to separate by race on the train.  And I would do my homework.  I was still trying to go to school and got to Memphis and there was no seminary I could go to in Memphis.  I said, we're going to move to Memphis.  My wife, she supported me, she said, okay.  So I had a wife and three small kids coming to Memphis to this segregated place, not a relative that I knew of and a very small congregation.  But I wanted to be in the south.  Everything in Memphis was segregated, and yet we came.  And I had already made up my mind that I would cooperate with segregation.  I wouldn't go to any place that I wasn't treated with respect.  I wouldn't go to the colored entrances and all that.  If I had a colored entrance, I wouldn't go to it.  But I never criticized my cousins, I didn't come down from Chicago to talk about my country cousins.  I joined in the movement, and my church grew, and I was--I was thankful for the support that they finally gave me after I helped to open their eyes.  And once that happened, they still support me a great deal.  But it was--it was--it was, it was something that--it has a quality about it that's mysterious, because I wanted to go and it looked like, I needed a church like that to go to rather than a well establish--a well established church because I would have had so many traditions to fight, you know.  Had ideas that I had in my head I could not have done that that he church that had, you know, had a history.  This was a brand new congregation.  And it was--it was an opportunity for me to help shape it into the kinds of things that I wanted to happen.
Story_ID: 83466
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, were you influenced at the National Baptist Convention by the ministers that were activists, because I know Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, and his father [Rev. Martin Luther King, Sr.] was prominent in the National Baptist Convention, Gardner Taylor, you know, was there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And others that had a, you know, a social change agenda, were coming to the National Baptist Convention prior to '61 [1961], anyway, they were all there together--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you influenced by them--
Speaker 2: I was in that group.  I was in that group.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: --very definitely.  And for a time, Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was the President of the congress.  He was the President of the congress.
Speaker 1: And that's the teaching--
Speaker 2: The teaching arm.  The congress that I went to in '59 [1959].  They meet in June, and the convention meets in September.  And there was a tremendous amount of energy spent on trying to get tenure--I think when Dr. [J.H.] Jackson was elected, there was some discussion about tenure and, I think, perhaps he agreed to it and then changed his mind.  And you can be President as long as you wanted to, and they were trying to stop that.  What Martin was--was President of the teaching arm, the congress, and people just loved him, I mean, you just couldn't deny that.  And Dr. Jackson didn't like the kind of support that Martin was getting.  Those of us who, not only lived in the south, some of the guys from Cleveland, and Ohio, and Detroit and all over the nation were tuned in to the Civil Rights Movement, but Dr. Jackson was not.  And his statements kept coming out, you know, that--that was in opposition to what we were doing.  And so I said, well, this is a good to work on tenure. (Laughter)  To have this organization not speak out on behalf of--of--of black Americans is--is terrible.  But he fired Martin, and that was the straw that broke the camel's back.  He fired him straight out, and when he did that, the wheels really started rolling.
Story_ID: 83467
Speaker 1: Now, there is, there is--well, it's, it's, it's not a rumor but it's not true that the minister--there was--we had a convention in Kansas City, I was there at the convention.  I was on stage--
Speaker 2: '60 [1960], '61 [1961], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That a minister was pushed off the platform, and he was but it wasn't intentional.  I was looking right at it.  They had a false background, curtains, and there was some shoving of ministers trying to get to the microphone.  One group tried to keep the other off, and in the shoving someone hit this man's chair and he went back.  If it had been a solid board, he would not have fallen, but he went back.
Speaker 2: He was on a platform (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was up on a stage--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)?
Speaker 1: And the curtain was behind it, and he fell off and was killed.  Well, the rumors went out that somebody pushed him and they were fighting.  And it was just a horrible time.  And after that and with other legal maneuvers, we said that's enough.  Martin [Luther King, Jr.] needs a convention that he can grow and develop in, so we organized Progressive [National Baptist Convention] in Cincinnati, Ohio under Venshel Booth, who just died last month, I think--well, December or January.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: V-E-N-S-H-E-L, Venshel Booth, B-O-O-T-H.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He called a meeting in Cincinnati to organize Progressive National Baptist Convention, and that was probably forty years ago, and then that was Martin's convention.  That was his convention, and so most of the guys--and we named it Progressive purposely so--
Speaker 2: To distinguish between--
Speaker 1: Yes, between the other. And then I was one of the young Turks, and we wanted things to go this way, wanted things to be like--well, one of the things--some of the group wanted to meet at the same time that the National Baptist met to make you choose which one you were going to be in, and our theory was, don't do that, you know.  Let's have ours at a different time and give the people the choice if they want to go the other one, they can.  If they want to belong to this one, they can.  It's not, you know, us alone.
Speaker 2: And you weren't trying to polarize them, you were trying to resolve--
Speaker 1: Yes.  And then we wanted to have it at a different time, and then eventually wanted to combine the congress and the convention.  There was no reason, given our size that we needed to meet twice, so we do meet August and we did combine.  Our congress and convention meets at the same time.  There is a move afoot now to have a joint meeting.  I don't know where we're going to have it with all these people, but it's being worked on for either for 2004 or '05 [2005] where Progressive National and National Baptist will meet at the same time in the same city.
Speaker 2: So it'll be the first time they come back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: First time they've come together.
Speaker 2: --'61 [1961]?
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 2: That's something.
Story_ID: 83468
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about some of your activities in Memphis [Tennesse].  I read that you were active in desegregating the buses in Memphis.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, the fact of the matter is, when I went to Memphis and everything was segregated, from the cradle to the grave, and I really didn't understand why graveyards had to be segregated, because dead people get along well.  But it was total segregation.  And I just came in and got involved with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I said to my congregation, I said, "When I come off of my European trip, I want a banquet at the Peabody, Peabody Hotel."  That was the south's finest hotel.  And they just laughed, they said, "Oh, Reverend, that's funny" (laughter).  They couldn't even imagine, first of all, how you're going to get Europe by the time you come back.  Second of all, you know you can't go into Peabody unless you go in there in the back door in the serving, and they were content with that.  That's what they had to live with.  And I didn't say any more about that.  I went to work involved in the movement, they supported me.  It was like opening their eyes, not just my congregation but other people too.  And we became, like, a--a trend setting church in Memphis, because most of the churches were very conservative.  I had certain ideas.  That's why I said, I really needed that new church because--and one of my best friends when I first moved to Memphis and my lawyer was Benjamin Hooks [HM] who was most recently the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] Commission--no, after FCC, he went to NAACP.  He was my lawyer, too.  And when I share it with Ben some of the ideas that I had, he said, "Boy, you ain't going to last in Memphis six months."  I painted the door red, I took my ushers out of black and put them in shocking pink.  I mean, I--I'd go to cocktail parties.  Preachers don't go to cocktail parties.  This one goes, and all that, you know.  And when I said that, he said, "Boy, you are--" so I had the great privilege of inviting him to be my 40th anniversary speaker, I said, six months, huh?  40 years; and he laughed of course.  But I got involved in the movement and I said earlier, I didn't come down, you know, with my northern attitude saying, why are my country cousins doing this.  I did not go to places where I was not respected or did not shop.  There were stores in Memphis where you have to buy clothes and you couldn't try them on.  You just--they didn't fit.  Now, this is in my lifetime in Memphis, Tennessee.  I did go to jail for riding on the front of the bus.  It was planned.  It was--it was--it was a movement.  Had a big rally one Saturday night at one of the churches downtown, and the rally was so hot.  Everything you say, somebody would holler, yeah.  We're sick of this mess, yeah.  And so somebody got up and said, "We are-500 preachers are going to jail Monday morning for riding the front of the bus.  Can you imagine what will happen in Memphis if 500 black preachers in jail on a Monday morning, and the place just erupted into pandemonium.  Well, Monday morning came and there were not 500 preachers.  There were not a 100--there were not five preachers, there were two.  And eight laymen, and we went on through with it.  It was--I was one of them and Jim Netters who still pastors in Memphis and became a city councilman later on, the two of us.  We were on two different buses and the bank president and some other people, but we went on with it.
Story_ID: 83469
Speaker 1: So when I got on the front of the bus and sat down, the bus driver said, "Now, y'all don't want no trouble, you know what the Jim Crow laws are."  I said, "Yeah, I know.  But I'm sitting up front today."  And so he called the police, and the bus didn't move.  While waiting for the police to come, the black people on the bus said to me, "Why don't you come on back here where you belong so we can go to work."  I did not bear them any ill will, these people just wanted to get by another day, another day, another day 'cause they had to live with all these couldn'ts and can'ts.  You can't go to the library, you can't go to the school closest to you, you can't use the park across the street, you can't try on clothes, you can't go to the movies, you can't--I mean, all these can'ts you--you had to live with.  And I knew it was about opening their minds.  We didn't grow any new arms and new legs, we're just changing their minds.  So I went to the back of the bus and had a civil rights meeting while waiting for the police to come.  And I said, "Do you see a steering wheel back here?"  They said, "No."  I said, "Do you see clutch and brakes and all that?"  They said, "No." I said, "If we can't sit up front, how can we ever drive this bus?  How can we get jobs driving if we don't sit up front?"  And they came on and arrested me and all that.  But I should tell you now that the general manager of the bus company is the Chairman of my Trustees Board.  He's the President and general manager.  Not only did he--he went through the ranks of the driver, I've had men in my church who have retired after thirty years of bus driving in Memphis.  The whole--the train station that I used to go in and was segregated, they just named that hall after him, the Hudson Hall, because he remodeled the whole thing.  I mean, that's the kind of change.  I was NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Chairman of the Labor and Industry Committee.  I got the first blacks hired at the banks.  And we were--we're in a tristate area so it's more difficult for us.  We had to contend with Mississippi, Arkansas and Tennessee.  I actually had the--the--the bankers to tell me we can't integrate.  How Mississippi customers will never let Negroes wait on them.  I said, "Wait a minute, what happens if all the bank hire Negroes, where are they going to bank if they don't let Negroes wait on them?"  And so we got all the banks to hire blacks, but we went--we never had had the violence in Memphis.  We went just time and time again.  We'd go to the--to the hilt and row by row almost and we integrated.  My five year-old daughter was one of thirteen children integrated the schools at Memphis, five years old.  We went to school with police protection, and when I tell young people that in my lectures.  I said, "I went to school with police protection.  Not in Zimbabwe, not in South America, not in Bosnia.  In Memphis Tennessee, USA [United States of America], in my day and my daughter's day.  And she's got a sixteen year-old child now.  The day of integration, the police picked me up and my daughter and followed us to school.  The police had surrounded the school to protect us from the howling mobs, but there were no howling mobs.  I got out of the car and the policemen in charge was introduced to me by the policeman that escorted me.
Story_ID: 84283
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we're talking about the desegregation--
Speaker 2: The morning of integration.  The police came to my home to escort me to the school, my daughter and I.  When we got there, the policeman in charge introduced me to the policeman on duty, and I got out of the car and I said, "Good morning, how are you?"  And he looked at my hand as if I had leprosy.  He never touched me.  As a matter of fact, he never acknowledged my presence.  He talked over me to his comrade.  No mob showed up, thank goodness.  But as we walked up the sidewalk to the school, the police who turned out to be the mob, said the nastiest things to me and my daughter; five years old.  I'm a gospel preacher, and the things I--that they said, I could not repeat in any company, to us as we walked up that, that, that sidewalk.  And she went on, you know, did her day--the, the school, and I said, "This was not in Bosnia.  This was not in Zimbabwe," I tell kids in my lecture.  "This is not in South Africa.  This is Memphis, Tennessee, USA [United States of America], in my day.  I went to school with police protection in Memphis, Tennessee."
Story_ID: 84284
Speaker 1: Now, let me try to put this as some kind of context to it.  Memphis [Tennessee], you didn't have a lot of violence associated with desegregation.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is like the cotton capital of the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, cotton market.  This is the heart of the mid--I mean, the center of the south.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Well, commerce and whatever.  And others have said that in those situations sometimes the businessmen really would have liked to have integrated, but they were waiting for something to happen, you see.  It's easier for them to do business if they didn't have to do some of the things that they, you know, it was easiest to make money.  Do you think that's true or--
Speaker 2: There might have been some of that, but I wouldn't think a great deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was a great deal of it.  I, I don't.  We did use the businessmen as--we had informal group meetings, and if something happened somewhere else, we would quite easily say that if we don't deal with us that you're going to have some more difficult people to hound.  We don't want this to happen in Memphis and so these businessmen would--we'd have secret meetings downtown and the banks and stuff, and decide what we were going to integrate next, and we just did little by little, by little, by little until all after a while, and this was done under the leadership of the NAACP for the most part.  It was one of the strongest chapters--it might have been the strongest in the south, but one of the strongest in the nation.
Speaker 1: Who was the head of that chapter?
Speaker 2: A young woman, Maxine Smith.  Maxine, her husband was Vasco, who was a dentist and grew up in Dyersburg, Tennessee.  And after dental school, came to Memphis, started his practice and she was the Executive Director of the NAACP when I moved to Memphis.  And for a long time, many of them didn't know I was a pastor, I just--they, you know, I just came in and started going to work whatever needed to be done, I would do it.  And then at some point, they recognized my leadership skills and started putting me in charge of stuff.  But it was a very strong chapter.  Maxine taught school for a little while.  I think she had a Masters from, from, Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or someplace like that.  And she taught for a little while and then she came out of that and stopped teaching and started working with NAACP, and we call her Mrs. Civil Rights of Memphis and she's still going strong.  She, she, she resigned, though--she retired, rather, but she's still--interesting thing is now, most of us are getting living legend awards and all that stuff for the stuff they arrested us for doing forty years ago (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That doesn't feel odd, does it to you?
Speaker 2: It is.  I got the University of Memphis Living Legend award and the state's Living Legend award and all that.
Speaker 1: Well it must be great to be vindicated, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --over and again--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  But they--there were exciting times and in the midst of all that, you had to find something that you could tease about or joke about or laugh about.  You couldn't keep that kind of intensity all the time.  It would just, it would just, you know, tear you apart.  And while during that period of integration, we went for the beverage companies, and that included the beer distributors.  And I was chairman of the labor and industry committees.  And how we're going to do this--said, how's it going to look in the newspaper, Reverend Kyles, Chairman of the Beer Committee, and this is in the Bible belt south (laughter).  I said, "Go ahead and put me down as Chairman of the Beer Committee."  And you found little ways.  I was fascinated with the accent of white people in the south.  And sometimes we'd be out strategizing, and there was one guy, Mr. Somebody, I don't remember his name, but he always had something to say about if we got a favorable ruling, and I would--they would say, "Billy, call him up, call him up."  So I call him up and use a southern accent, and he just, he just go on and on and on about how we got to stop the nigra; N-I-G-R-A.  Many white people use that rather than say the word "nigger."  They would say "nigra," and you hear that all through the south.  And I would put on my accent and call him up.
Speaker 1: Can you do your accent for us?  I'd like to hear that (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) "I said, Well, nah, Mr. Bing, what we're going to do with these nigras?  I mean, you know, we just the--just got this ruling.  We can't live like this."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Too bad the Oscars are over.  I mean, they just nominated, but that's good.
Speaker 2: You had to have something to break that, that, that intensity because it was, it was, it was always there.
Story_ID: 84285
Speaker 1: And then the other thing is what happened with the schools.  My daughter made friends with white kids, they spent the night with her, she spent the night with them.  This is elem--there were a cluster of schools; elementary, junior high, and high.  And she would spend the night with her white friends.  The teacher would smell her hair or do something stupid, a professional to a child.  And, you know, we'd get through that, we'd go up and complain about that and stuff.  In junior high, by the time we got--they were doing a greater year, but by the time she got to junior high, everything was integrated.  So when the black kids came into junior high, she was over here with her white friends that she had gone to school with through elementary, at lunch, when the black kids got there, they jumped on my daughter about, "Why are you sitting with them?  You think you're too good to sit with us?"  So she got it from both sides.  The thing that broke the camel's back, was she, she always loved theater.  She got the lead role in the school play, female at Central High [School, Memphis, Tennessee], predominantly white.  The lead male role was white.  The kids had no problem with it.  They were going to--they were making costumes and designing sets and all that, but the teacher said, "Not on my watch," and she was so hurt.  They canceled the play, rather than let a black girl and a white boy have the lead roles.
Speaker 2: And this is in what year?  About what year is this?
Speaker 1: Probably '70 [1970], '69 or '70 [1969 or 1970], and I said--she said to me, she said, "Dad, I'm sick of this mess now."  She said, "I want to go to a black college."  And I said, "As long as you understand when you leave the black college that Sears and IBM and General Motors, they'll still be running the world, and you can't escape."  She said, "I just want to go to a black college."  So she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I'm not that sure that--I felt guilty about it years later that you'd do a 5 year-old child like this and I couldn't do it now, but I was caught up in the moment.  And there's a saying in our tradition, "that to serve this present age, my calling to fulfill," and that was my age, and I--and I sought to fulfill but I couldn't--I could not do a grandchild that way, you know.  It was too much of a burden to put on children, but she's--I think she tapped into my guilt for a good while by daddy I need, daddy I need.  So I told her, I said, daddy's is not guilty any more, but she doesn't talk about it in a negative, in a negative way, and she relates to all people pretty well.  But that was, that was really a trying time.  I was up there--she walked up in one class in junior high, Civics class, and the teacher said something about "like that communist, Reverend Kyles."
Speaker 2: Communist?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  And so you can imagine how she felt.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was something that was thrown around a great deal in those days if you were for social change, you were a communist--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Whether or not you were not--(unclear)
Speaker 1: Yes.  I would say, why do you think I need somebody from Russia to come and tell me I don't want to lay under these ton of bricks.  I'm laying under all these bricks, and I need somebody to come from anywhere to tell me, don't you want to get from under those bricks?  You darn right, I want to get from under from that.  I don't need anybody to tell me that.  And, and, and they spent so much money trying to prove that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was communist, I mean, tapping his phone and all that stuff.  I said, no, no, no.  This does not come from Communists, this comes from my desire for equality.
Story_ID: 84286
Speaker 1: So you all--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and your group of activists that you work with in Memphis [Tennessee] were doing fairly well--you know, I guess, in terms of this integration process, and I think--but Memphis didn't reach national attention until the garbage strike?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--that was true.  Memphis did it, and in some cases many of the original legal cases started in Memphis.  Like, the first time one where we went after all of the municipal places; swimming pool, parks and all that.  That was a first for Memphis.  We also did a lot of legal work surrounding Mississippi, the Meredith case, came out of Memphis to get him into Old Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], and that happened a great deal.
Speaker 1: Is that where the federal ruling was issued (unclear)--
Speaker 2: At least, the, the case was drawn up in Memphis.  The ruling, I think, was--could have been in Memphis, if not it was--it probably was in Memphis--it probably was.
Speaker 1: Federal District Court (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  But that was a lot of that going on.  A lot of strategizing for Mississippi, also, in Memphis.  And just a strong chapter.  In some ways, we were like a model for other cities how to avoid the kinds of violence, because we did talk.  We had communications with the white community.  We just knew that the, the department store that I was talking about in particular where you couldn't try on clothes, we picketed that store for eighteen months, summer and winter.  And they finally gave in.  But Memphis had that difficult time because of the Tristate area, also, but we managed that too.
Story_ID: 84287
Speaker 1: When, when--in 1968, the garbage workers just got fed up and, and they went on strike.
Speaker 2: Now, were these--were all the garbage workers black or--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, yeah, the, the, the workforce-- the drivers were white, but the workforce was black.  And people, you know, just kind of saw them as garbage men, I mean, these are the garbage men.  They didn't see them as-- well, we didn't see them as, as necessarily deacons in our church, grandfathers, fathers, you know, everything everybody else is, because you just kind of see them and take them for granted.  I didn't know how much money they made.  Their leadership came out of their own ranks, which I thought was tremendous that these men at the lowest rung of the economic ladder and educational would stand up against the man in Memphis, Tennessee in 1968.  That was very powerful, very powerful.  And they have a sign that they would wear.  It didn't say peace, it didn't say freedom, it didn't say justice.  All it said was, "I am a man," because they were treated less than men.  Two of them were killed accidently on a truck.  There was no Workman's Compensation.  They could work the whole month and still qualify for welfare, they made such little wages.  They handle garbage all day, they had nowhere to wash for lunch, had no rest area for restrooms, unless somebody on the route would let them use the restroom they had--there were just out there.  And in those days, they would come into your backyard with tin tubs, put your garbage into the tub, put it on their heads African style, take it to the truck and dump it and make as many as trips as needed.  Very often, the tubs would have holes in them.  If you put something in your garbage that was liquid and didn't have a container, that stuff would run down on them when they would put it on their heads.  So nobody really would let them in their homes and--so they got tired of that.  And they went on strike.  One said to me, "Reverend Kyles, don't think that we don't appreciate what people do for us."  He said, "But I'm a grown man, I haven't had a coat to fit me since I been a man."  He said, "I work hard.  I don't have shoes to fit.  I get the closest size to my feet."  He said, "If they would pay us, we could buy our own clothes."  And I was in Philadelphia two years ago speaking, a nicely dressed young African woman, African American woman, came up to me and said, "Reverend Kyles, you don't know me.  I'm from Memphis.  I'm a Judge in my third term here in Philadelphia."  She said, "I'm glad to get the opportunity to shake your hand and say thanks to you and so many others who helped me to become who I am."  And she said it just like this, "My daddy was a garbage man."  So they had dreams like other people have dreams.  And they just got tired.  And they just--they--we--the leadership tried to get them to go back to work and wait until the summer.  This is February.  Garbage could pile up and the cold weather wouldn't produce what you wanted, and they refused to go back.  They didn't anybody from New York or Chicago to come down and say, you need better conditions.  The leadership came up out of the--out of their ranks.  We literally had to run to catch up with them.  And, and, and so we started having rallies and marches every day.
Story_ID: 84288
Speaker 1: And then when you really got a march and a rally going, you would send for Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And the first time we sent for him, the staff said, "No, we don't have time.  We are behind on the Poor People's Campaign."  The Poor People's Campaign was going to be unlike anything we had ever tried.  We weren't going to Washington and make speeches and leave.  We were going to go to Washington, make speeches and live on the mall, build tents, make a tent city and live on the mall until this country did something about poverty.  And Martin was brilliant enough to take the black face off the march.  It wasn't just black folk.  He went to Appalachia, got poor whites, he got poor reds, he got poor yellows, he got poor browns, and poor blacks; the poor people of the nation.  He had figured out that we were spending $500,000 to kill a Viet Cong and five--$55.00 on poverty, and he was making his case.  See once--what, what people missed in many instances is that once we won the civil rights battles in '64 [1964], it became economics.  It was an economic battle.  What good is it to go into hotel, if you can't pay the bill, or to move into a neighborhood, have the right to, and don't have the money to buy the house.  It's strictly was moving towards economics.  And he was going to bring all these poor people from all over the nation into Washington and live there until this country did something about poverty.  So the staff said, "We're behind on the poor people's campaign.  He can't come to Memphis."  And they overruled them and said, "Oh, no, we got to go to Memphis."  He said, "The garbage people, that's the crowd I'm talking about it.  They are working, they're poor, but they work; the working poor."  And so he came to Memphis and made a great speech, and we got greedy and said, "Can you come back and lead a march?"  He said, "Yeah, work it out."  Came back and led the march and that the march broke up in violence.  We didn't know then, but we know now that certain forces had declared that Martin Luther King, Jr. will never have another peaceful march in America and young guys had been paid to break it up.
Speaker 2: Now, what forces were these?
Speaker 1: Well, it--we, we had--we call them Saints in Caesar's House.  Word would come to us from all kinds of sources.  I mean, people who were assigned to spy on him would be converted and give us information, you know.  And so rather--I can't pin down and say who, but we--the word came--word would come to us.  Words would come to us.  That's why we call them, Saints in Caesar's house in Caesar's house, and the saints would share with us many times.
Speaker 2: This was on the federal level or the--a lot of stuff is declassified now.  I just wondered if--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of it it's in--in the COINTELPRO?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.  That was the program of J. Edgar Hoover, counter intelligence program, to subvert the efforts of the civil rights leaders and black power advocates--
Speaker 1: Discredit them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway you can.  And so--and--and so that word was already out that he would not, that he would not have another peaceful march.  Some of it was J. Edgar Hoover just said straight out, three months before he was killed, he called Martin the most notorious liar in the country.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: That's what J. Edgar said about Martin Luther King, Jr., character assassination very often precedes physical assassination.  My own thoughts are that J. Edgar did not order his death or approve of it if he had known about it, because he knew that Martin would be a martyr.  He didn't want that.  He wanted to embarrass him out of office and already picked out who was going to follow him.  Gonna pick out the leader.
Story_ID: 84289
Speaker 1: Now, you have reminded me--asking something quick.  But there--in those days, I know it's written about now, and Reverend [Ralph] Abernathy, I think, who you knew well, quite well, who wrote about--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --the FBI's attempts to besmirch the characters of Dr. King by revealing these tapes of his sexual escapades--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --and stuff with woman in different cities.  Abernathy, you know, said he was quite concerned about him, but he was, but Dr. King once it was--he really said, well, he wasn't going to worry about it.  Just keep on going and to Abernathy's astonishment did nothing (laughter).  This stuff didn't harm him.  Didn't seem to harm him, so--
Speaker 2: The notion was if you're not plotting to overthrow the country, what's the point?  But Hoover was obsessed, you know, with Martin and when he made that statement, I mean, to say that, you know, like--you wouldn't say that about Billy Graham no matter what was going on.  I mean, to say that he was the most notorious liar in the country.  I mean, that's, that's pretty deep.  And then to know about--we didn't know, of course, then about COINTELPRO, but that he was to discredit likely (unclear), and they were going to pick out Martin's replacement, which of course did not happen, but--he had resigned himself to live with, with all those threats.  And you can imagine that threats that he was under from the time he got the Noble Peace Prize right through to Memphis.  He--the threats constantly, daily under surveillance.  Who would use whatever he had against Bobby Kennedy to get, to get permission to wire tap him.  And when we said those things in those days, people thought we were paranoid.  They say, "You don't do things like that in America.  You don't spy on Americans."  Said, "Y'all are paranoid."  Said, "Yeah, right."  But most of us felt--our meetings were open.  If we are not plotting to overthrow this country, and all of our meetings are public, then we can't worry about it.  We absolutely can't worry about it.  We got to do what we have to do 'cause if you are afraid to go out and all that, you can't do what needs to be done, and so we passed that.
Story_ID: 84290
Speaker 1: But he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to lead that march, and that march broke up in violence.  It was, it was, it was the first really big violent thing we had.
Speaker 2: Can you describe how it happened?  How did the violence start and what happened?
Speaker 1: We were having this march.  We were going to march down Main Street to City Hall.  Martin was late getting there because the plane was late.  I kept saying, we need to try out the march out.  The people had been there early, and it was getting hot and they were getting restless so they were just right for something.  The young guys were going around preaching against nonviolence, and I remember being--we all about march has started at a church called Claiborne Temple.  It was the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, AME's Church and most of our march.  I don't think Martin ever spoke there, but the marches started there.  And one of them was in the--one of the guys was in the church sitting up on the communion table with its feet propped up on it, and I remember snatching him down, you know.  I always kind of--I was young enough to kinds of relate to them and not just get all bent out of shape when they'd curse and do all that.  I just let it pass.  And I snatched--
Speaker 2: That was too much, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was too much on the, on the--and they were, they were haranguing the crowd all the way through.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Who did they purport to represent or who were they supposed to be (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Themselves, I guess.  There was a group called the invaders.  I don't think that the invaders, as a group, was under the sponsorship of whoever it was.  But individually, there were some people.  There's one young guy that he's still in Memphis now, and he talks about--I know he regrets seeing that tape about how Dr. King has no right to come in here and tell us what to do and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  I mean, to say that and then get it for posterity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I suppose so.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: That's played now and he's the person that tried to block (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I mean, this is our territory.  You know, like young guys (unclear) will do.  I'm sure he regrets having said it.  But as the march took off, finally when he got there, and there was pushing and--always pushing and shoving who's going to lock arms closest to Martin.  The Bishop, or the Priest, or the Rabbi, or the whoever.  I always took the position of being on the middle or the end of the march that you needed some leadership back there.  So that was always my position.  I would, I would go in the back.  So I was still at the church when the people were marching.  They started marching down one street.  They were going to make a left turn and go down Beale Street and then a right turn down Main Street.  Before all the people left the church, I could hear a sound, but I didn't know what it was.  It was a, it was a, it was a whishing sound.  And then a policeman was standing close to me, and I heard on his--on his radio, "The nigras are rioting, the nigras are rioting."  We had these signs on wooden sticks and it only takes a few.  A few guys pull the signs off and start breaking out the windows on Beale Street before they even got to Main Street.  And the police kept asking for permission to break up the march, permission to break up the--the nigras are rioting, the nigras are rioting, and I could hear this.  My wife and children were in the march and everybody's going--and finally, the police--I heard the order says, permission granted, and rather than try to isolate those guys that were doing that, they waded into the crowd and started beating people at random.  Just beating them; teachers, professors, housewives, people with children.  I mean, the police--the police have always been quite vicious to black people in Memphis.  It's been a--a long journey along those lines.  And, finally, when they said, permission to break up the march.  They could have isolated those guys, and then it just grew bigger and bigger and everybody was told to come back to the church.  They fired teargas into the church, once we were back.  Nobody was rioting in the church.  But they fired tear gas, and that made the national news.  And we had to just literally pick Martin up, put him in a car and took him to a hotel.
Story_ID: 83478
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we're rolling.  And you were saying that after that march that turned into violence you all--
Speaker 2: We had to get--after the march broke up in violence and the police were just so vicious, I mean, they were just--that, that it's on film how they were beating people just--people were not doing anything.  They just waded into crowd.  They could have isolated those guys.  And it was--we got back to the church, they even shot teargas into the church and someone had--we flagged a car down and put Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] into the car and took him to the Rivermont Hotel.  He always stayed at the--at the Lorraine.  Just took him to the closest safest place.  I don't know if he ever checked in or not, he just--when I got over there, he was lying on the bed, you know, just stretched out on the bed in his clothes, and he was so depressed.  He said, "Billy, what happened, what happened?"  And I said, "I don't know, Martin."  I said, "It was a police riot, that's really what it was and that's what made the people run and do all that.  He could have isolated those guys."
Speaker 1: This is really the first time that, you know, in a long time that something like this had happened at a--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in Memphis--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- well at one of his marches?
Speaker 2: At one of his marches, period.  Yes.  Yes, that had not happened.  And it was--it devastated him, it really did.  And he said, if we don't have a peaceful march in Memphis, we can't go to Washington 'cause then that's when they begin to ask the press, Dr. King, you think you can have a peaceful march in America?  You're going to take--in Washington, you're going to take all these people, poor people, up there.  You're talking about staying, and he said, "Well, we're going to have a peaceful march in Memphis."  And not knowing, you know, what we know now, he brought all of the main staff into Memphis.  That's why so many of them were there when he was killed.  He came back--he sent Jesse [Jackson, HM], Hosea [Williams], Big Jim Orange [James Orange], Andy [Andrew Young, HM]; everybody was in Memphis.  All the top staff was in Memphis in preparation for the march.  Andy was meeting with some of the young Turks, trying to calm them down.  They had asked for $40,000 to carry on a feeding program or something--
Story_ID: 83479
Speaker 1: And he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came back into Memphis [Tennessee].  They had a retreat that weekend in Atlanta [Georgia], and the staff came in earlier than he did.  He came back into Memphis on April 3rd and--in preparation for the march.  We were in court trying to get the injunction.  They're had been an injunction after the riots.  The injunction was--we were enjoined against march, and so we had the lawyers trying to get that opened.  To get it lifted.  That--he had some meetings that day, I think, the last meeting we had at a church was Jim Lawson's church.  The mountain top speech occurred on April 3rd.  That's the last speech of his life.  But it almost didn't happen.  There were tornado warnings that day.  It was raining profusely, thunder, lighting, and he thought there wouldn't be many people at the church, Mason's Temple.  It is the Headquarters of the Church of God in Christ.  It's the biggest place we had to meet in.  And when you have a speaker like Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you would go there.  And so he wanted to stay at the motel and work on the poor people's campaign--on the march, and he told several of us to go over and have the meeting at the church--at the Temple.  They called it Mason's Temple, named after the organizer, Bishop Mason.  When we got there, the place was nearly full, it was more than half full.  Even in that weather, and when we walked in, people started clapping and [Ralph] Abernathy's preacher sent--said, to him, "These people are not clapping for us, they think Martin's coming in behind us," and they did.  (Laughter) So he went to the phone out in the lobby.  There were no cell phones then, if you can believe it.  He went to the lobby and called Martin at this hotel and said, "Man, you better get over here.  These people have come out in the weather to hear you.  I ain't making no speech tonight."  And would you believe, Martin came.  While waiting to get to his speech, the shutters in the back of the building kept banging because the wind was so high.  And if you turn the fan on, and they blow out, they won't bang, but the fan wasn't on and every time they would bang, he would jump and look around.  They would bang, and he would jump and look around.  And I noticed that, so I went to the--I got the custodian to turn the fans on and blow out so that it wouldn't bang 'cause it made him real nervous.  That night Abernathy introduced him for twenty minutes, twenty minutes.  He started when they first got together in, in, in Montgomery and went all the way up to Memphis with no expectation that that would be the last introduction he would make.  As a matter of fact, the introduction was so long, when Martin finally got up, he said, "I thought Dr. Abernathy wasn't going to make a speech," twenty minutes.  And nobody said a word.  In our tradition, we know how to get the introducer out of the way; amen, brother, amen, amen, amen, amen.  None of that.  Ralph introduced him, he got up, he didn't take a topic.  He just started talking.  He talked about the plane being late from Atlanta because Dr. King was on it, that he came on the, on the loud speaker and said that, talked about the threats against his life when he got into Memphis, talked about death more than I had heard him talk about it.  Talked about the time he was signing autographs in New York.  Autographing the book, really.  And a demented black woman came up to him and said, "Are you Martin Luther King, Jr.?"  He said, "Yes."  And she plunged a letter opener into his chest.  And he's telling the audience this.  And he said, when I was recovering, I got greetings from all over the world.  But the most telling came from a young girl who said, Dear Dr. King, I read about your misfortune, and I'm so sorry.  The "New York Times" said that the blade of the letter opener was so close to your aorta that if you had sneezed, you would have drowned in your own blood; and she put at the bottom, I'm glad you didn't sneeze.  And he picked up on that, and did a whole litany, I'm glad I didn't sneeze.  If I sneezed, I would have missed the Selma to Montgomery march; if I sneezed, I would have missed the voting rights act; if I sneezed, I would have missed the young people sitting in all over the south for their rights, and he went on and on about what he would have missed had he sneezed.  By that time, we were on our feet, we were crying, we didn't know why we were crying.  I mean, it was awesome.  And the rain and the thunder added to it, you know.
Story_ID: 83480
Speaker 1: It was, it was, it was very powerful and he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said, "I may not get there with you, but you will get to the promise land because God has allowed me to go up on the mountain, and I've looked over and I've seen the promise land."  And I'm so certain he knew he wouldn't get there, but he wouldn't tell us that.  Can you imagine what we would have felt if he had said to us, "I won't get there with you, but you'll get there."  I mean, we would have been devastated.  So he softened it, and even in that moment he softened it and was thinking about somebody else.  Thinking about us.  He said, "I may not get there with you."  He never thought he'd live to be forty.  He was thirty-nine.  "But you'll get to the promise land because God has allowed me to go up and look over, and I've seen it.  And tonight, I'm not fearing any man, and I, I"--with that jumping he was doing, and it's like he preached himself through the fear of death.  That was his moment.  He just got it out of him.  He said, "I'm not fearing any man."  And if you listen to that speech, at the end of it, it says, I'm happy tonight.  My eyes have seen the coming of the glory.  And one of the things he'd always do is finish a quote.  He said, if you don't finish a quote, it's like without finishing a poem.  But he didn't finish it that night, he turned and we had to help him to his seat.  I mean, it was just--and we just kind of stood there, you know.  It was awesome.
Speaker 2: Had you ever seen him that emotional before?
Speaker 1: Not, not like that, that night.
Speaker 2: --how about the film that they've shown--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they've shown it a million times.  You know, you would see his tear--his eyes are welled up with tears--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he seems to be--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't the first time he made that particular speech, necessarily, but it was the most emotional--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  It was.  It was.  And, true enough, the next day, one of the reasons I feel he preached himself through that fear.  It was gone.
Story_ID: 83481
Speaker 1: I mean, the, the, the somberness was gone and he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in a joyful, playful, mood, really; he and Andy [Andrew Young, HM].  Andy had been away with the lawyers all day and he said, "Where you been, Andy?"  Andy said, "I been out trying to get the injunction moved."  He said, "Well, you need to report to me."  He threw a pillow at him.  Andy threw it back at him.  (Laughter).  And they were pillow fighting.  Everybody kind of got into a pillow fight.  And he was in a lighthearted mood the rest of the day, really.  I mean, the--up until that awful moment.  He did have a meeting with the staff to get them recommitted to nonviolence.  He said, "Even if you don't embrace it as a philosophy, you have to embrace it as a tactic.  There's no other way we can win.  We cannot win a violent revolution.  We have to be non-violent."  Anybody that can't embrace that, you got to go.  You can't have it.  You can't have it.  Dinner had been prepared at my home.  I told him dinner was at five o'clock.  He called the house, they told him it was six, which it was the correct time.  I said five, because we had a rally that night and he was not known to be on time.  So when I went to the motel to get him, he and Ralph [Abernathy] were in the room.  They shared a room.  Dorothy Cotton had the room that Martin would normally stay in.  Dorothy was one of the Vice Presidents.  She's probably the highest ranking female in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at that time.  And she had the room that he would stay in, 307.  So he and Ralph just stayed in 306.  And when I got there, they were there.  And I went, I said, "Okay, guys, it's almost five o'clock.  Martin said, "Oh, no.  Dinner is not at five.  It's at six, and I'm in no hurry."  And that gave me the wonderful privilege to spend the last hour of his life with him in that room, three of us.  Three preachers Abernathy, King and Kyles, and of the three, I am the one and only one that's left of that three.
Speaker 2: So what did you talk about?
Speaker 1: That question is always asked, especially by the media.  I said, "We talked preacher talk."  They said, "Well, what's preacher talk?"  I said, "What preachers talk about."  But he had come out of that funk, and he was just talking--Ralph had washed a shirt for him, one of those drip dries.  He couldn't button it.  Ralph, said, "You're not going to wear that shirt?"  He said, "I can't button it."  He said, "Well, you know, I can't another shirt for you."  He said, "Well, I can't button it."  Ralph needed a preacher for the week, and Martin said, "Why don't you get Kyles?"  And when he told me the date, I said, "Well, I'll be in Columbus, Georgia preaching for Fred Lofton.  Martin looked me dead in the eyes, said, "Wait a minute.  Anybody with good sense would rather spend a week preaching in Atlanta than in Columbus, Georgia."  I said, "Does that mean, I don't have good sense."  He said, "That's not what I said.  Listen very carefully."  I said, "Plus, I gave my word."  He said, "What's that supposed to mean?"  It was just like banter between preachers.  I had just purchased a new home, a different home, and Martin said, "Did you buy a new house?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Now, I got two problems.  One is, your wife is too young to cook and the other is, I'm not going to call his name, but a preacher in Atlanta bought a new house and invited me and Coretta to dinner, and when we got there, we had to eat on a card table, 'cause he didn't have no furniture, and the ham was cold, Kool-Aid was hot and tomato salad"--he just went on.  "Now, if I go to your house, you bought a new house and you ain't got no decent food or furniture, I'm going to broadcast it on the nation that you bought a house and can't buy food."
Story_ID: 83482
Speaker 1: Then he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] spoke very affectionately about his dad [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.].  He said, "Oh, dad is tough." Said "Dad came to Ebenezer [Baptist Church] to get to church and wind up getting momma, too.  He sure is tough."  It was light conversation, very light.  Ralph [Abernathy] was shaving and putting on shaving lotion.  He said, "I got to smell good over there, all them cooks over there."  I said, "My wife didn't cook, the people at church cooked, anyway."  And it was that kind of--then he got just serious for a moment.  He said, "Billy, what do you think it was that brought the community together like this because we haven't seen this for a while?"  I said, "I think they related to those garbage men.  And perhaps felt some guilt that we didn't see them as choir members and deacons, and, you know, just garbage men."  And they came--I mean, they supported him whole heart--we collected food and money.  About a quarter of six, we walked on the balcony.  There were a lot of people in the courtyard.  We were up on the balcony, and they were down in the courtyard.  He was saying hello to people he had not seen.  He asked Chauncey, his lawyer from Chicago, who was also Muhammad Ali's lawyer, "Are you going to Kyles' house?"  I think Chauncey, said yes.  He saw Jesse [Jackson, HM].  Jesse was with Ben Branch.  Ben Branch was a musician who grew up in Memphis but now lived in Chicago.  So Martin said, "Jesse, don't take that whole band to Billy's house.  Plus, you're not dressed for dinner."  Jesse said, "I'm not taking the van, and I don't need no shirt and tie to go to dinner.  I got an appetite."  Then he said, "Hey, Doc, I want you to meet Ben."  So they started walking towards the balcony, Ben Branch and Jesse, and Martin was still waving at folks.  The driver and the car were right beneath us.  Somebody said, it's going to be cold, get your coat.  He went back to the room, Abernathy was still in there.  I said, "Ralph, get my coat."  He didn't go in the room.  He came back to the balcony.  Jesse and Ben got to him, and as soon as they they got there, he leaned over the railing to meet Jesse--to meet Ben.  I walked away.  I said, "Come on guys, let's go."  I got about five steps, "Kapow!" [sound effect].  The shot rang out.
Story_ID: 83483
Speaker 1: He was talking to Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, HM] and Ben [Branch].  The bullet hit him in the side of his face.  There was a bigger wound under his shirt that you couldn't see but blood was everywhere.  The bullet, I think, they call them dumb dumbs.  It explodes when it hits you or it explodes coming through the barrel of the gun.  It doesn't go in straight, it jags.  It's just jagged.  So it just tore all of his chest out, severed his spinal cord.  And he was knocked from the railing back on the balcony.  I rushed to his side and I saw this hole, and I ran inside.  Ralph [Abernathy] and I crossed each other.  He came out, I went in.  I picked up the phone to call an operator--or to call an ambulance.  The operator when she heard the shot, left the telephone.  You couldn't use it without her.  And when she realized that Dr. King had been shot, she had a heart attack.  She fell in the courtyard, and she died three or four days later.  She was the wife of the motel owner.  I ran back outside.  By this time, the police were coming with their guns drawn and I holler to them, "Call an ambulance on your police radio."  The reason they were there, after the march had broken up, they stationed police, National Guard and highway patrol at every fire station in the black community.  And there's a fire station right across the street from the motel, and that's why they were so close.  And when they were coming, I said, "Call the ambulance on your police radio."  And they hollered, "Where did the shot come from?"  So you see a picture of pointing in the direction of the shot.  And they came and, and, and some people got up on the balcony, but they stopped others from coming.  And then we got somebody on the switchboard.  I told Jesse to call Coretta and I called my home.  While waiting for the ambulance to come, I took a spread from one of the beds, and I covered him from his neck down.  He never spoke a word.
Speaker 2: Was he alive at that point, do you think?
Speaker 1: Clinically, he was probably dead.  He was losing so much blood, and the--but I think alive as much as brain.  His eyes would move like reflective, you know, reflection.  I took a crushed cigarette out of his hand.  I took the package from his pocket, and I share that with young people because they can't imagine Martin Luther King smoking, but I said, "Yeah, but look what was happening in his life."  He was a human being, he was not a saint.  And he didn't come out of the sky from Mars.  I said, the pressure of Vietnam, the pressure of the poor people's campaign, the Memphis campaign, the threats against his life.  I said, he didn't want young people to see him smoke, but he had to have something and that's--a cigarette is a mild thing to have with all that pressure.  Because he had all the hopes and aspirations that human beings have.  He was a human being.  They said, "Wow, wow."  So I took the package.  I have it somewhere now.  I took the cigarette--it was crushed.  When the bullet hit him I'm suggesting that he did that, so I took the cigarette from his hand.  And the ambulance finally came.  I told them what hospital to take him to.  And instinctively I said St. Joseph's, because that was the easiest hospital to integrate in Memphis.  It was a Catholic hospital.  The Methodist and Baptist.  Baptist being the hardest and Methodist being the next, the Catholic--I'm sure they would have treated him at any hospital, but I said, take him to St. Joseph.
Story_ID: 83484
Speaker 1: About an hour later, they called us at the motel.  I was dealing with the press.  I was a senior person on staff there.  Hosea [Williams] got angry with Jesse [Jackson, HM] because Jesse--Jesse was standing by me.  And the press was talking to me, and, of course, he started talking too because they had some kind of pact that--that the leadership wouldn't have anything to say until they got together and have one statement.  But that was difficult to do with all that was going on.  And I had difficulty with why was I there?  That we were young preachers and friends together.  We were friends.  If he had not been going to my home, would he have been killed?  I know now that he would have, but I didn't then.  If we hadn't invited him to Memphis [Tennessee].  We know now that [James Earl] Ray was stalking him.  He was not to reach Washington [D.C.].  And I was shaking my head trying to wake up out of this nightmare, and I was already awake.  And so over the years, it was like a revelation.  It was like God unfolded to me why I was there.  Like the unfolding of a flower, if you give it time, and let it unfold at its own pace, you get a beautiful flower.  If you rush it, you tear the pedals off and you destroy the flower.  So I waited.  I don't know how many years it took, but the revelation came so clear to me that I was there to be a witness, and my witness has to be true, I mean, I don't--I don't have an axe to grind with anybody.  People say, was Jesse really there?  I mean, I, I, I don't get into all that.  I just tell what I experienced and what I know.  And the witness is true, that Martin Luther King, Jr. didn't die in some untoward way, he didn't--he wasn't shot by a jealous lover.  He wasn't shot leaving the scene of a crime.  This man with an earned Ph.D. degree with a Nobel Peace Prize.  It could have been U.N. [United Nations] Ambassador, all the things he could have been.  He could have been University President.  And here he is with all these skills dying on a balcony in Memphis, Tennessee helping garbage workers.  That is so profound.  Never lived poor himself.  His dad was quite well off.  Never had a poverty moment in his life.  And here he is--and that's why thirty-five years later.  This is thirty-five years after his death, people remember and celebrate his life because it was a life of service.  And once that revelation came to me, I travel all over this country and out of this country, sharing--'cause people are so--they're just so eager to hear and to know what it was like the last hour of his life.  And I do it all over the country.  It's not my--I'm a full-time pastor, it's not all I do, but every opportunity I get, I go.  I go as often as I can and just to see the reaction that people have, you know, and hearing about that last hour and about his life.  And how he--how he served.  And this is thirty-five years, and young people are learning his speech, even right wing conservatives, even though they repeat it out of context, they do it.
Story_ID: 83485
Speaker 1: And to have--they've only three people in the history of this country that a national holiday has been given for.  Abraham--Washington--George Washington, the father of the country, Abraham Lincoln saved it through the, through the--
Speaker 2: Civil War?
Speaker 1: Civil War, and Martin Luther King, Jr.  The only three that a national holiday, and that has happened in less than a 150 years.  From three fifths human to a national holiday in honor of an African American, and no matter what the politics may be you got to deal with the holiday.  The post office is closed, the banks close, the schools are closed, the stock market is closed.  That speaks volumes about a people who came here enslaved in less than 150 years.  Illegal to know how to read. Now, we're everywhere.  We're everywhere.
Speaker 2: It's probably the only holiday of the three--I mean, they ganged up the other two and made it President's Day.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And of the two holidays, it's probably the only one that the international community is really concerned about, as well.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because of what he stood for?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And it's growing every year.  It's amazing.  Every year, it gets bigger and bigger.  And people are doing meaningful things on that day.  They're just not going fishing and taking it as a--when I spoke in Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] last year, there was some debate on campus about whether the school should shut down.  I think they have a policy where you can--you can miss any class, make it up if you have to and go to the celebrations.  And I, I said, well, I didn't really come to get in this fight, but as long as they allow all the room for--if they shut down, they're not going to have anything in--at least, you--they had a Chicago program and a (unclear) program, and they were both full.  If the school had been closed, I doubt that you ever had anything like that, you know, on that day itself.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 83486
Speaker 1: And I--I'd give as many as--I have given literally thousands of interviews.  It's not my life's work, I don't have an axe to grind with anybody, you know, I don't get into arguments and debates.  Every time Jesse [Jackson, HM] runs for President, they would say that his character flaw is, he lied about being with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King.  And the blood on him, where did it come from?  Blood was everywhere.  Finally, last year, somebody came up with a picture with Jesse leaning over Martin.  I don't know where it has been all that time.  They finally had a picture, and if you got that close to him--I had blood all over me.  But I can't get into that kind of discussion.  I mean, that--what does that has to do with anything?  I mean, that's not going to make you his successor, you know.  You have to work to earn those positions.  So I give interviews as often as I can, and they're all kinds of conspiracy theories and they've got Jesse in it and I'm in it and all that.  And I just bypass all that.  I really do, because it was a relief for me.  Something had to say to me, why I was there at that moment in history.  And once that happened, it was like a burden I had laid down.  And I can go on.  I give--I give VIP tours to the--at the museum.  The museum--the museum-- that the place where he was killed is now a wonderful civil rights museum, and if people who listen or see us ever get to Memphis you really want to go to check it out.  It's a wonderful museum--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--motel?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 83487
Speaker 1: We're rolling again.  So say that again.  So say that again.
Speaker 2: You know--without--if I had not been steeped in my religious convictions and belief, I could have either gone crazy or I would have become, you know, violent.  To shoot a man down like that, like a dog, and he is espousing non-violence, so what's the point?  And then it occurred to me so clear, how I would dishonor his memory and his life if I turned to violence.
Speaker 1: Because [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] felt what all--I mean, it's good that people have things that they have written about that made him more human and accessible--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on some level.  But at the same time, his resolve around non-violence was real.  I mean, what's--
Speaker 2: It was unshakable.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was.  Once he committed to it, that was it.
Speaker 1: And in his senseless service and mission was quite real.
Speaker 2: And he, he knew he would live--he said, I won't even live before--not that I don't want to.  Longevity has great place, but I will not make it to forty.  And so we started dealing with that sort of humorously.  "Now, Andy, what you going to say at my funeral?  I don't want no bunch of crap up there on my funeral."  And we started talking about what you going to do, and he got to the place before and all these people being killed in Mississippi and stuff.  I mean, that's the closest I've heard him to the Memphis night, when he would say, "I'm tired of preaching these funerals.  I'm tired of it."  You know, "This country has got to do better."  I mean, that's when he really got it, and especially at Jimmie Jackson's funeral and some--and the young girls in Birmingham.  I mean, it was--And I, I, I equated that with, with Allan Boesak in South Africa.  I took him through the museum, and he was talking about how difficult it was for him to be in rallies and talk about going back out, knowing that the people he was talking about and talking to, he'd have to do their funerals, and over, and over, and over again.  He said that was difficult.  And Martin was kind of at that level, doing all these funerals, over, over, and over.  And in some cases, you know, just almost needlessly because in some instances the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had information that certain things were going to happen.
Story_ID: 83488
Speaker 1: As we said earlier on, I think, we were discussing before we started this, that there was so many stories and so many acts of heroism and bravery in this non-violent movement that the--I think--I mean, do you feel like a war vet or something?  I mean, after all, you seen so many--you know, there's been a triumph (unclear) a triumph of it, but are you still haunted by this?
Speaker 2: You--yeah.  Yeah, you do see it as, as a veteran of a war.  It's like a rag tag army that had no conscription power.  You couldn't draft anybody, you couldn't shoot, desert us.  You had no real person that could, could put out a demand and make a happen.  It was so volunteer.  But on the other side of that, that's the best army.  You couldn't pay people to do what they did in Birmingham.  You couldn't, you couldn't have had a mercenary army doing that.  I mean, get up from those firehoses and get right--and knock them right back down, and some of the pictures that we've seen at the museum.  There's a powerful picture of one of the dogs that's right at this young man's stomach.  I mean, just at him.  His fists are not balled up, there's no fear on his face, he's just there, you know, with mad dogs.  And what we depended on was that there are enough people of good will and people who are civil enough not allow this to happen in this country.  But you do feel like a veteran.  Rag tag army, sure, but who could make anybody do anything.  I mean, you may call King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] the General, but he couldn't, you know, he couldn't, he couldn't make even the other groups come in.  There were a lot of instances where NAA [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, and Urban League didn't agree, or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] didn't agree, did not support the Freedom Riders.  All kinds of things happened and for it to come out--that's why I think people are taking a second look at the power of the Civil Rights movement.  They're seeing it altogether a different light.  You know, what it did and the power of the individual, how one person can make a difference.
Story_ID: 83489
Speaker 1: And I'm just totally opposed of them making Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] a saint and doing all--because that wasn't him.  We knew he was special, but now he wasn't saintly.  Because if I say he's a saint, than excuses me.  I ain't no saint.  I can't do that stuff.  And then they always want to compare Martin to Malcolm [X].  We have a diverse group.  You know, we don't all beat with on heartbeat.  Malcolm was useful at his level and Martin was useful at his.  They said, "Well, you know, they were coming together."  Martin never changed his position.  The press does not like to deal with after Mecca.  He was coming closer.  He denounced violence and hatred, but they don't deal with that.  They deal with what sells papers, "by any means necessary."  Malcolm was coming closer to Martin's position.  Martin never moved.  He stayed there.
Speaker 2: That's more of a tactical move, because, I think, maybe--would you think ideologically they were similar, in terms how they analyzed what the country was and what it was trying to do to us?
Speaker 1: No.  I, I--but after Mecca, Malcolm was coming closer--he renounced violence after he went to Mecca.
Speaker 2: But I was asking do you think their analysis of our situation?
Speaker 1: At the time that they made it?
Speaker 2: Similar.  Not necessarily their strategy of how to deal with it, but their analysis of what our situation was and were the forces aligned against black people?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  It's just how you expressed it.  You know, used different terms, but bottom line was they were both right, and the reason you need that kind of--it, it really takes more courage to be non-violent than to be violent.  I mean, it, it, it really does.  Violence is the response, you know, natural.  That's why we were able to win the battle against the forces of evil because they know how to response to you violent.  If we had fought back, I mean, they exploited that.  They almost invented that, but they don't know how to respond to non-violence and that's how you went.  You know, ain't no problem.  Ms. Charlie going and putting you in your place violently, and you better not raise your hand like you're going to fight back.  It appeared that he was going to get a gun.  How a wallet looks like a gun, you know.  It's non-violence that they can--that they can't handle, and it takes much more courage to be non-violent 'cause you--
Story_ID: 83490
Speaker 1: It seems like it's almost like an emotional freefall after you make that commitment to service to put yourself in risk like that and know that you're not supposed to, you know.
Speaker 2: And depending on the civilized people to come to your aide.  You know, that's part of what you expect to happen.  And when people saw that on television, how do you bomb a church at a Sunday School hour and brag about it?  How do you do a number like they did on Emmett Till and get off two or three times and then sell your story to the press, you know, three months later.  I mean, that--
Speaker 1: And admit that you did it in the story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the story.
Speaker 1: And tell--and give the details.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I don't understand.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  And one of the things I always say to my audiences when I--we don't talk about slavery enough.  We don't deal with it until--black people, it's hurtful.  White people, it's shameful.  But until we really deal with the whole question of slavery, put it on the table and let's deal with it.  It is a part of the American experience.  It happened in America, and you can't sweep it under the rug.  You can't act like it didn't happen.  You put it on the table, and let's deal with it.  You want to get into all the reparations and all that, that's fine.  And there are other ways to--reparations to manifest themselves other than money.  We just think about money.  They're all kinds of ways you can--I mean, there are other ways you can do it.  But--and until that happens, the healing can never take place, and it's going to be there.  I spent a good deal of time just dealing with that whole period.  Not only was it a horrible time for people of African descent--the record is that only five of twenty slaves made it across the Middle Passage; packed on ships like sardines.  And if that's true, then I am a descendant of the five, and I owe it to my ancestors to make the--there's not a month that goes by that our Jewish friends do not have something about the Holocaust on Television; not a month.  That happened, a horrible thing but it happened in Europe.  Slavery happened in America.  There's a Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C.  There's no slavery museum, there's no museum that deals with slavery.  That happened in America, and we've got to deal with it.  It is a part of Americans.  Not just Black History Month.  It is a part of the American experience.  People owned human beings like cattle.  They would sell a father one way, a mother one way, the children another way.  I mean, that happened.  But we--and the only trouble white people could get in regarding slaves was teaching them how to read, lynch them, burn them, castrate them; whatever you please, but you better not teach them how to read.  And many white people did get in trouble and lost fortunes and whatever else helping slaves to learn to read and becoming anti-slavery advocates.  All through that museum, you see black and white bleeding together.  Several ministers were killed on the marches.  A housewife from Detroit, Viola Liuzzo, came down to drive the workers.  She was brutally killed.  People of good conscious have always come--they've always come forward.  You're going to have that kind of help.  But as horrible and our ancestors found ways to cope, coping mechanism, they didn't know they were coping mechanisms, but the innards of the hog that was thrown away, they took it and made it delicacies out of them, you know.  Couldn't make a whole cornbread, so they short cutted with what they had and made hot water cornbread.  I mean, just took throw away scraps and made quilts with designs in them and all that.  So not only is slavery a story of a, of, of, of horror.  It is a story of a strong determined people who survived everything that was put up on them, barring none.  Everything.  Anything that was put up on them, they survived it.
Story_ID: 83491
Speaker 1: I often wonder when I go to church, you know, the family and I go, when I hear a preacher preach about what happened or what's in the Bible, what happened to the children of Israel and those things.  I often wonder, if not, our own story in this country is just as dramatic.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Perhaps it should be given the same attention, you know, from the pulpit.  I mean, do you have any thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that's why we mix it so often.  Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] mountain top promise land, you know, is a mixture of the, the, the Biblical journey of the Jews and Moses didn't get to see--he saw it, but he didn't get--he didn't make it to it.  So there are a lot of parallels.  But that's story is so compelling.  I mean, it really is.  When you think about, there were no classes to teach the slaves to speak this language.  They never had bilingual classes.  They didn't speak this language when they came here, but they had such a will to live.  They learned it phonetically.  They didn't know they were learning it phonetically.  So I tell young people, don't be upset when you hear Granmomma say, "Give me this hereya," or "Imma get you good."  They just picked it up.  I said, that's like taking you and putting you in France.  They don't speak English and you don't speak French, but you got to survive.  And they ain't thinking learning no English, so you got to learn French because they weren't thinking of learning, not even to give you orders.  They weren't learning your language, so you had to learn theirs, and they did.  They learned it because--so the other side of slavery is the story of a strong people who survived everything, and they had dreams.  The slaves had dreams of children, children becoming all of the things that people of the world can become.  You could hear in their songs their dreams; yes, we're in trouble now, we're in some deep trouble, but I'm so glad ain't going to last always.  That hope.  Without that hope, you die.  You just die, and they kept that hope alive.  And those songs had double meanings, wade in the water, God's going to trouble the water.  That meant you were getting ready to get out of there.  Just follow the river.  Just follow the river, you know.
Story_ID: 83492
Speaker 1: You think about even after slavery there's a period Jim Crow, the survivor's techniques kept coming.  Now, we're free.  Free to do what?  Free to go where?  Couldn't own anything in slavery.  Couldn't own a bucket of dirt.  Now, I'm free.  What I am going to do?  So a thing came into place called, sharecropping.  You got a hundred acres, let me farm ten at harvest time, I'll pay you back.  Give me a little money for seed, Mr. Charlie, and when harvest time come, I'll pay you back; sharecropping.  The share crop.  I'll live on your place.  Harvest comes, I can't read.  Illegal for me to know how to read, and you tell me you didn't make enough.  And it's the kind of slavery you keep me in it, I'm going to let you have this, I'm going to let you have that, but you still owe me.  Even if you could read, it was dangerous to say I don't owe you.  I mean, that that's (unclear) man.  You work the whole season sharecropping, and you--so you get a little bit, and you get a little bit, and you get a little bit and you survive, because if you can get another day, survive one more day.  When I was sharecropping, and that whole period of Jim Crow and segregation; can't do this, can't do that, and can't do the other.  When Rutherford B. Hayes pulled the troops out of the south, that was it.  That was it, and we even survived that.  And the kids in the south could not go to the school nine months.  They couldn't go until the crops were in.  Once the crops were in they can go, which may have given them three months.  Now, if I get three months a year and you get nine, do that for 120 years, and now you say the playing field is level L what about all those years I missed, those months.  Oh wonderful, now, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], says judged by the content of character, not the color of skin.  Well, if my affirmative action you tell me what--what, how do I make up a 120 years?  I go to the field and you go to the school.  And so without wallowing in that, I say, well, now, if you behind in a race, how do you catch up?  You can't curse your way up, can't call folks honkeys and names to get up.  The only way you get up is run faster, and that's how you catch up.  And that's what we did.  We ran faster.  So we got--can you imagine even if it's in the wrong party, can you imagine the Secretary of State being African American?  And, and, and, and the security advisor, National Security Advisor African American from not knowing how to read all the way to that.  Astronauts and everything else.  It is a powerful and compelling story.  I'm glad you people are doing what you do.  I really am.  I really am.  I applaud you, and that's why I said, right away, count me in.  I said, I'm coming to Chicago.  I'll take a day or whatever it takes.  I mean, that is, and you're right.  You can put that in a Bible book as a people, you know.  Who survived and God played, played a vital role in this.  We don't deny that.  The reason they burned our church is because it was so effective.  They wouldn't have burned it, if it hadn't been effective.  They made the mistake of letting us sit up in the balcony hearing about, how you get to God, you know, and we brought some of our own guard and we put this thing together.  And it is very powerful, very powerful.
Story_ID: 83493
Speaker 1: Sir, now, what happened to the garbage workers strike in Memphis [Tennessee] after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: We had that march that was broken up in violence.  His wife [Coretta Scott King] came and family came and people around the nation came.  And then the city finally gave in.  The big issue, once we got the money amount straight, the big issue was the city was not going to do dues check off and for you know--I don't say, that's the life blood.  I mean, if you don't do dues, how you going to get 1,300 people to come into office and pay union dues.  So once they settle that, there's, there's a piece that happened that I can't quite remember together.  It's interesting how I remember some things, the very details others escape me.  But that was philanthropist, I think, A. Plow, with St. Joseph's Aspirin or something.  He agreed to do something personal that took the city off the hook, whatever it was.  And then the city agreed to do dues check off, and that's how they settled it.  It was being very close to being settled before Dr. King was shot.  Reverend Netters, the other minister I told you about.  They were in meeting and they had come very close to a settlement and that's not this is it would have saved Dr. King, cause that--the strike wasn't what the killing was about.  But the sanitation workers got dues check off and they have a good program now.  I saw a truck the other day--now, we have to roll the garbage to the sidewalk, they come out of yards.  I saw a truck the other day, had one person on it.  And from the inside this thing, he pulls the controls and this thing picks up the garbage can, brings it around, dumps it and puts it back out.  One person.  I don't know if it's just a trial or what, but they make a good salary and, and they are a part of a--the community and, and many of them get interviewed about that period, and they have a--I met--I was in San Antonio [Texas] last month, Tucson [Arizona].  A young man came up to me and he said, Reverend Kyles, I'm from Memphis.  I said, I know you, I, I, I, I know you from what I was there and my daddy was a garbage worker, too.  I said, oh good.  I said, what you do down here.  He said, I'm in business.  I'm doing good, down in Tucson.  And I meet all overall the country who had some involvement in the, in the movement at some level, and they like, they like to tell me what it is and I listen respectfully.  But the garbage workers won their point, won their--
Story_ID: 83494
Speaker 1: Now, the Poor People's Campaign took place, but it didn't have the impact it would have had if Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had not been killed.  We did it--I think, we may stayed there two or three weeks and then start--it started acting like a real city with crime and everything else.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So we had to give it up.  There was a lot of discussion about the leaders leaving the tent city going to the hotels, 'cause they couldn't stay in tent city because the toilet facilities weren't right and it was, it was a city.  But it did not, it did not carry the weight it would have carried had Martin not been killed.
Story_ID: 83495
Speaker 1: We stayed up all night that night working on a statement for the next day after the announcement of his [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death, and that was that[Ralph] Abernathy would be made President and the poor people's campaign would continue in honor of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  We had the first memorial at the funeral home.  There's a funeral director in Memphis who always provided us with a car and a driver whenever we had dignitaries in town.  And I have so much respect for him.  As a matter of fact, they pronounced death, they asked me what funeral home, and I said Robert Lewis, because Lewis always did that.  And after autopsy and all that, you know, they take the top of your head off and all that.  They took him to Lewis', I couldn't look at him.  I would not look at him.  And Lewis put it together.  He said, I'll do whatever you want me to do.  And if Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King doesn't like this casket, she can send it back, and I think they did.  But he never once in all these years used the fact that he embalmed Martin Luther King [Jr.] to enhance his business, and I just respect him so much for that.  Because he could--and as photographer who, you, you probably you probably seen so many photographs, Ernest Withers, he has photographed the movement from Emmett Till on.  He's a photo journalist and he's you say contract with somebody now, but most of the pictures in the museum, many of them he took and the whole Civil Rights Movement, he's got it.  Little Rock and all of it.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: W-i-t-h-e-r-s; Ernest Withers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he's a great resource to on the movement, but Ernest could have taken pictures of Martin before the undertakers finished but he would not snap one picture until he was fully dressed.  The University of Tennessee at one point, the medical school was using some of the autopsy pictures in class.  Vasco Smith, Maxine's husband from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was also a county commissioner, and he went right away and got that stopped.  They were using photographs of his autopsy in their teaching.
Speaker 2: Sort of the ultimate disrespect.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  But Ernest would not take one picture until he was fully dressed.  So I have a lot of respect for him, too.
Story_ID: 83496
Speaker 1: And the journey continues, you know.  It really does.  But what you're doing is so significant.  I've been asked often and often about writing a book.  And I don't feel it.  I mean, I--you know, and I'm, I'm, I'm a little more than suspicious.  You know, when you put stuff in a book people will believe it and things live given so many interviews and the interviews don't didn't you come out like I said, didn't say what I said, you know, and I, I, I don't want that.  I think I have enough tapes and stuff like that that people can get information from me, but if you write that book and they put stuff in there that you didn't say, I mean, you can't--you're not--they're not going to redo it.  I think that's one of my fears, but the other is I made a promise to myself and to the Lord that I would not commercialize my relationship with Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so I won't do it.  If I write a book, it'll be for classroom.  So I give all these interviews, and I just give them.
Story_ID: 83497
Speaker 1: So we were talking about chronicling this experience, there was a book, a controversial book, written by Reverend Ralph David Abernathy, who was very close to Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  You know, that was controversial to people.  You know, what was your opinion of the book and effort?
Speaker 2: I think Ralph wrote that book because he was still angry.  I don't think he was at the signing of the King Holiday Bill.  It was almost like he had fallen out of favor with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--I think he thought SCLC tricked him into running for congress, and he didn't win, and he lost the presidency.  It would've been difficult for anybody to follow Martin Luther King, Jr. at any level, and it was equally as difficult for Ralph because he wasn't Martin, and he--you know, even Martin's own sons are having trouble, Martin III.  I can't say that Ralph intended, you know, to harm them with the book, but the, the end results was the same.  To say this, he was the godfather to the children, and to say what he said in the book, that really wasn't true.  It really wasn't true.  And if you're close to Martin, as close as Ralph was, people are going to believe it.  They're going to believe it.  And then to do it, you know, while the children are still young, I mean, living and that whole thing.  But I think his anger was there, and book publishing companies, it was a respectful and responsible one, but there were pictures in there that they were mislabeled.  It was almost like a rush job to get this out, and to find a hook, knowing to some degree, that just a book by Ralph Abernathy would not be a seller.  What's the hook?  What's the controversy?  And so when they started talking about his sexual prowess, that was the hook they needed.  And that's been one of the reasons I've been--I'm reluctant to write a book.  I don't know what they'll take my words and do, and I can't do anything about it once they do it.  So--
Speaker 1: So you don't think, necessarily, that's what he and-- what was written finally, wasn't necessarily what he intended or what?
Speaker 2: He probably said it.  I don't think that's, that--I can't say, I can't tell.  It's sort of like they probably came back to it when they interviewed him, trying to find out, you know, what can we use as a hook?  And then on the other hand, he could've been a part of it. I, I, I really can't say.
Speaker 1: But it--do you--
Speaker 2: He didn't deny it and--that, that he said it, and we went around--he went around the country defending it.
Story_ID: 83498
Speaker 1: I remember what we did was, we divided up into groups.  I took Memphis [Tennessee], somebody took Birmingham [Alabama], and we found all the flaws in the book in those cities, with a reputable book publishing company, and we started going--the woman that he accused Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] of being with, I took her to Washington [D.C.] for a press conference so she could deny it.  The way the dinner came about that night was Ralph [Abernathy] asked the woman to cook dinner for him.  She got excited, and said, "Ooh, I'd love that."  You know, and she called her sister and her sister came and brought a friend, and that's how they happened to wind up with three women and three men.  It wasn't like he said it was in the book.  And it was just--he was still angry at how he was--he felt pushed out of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  He wasn't--He didn't get support for the congress.  There was some discussion about him hugging [President Richard] Nixon and supporting Nixon, and this was kind of a way to get back at those people who were on him.  And it was terribly unfortunate, because I think he deserved better than he got, Ralph did.  He was there.  He was a supporter of Martin.  He went to jail almost as many times as Martin did, but I guess he saw this as a way to vent his anger upon SCLC or the King Foundation and anybody else that wasn't favorable to him.  And it was terribly unfortunate.  But what I discovered was, I said, wait a minute, at the meeting, taking the woman that was accused, she, you know, just told them what happened.  And she said the truth is, Reverend Abernathy was laying on the bed asleep at the time he claims that Dr. King and I were in the bed.  And it occurred to me, I said, wait a minute, we're going around the country trying to defend this book, and all we're doing is promoting it.  We need to stop right now.  Ben Hooks [HM] went on Donahue ["The Phil Donahue Show"], Ralph went on Donahue, and he was announcing Jesse [Jackson, HM] talking about he had blood; Jesse didn't have no blood on him, and if he had blood, he must've wiped it on him.  I mean, it was just--it was, it was--I said, I can't be a part of this.  I just can't be a part of this, so I just backed off from that whole thing, and eventually, you know, the fuel did die down because it just simply wasn't true, and it just never happened like that.  So I just kind of let it go.
Story_ID: 83499
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], though, SCLC reached a--kind of flattened out after the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], it seems; I don't--that's the impression people have (unclear) about it.  It still exists, but it doesn't seem to be involved in as certainly as dramatic activities that it used to be; what can you say about that?
Speaker 2: It was so much Martin, that's why.  It was so much Martin.  Martin needed a vehicle to do his thing in the SCLC.  There was a long debate.  Roland, what was his name?  There was a minister from Louisiana, the board was comprised of ministers, and he fought like mad.  It was going to be Southern Leadership Conference, and he fought like mad to put the word Christian in.  He said this has got to be a Christian leadership.  He fought.  He fought.  So it wound up being the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and it wasn't just preachers in it, everybody could be in it, but the board was mainly preachers.  And this was the vehicle for Martin to make his step.  He had been kicked out of the convention, for the most part, leadership of the National Baptist Convention, and so they saw the need to have his own, and so we organized SCLC.  And it was very effective.  Very effective.  There was never a chapter or an affiliate in Memphis.  The NAA [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was so strong, it would've been the same ones of us doing the same thing; Ben [Benjamin] Hooks [HM], Jim Lawson, Billy Kyles, and whoever and whoever, and Martin understood that.  He was never upset that there was never an SCLC chapter in Memphis because we would go to wherever he was.  And Ben was on the board and Jim Lawson was on the board.  And it never had--but it was very effective under Martin's leadership, and he worked more than people can imagine.  He would get out of jail himself on bond to go to New York to get a check for $50,000 or whatever, to come back and bail the other people out, because people wanted to give it to him.  If Ralph [Abernathy] had gone, they weren't going to give it; if Wyatt Walker [HM] had gone, they weren't going to give it; if Andy [Andrew Young, HM] had gone.  Martin Luther King has got to get this check.  And so generals, generally, don't have to do the marching and the shooting and all that, but in this civil rights wag tag army, generals had to do everything that the enlisted people had to do, and that's what Martin did.  But SCLC was very effective and got a lot of support from movie stars, and singers, and that whole thing.  And then after his death, we did have the SCLC convention--was supposed to be in New Orleans, but we had it in Memphis in August, and it hadn't been in Memphis since.  Tomorrow, the 15th, whatever tomorrow is, Martin III will be meeting with the mayor of Memphis and some other people.  I could not be there, and asking Memphis to host the convention in 2003, August, and I'm sure they will agree to do that, and I will do all I can to help that happen because it hasn't been there.  Martin Luther King III, it was almost a natural to elect him as President because his father was the founder.  The board has suffered some difficulties, you know, and they aired them in public, and that probably wasn't a good thing, but I think it's settling down now.  They had a good convention last year.  And I just feel for Martin III.  Almost anything you do is going to make a comparison between he and his father.
Story_ID: 83500
Speaker 1: I mean, I just can imagine how difficult it must be to live as Martin Luther King, Jr.'s son, you know, or daughter, for that matter, but especially the namesake.
Speaker 2: I think Yolanda King, she's performed as an actress.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She's been able to step out of the role, on some level, and do some other things, but it's almost like you're kind of locked into being--
Speaker 1: That's what people expect, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the child of Dr. King for the rest of your life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Bernice [King, HM] seems to have picked up the preaching torch and she preaches.  She's a tremendous preacher, and it's so eerie seeing her have gestures that her father had that are in her genes.  And she's a powerful preacher.  The women had not been through the museum until Bernice--I took Bernice through; the boys had been.  And she sat in that room and sat on that bed, and it was almost as if she was trying to make contact with her dad.  I said, "Bernice, you need to go through that museum.  You need to see that.  You need to see what it's about."
Speaker 2: She had never been before?
Speaker 1: She hadn't been.  I don't think Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King has been yet at all, and I'm not sure that Yolanda's been.
Story_ID: 83501
Speaker 1: But SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], it's, it's vibrant, and it's alive, and they still get a good little support from the political people, and they always have a good convention.  And Martin [III] is kind of--if there's one thing I would hope that he could do, and that's get him a good administrative assistant that could handle his schedule.  Sometimes he'll come into a town, and there's nobody to meet him or, you know, things like that, that just a matter of administrative kinds of things, and he's not had that kind of help.  And I wish he would really do that.  But it's not dead, there's still some infighting on the board, but I think it's, it's--at least it's not public.  And I think the Memphis convention will be a knockout because I think it'll be forty years ago that the convention was organized, that the SCLC was organized about forty years ago in August.
Story_ID: 83502
Speaker 1: Here's a question we normally ask of reverends; what is your personal philosophy of religion?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Your philosophy of religion, your personal theologist.
Speaker 2: For me, it's, it's, it's my life.  It's a way of life.  My faith.  I don't know what I would've done in life without faith.  A belief in something bigger than me.  I mean, I choose to believe that, and I do not choose to believe that my death is the end of all I've experienced.  I mean, I just--I want to believe in the resurrection, I really do.  All that has made me what I am and who I am simply cannot end in the moment of death, and I don't mean just in terms of not leaving stuff that's not written or on tape.  I believe in the afterlife, and I believe in it very strongly.  And I don't have any notion that heaven is golden streets and pearly gates, I think that was an attempt to give some impression of what the kingdom was like.  See, you put so much value in gold in the kingdom, we'll just put it on the streets.  And you put so much value on pearls, we put it on the outside of the gates.  I think it's going to be something altogether different than pearly gates and golden streets.  But I choose to believe in life after death, and my religion allows me to be political and allows me to be human.  It allows me so much more than many people think it allows.  It allows me to be joyful and having appreciation for poetry and life and love.  Even in my humanity and my weakness, I believe that God is a forgiving God, and I believe he cares about what happens.  And when we say, "Well what--how could a loving God allow evil things to happen?"  He made us as free moral agents.  He could wave a magic wand and make it all better, but he uses human beings to bring about his divine will.  In every case he uses human beings, and he allows us to participate in the miracles of our lives.  You know, and you read the Bible and see that you can't bring--you can't part the waters of the Red Sea, but you can do what you can do.  You can at least hit it.  You can't bring water out of a dry rock, but you can at least hit the rock.  You can't raise the dead, but you can at least move the stone, you know.  And here we are going through life moving stones and he works the miracles.  The mess we've gotten ourselves in as human beings is not his doing.  We did it.  It was our choice.  Apple trees and orange trees just have no choice but to be apple trees and orange trees.  We have a choice.  We can serve him if we want to, don't serve.  He's not going to kill us because we don't serve him.  It's our choice.  We can serve him if we choose or not.  Other things in nature do not have that kind of choice.
Story_ID: 83503
Speaker 1: Is it clear what God wants us to do?  I mean, do you think it's clear?
Speaker 2: If we're open to it, and sometimes we have to wait and ask for that clarity.  You know, it--sometimes we don't know.  I don't know at what point Martin [Luther King, Jr.] recognized that he was to do what he had to do, and there was no turning back.  At some point, he recognized, and God will send people a leader that it needs when they need it.  It'll happen.  It'll come.  I know, we focus on Martin, but we needed [W.E.B.] DuBois too.  We needed George Washington Carver.  We needed all the heroes of the early days; we needed them for that time to do what they did.  You needed a powerful A. Philip Randolph, you know.  We don't always measure it like that, we just see it as something passing, but I see it as so much more than that; so much more than that.  And I then I don't think that--and we also, we are--as human beings, we are so hard on our leadership, too.  We require so much.  We use them up so quickly.  If Martin were alive today, we would've used him up.  There'd be no national holiday in his honor.  He'd walk in a room I'd say, "Dr. King, nice to see you.  Have a seat."  Next order of business.  But God took him when he was young, and vibrant, and vigorous.  We don't even know what he'd be like as an old man.  Our imaginations can run wild on what he would be and what would have happened.  More powerful in death than he was in life.  Jesse's a good example.  Oh, my God, what's Jesse [Jackson, HM] doing now?  Oh, my goodness.  Oh, there's Jesse again.
Speaker 1: Right.  That appreciation of Dr. King, there was--and I'm sure you heard people say that, you know, Dr. King, what is he doing now?  What is he doing that for?  Why is he speaking out against the war?  Why don't he stay in the same thing he was already in?  You know, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Lost a lot of friends.
Speaker 1: But when he was killed, a lot of those same people that complained, you know, cried their eyes out.
Speaker 2: And they made great speeches on his birthday.  Made great speeches on his birthday.  That's such as life.  Such is the human experience.  So my religion allows me wonderful opportunities, you know.  Sometimes we go to the extreme and we become fanatical, thank God that that's not the case.  I could've gone stone mad crazy, and very often when people stay in the Civil Rights Movement for that long, you know, and stay on that cutting edge that long.  I had things, you know, pastoring.  I'm baptizing children whose grandparents I married.  You know, I have that variety in my life.  I look at poor James Meredith, you know, he had to suppress all those feelings at Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], go to school, isolated.  The one thing I hear most about from classmates who are grown now and whatever, is they wished they had spoken to him.  And he suppressed all that stuff.  And when it started coming out, I mean, it's sad.  He's now got a used car lot in Jackson, Mississippi, or used rental cars or something.  His son did go back and get his Ph.D. from Ole Miss, and they had a 40th reunion or something, and Meredith went; but he went from being an aid to Jesse Helms, he went through all kind of changes.  I mean, just mind changes because all that stuff died that he suppressed started coming out, and I felt just so sorry for him.  You know, his marriage broke up, and--but he's hanging on to the strings and to the cords.  And there are other casualties pretty much like that.  When you stay in it that long.  James Bevel [HM], Bevel was a genius, just a genius, and now it's questionable what he's doing.  And I feel enormously blessed that as a pioneer, I'm still around with some degree of clarity and can walk some of the trails that we blaze, because very often pioneers are not even around.  When they blaze the trails, they're gone.  And so I feel extremely blessed.
Speaker 1: I think it was Frederick Douglass that said, "A movement has got to be all consuming.  It's got to do that or it does nothing."  But after it's over, you know, what's left?  It's all consumed (unclear).
Speaker 2: What do you do?  What do you do?  What do you do?  So I feel extremely blessed.  I do.
Story_ID: 83504
Speaker 1: Now, sir, that leads to one other question that we always ask, and that is what are your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: For black people period?
Speaker 1: Yes, for the black community today, in general, yes.
Speaker 2: That we can really build on the foundation that's been laid and continue the upward journey.  When I look on what is--I mean, we can see problems in the community, and many of them are--some are racial and some are not, but at the same time, when I look at the progress that's been made, if we can continue to make that kind of progress, a lot of people have benefitted from the civil rights movement; some not as much as others.  I want to see the communities, if it's at all possible, we have got -- first of all, we have to deal with education.  We got to go back to neighborhood schools.  If we get the partnership of the school, the home, and the community and the church, we can rebuild, I mean, so much more because those who benefitted the most left the neighborhood, and that's okay.  I mean, if you're living better that's fine.  And those who have left need to come back in and give something to the community.  The world in which we live is becoming so technical, and it's going to be so much of a challenge that finding young people who are not educated would be a setback.  It'll be a tremendous setback because these young people are going to be in charge of the world much sooner than we think.  It's going to happen like that.  And there's no point in saying that, "Well, I didn't mess up the environment.  I didn't mess up the world.  You all did it."  That's beyond the question.  The environment's messed up, yes, but you're going to have to straighten it out.  All the stuff that's messed up.  Who do you think is going to be in the positions that we're in, in less than twenty years?  And the black community, you know, has produced so much positiveness to come from slavery, that's why you need new leadership, you know.  I've seen so much progress.  My son hasn't seen that kind of progress; your son hasn't seen it because they didn't know about that other time, so they need to take up where we are; Harold Ford, Jr., my Congressman,  raised up in Congress, you know, and he's really on the education thing because I've been on him about it.  I said every chance, you talk about the need to be educated.  You literally have the world at your fingertips, and education then leads to better employment, so education and, and employment, and sensitive people would be going--if we had under thirties voting at the same percentage that over fifty-five voted, we'd have a different congress right now.  And out of the black community can come all these possibilities.  We're going to have another black mayor of Chicago, you know, [Richard M.] Daley ain't going to live forever.  We're going to have some more blacks on the Supreme Court or Thomas gone do a turnaround.  But that partnership between the home, the church, and the community.  That's why we have to weigh the good that integration, which we should've called desegregation, weigh that against what we lost, the nurturing that kids got in the black community.  Your mama would see your teacher at the drugstore, or at church, or somewhere in the community, and now teachers come from out of the county almost to teach kids that they're afraid of, and they take the best black teachers and put them in white schools.  You know, now, we're in charge.  The school board is predominantly black, the superintendent is black, and we're still missing it.  So I'm at that point where I can give great advice.  I'm a great, whatever they call it, elder statesman, I'd guess you call it.  But from the time I walked in that school with my five-year-old daughter to now, I would not be out there carrying a picket sign, can't do it.  Can't do it, but that's something I can do, and that I'm willing to do.  And the community--you know, we just made a decision in our church three years ago, four years ago, most of my members have moved out, they have to drive in, but we made a commitment to keep the church in the neighborhood, and we're going to revitalize it.  We're getting together with all the churches in there.  We've already started revitalizing that community while we're in charge.  Having said that Memphis was completely segregated it is now completely integrated, or completely desegregated.  The African American mayor in his 10th year, movement is happening.  We have an African American in the county.  The county had almost decided we'll let the blacks have the city and we'll keep the county, and now we got the county too, in my day.
Speaker 1: Would it be hard to have imagined that in 1968?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And the young people coming along need to know about it.  They don't have to, to--I want them to marvel in what we were able to do as a race of people, not you know--I've seen all this progress.  Now, you take it to the next level because you absolutely will be in charge.  Everything we do, you will be doing it in less than twenty years.
Story_ID: 83505
Speaker 1: Sir, is there anything that you would do differently, you know, when you look back on things?
Speaker 2: I, I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I had some regrets about taking my daughter, at five-years-old, into that kind of hostile environment, but she's, you know, not the worst off for it. I don't have any regrets about--I think the moving to Memphis was bold and daring at a time when you needed to be bold and daring, and it, it turned out quite well.  I wanted to be involved in the movement, and I had no idea I'd be as involved.  And, now, the picture is reversed.  The immigration is going back.  People are coming back faster than they're leaving the South.
Story_ID: 83506
Speaker 1: A couple of the things, of the things that occur to me is, is seeing the change in an individual, and if you can do anything for positive change that encourages that, or that's the spark that allows that to happen.  We had a wonderful thing to happen in Memphis. Our congressman was--this is not the wonderful part, he was at a--had a nineteen-count indictment, Harold Ford, Sr., the first black congress from Tennessee, and I cannot forget how Harold got in.  We don't know how many times they had stolen votes.  A housekeeper told us on the night of election his opponent was an incumbent on the television making his acceptance and victory speech.  Some housekeepers told the people in the Ford camp, "Y'all better go in there and check that room.  These people have been going in and out of there a whole lot."  They went in there and found four or five ballot boxes that were hidden that put him over.  We don't know how many times they had done this.  And while this man--
Speaker 2: So he took the votes of another person, they just took it?
Speaker 1: No, they hid ours, hid the boxes because they knew it was a strong Ford area, and they hid them.  And so when they counted them, and he was announced as the winner, it shocked everybody, and the man was on television, and the television reporter said, "Well, we're just getting word that Mr. Ford's group has found some more ballots, and that he has beaten you.  Well, I can't speak to that.  I can't speak to that.  I can't speak to that."  I don't know if he was in on it or not; probably not, but I don't know.  His name was Dan Kuykendall, Congressman, Republican.  And Harold Ford went to congress as a young man and was dynamic.  I mean, just--his office became almost like a social services office.  If the utilities weren't paid, see Congressman Ford.  If you got behind on your house note, see Congressman Ford.  Because we hadn't had a Congressman before, we didn't know what he was supposed to do, so he did everything.  And he gave the establishment the devil.  Amassed a lot of power.  His family became prominent in politics.  Anyway, there was a nineteen-count indictment that came down that was really trumped up.  We knew it was trumped up.  I led the charge in raising money for his defense.  We needed almost a million dollars.  I was going all over the country, and in Memphis.  I became the point man for Harold Ford.  His youngest--his junior--his oldest son, Jr., stuck with his daddy every time they go to court.  If he wasn't in school, he was in court.  I was in court with him.  Anyway, he beat all the charges.  And the family just was so appreciative to me, the whole family was, and so when Harold, Sr. decided that he would give it up after 22 years, Harold Jr. was only twenty-two, twenty-three, and he decided to run for his father's seat.
Story_ID: 83507
Speaker 1: It was the only time in the history of the country that an African American son [Harold Ford, Jr.] followed his father [Harold Ford, Sr.] to Congress.  He went to school, he crossed the T's, dotted the I's.  Respectful.  Raised in Congress from four-years-old.  Knows it in and out, and all those people that tried to beat him, they didn't touch him, and they tried to make an issue out of calling him Jr.  So we had big signs made that didn't say anything but Jr.  Took a negative and made a positive out of it; Jr.  Jr.  Jr.  And he won.  He just ran for the speaker of the House leadership that the woman got, [Nancy] Pelosi, or whatever.  Told him it was a good move.  But we are so proud of him.  We're just so absolutely proud of him that he--that's one of the things I'm so proud of, that I encouraged him to run for his daddy's seat.  Go to school, get your education.  Remember where you came from.  Don't talk about all the things that have not been done, now I'm here to save the world.  Build on what has been done.  You don't have to tear anything done and that's what he's doing.  And he's well spoken, and the white people, they're gravitating to him--not, not, and he doesn't have the baggage that his dad had because he had to knock the doors down.  You don't make friends knocking doors down.  All he had to do is walk in.  And his thought process is going to be altogether different than his dad's, and it should be.  Same opportunity Jesse [Jackson], Jr. [HM]. has.  He doesn't have the baggage that his daddy's [Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] got, so he doesn't have to deal with that.  He can start here.  His dad had to start down here.  He doesn't have to deal with that. And that's what's happening with Harold Ford, and that's one of the community pride things that I, that I'm so glad about.  And he will be a Senator and a Vice Presidential candidate in less than ten years, maybe five.
Speaker 2: Sir--
Speaker 1: --And to have had some hand in that is gratifying; it is.
Story_ID: 83508
Speaker 1: What other--some of the other things that you would consider as your legacy, I guess?
Speaker 2: Of course, the development of our church [Monumental Baptist Church].  To go from thirty-four people, we're at probably 800 now.  We build homes for the elderly.  We just purchased another building in the community that we're going to turn into an office building, we're going to try to get--but the work of the church is so gratifying for me.  I get acclaim from the civil rights arena, and I never made a break.  My civil rights activities are part of my Christian extension, religious extension.  I didn't make a break.  And to have the involvement in the lives of people at that level, everything that happens to them, to human beings, I'm involved in it.  I buried--I just had a funeral, a thirty-one-year-old.  One of the kids that grew up in the church; thirty-one-years-old, and his mom even called me on the road just to talk to me.  I can't bring him back, but she just wants a word of encouragement from Reverend.  His girlfriend stabbed him.  She didn't--she wasn't trying to kill him.  She stabbed him, and he was bleeding internally and didn't know it.  And I comfort her by saying by saying, "As strong as he was, he could've killed her, but you did not give birth to a killer."  And as hurting as it is, he would rather have been the slain than to be the slayer.  And you go from that to marriage, to dedicating babies.  That is the joy of my life, to be involved.  Dedicating homes and meeting people all over the nation.  Reverend Kyles you married me, and you baptized me and my--you married me and my husband, you baptized my children.  There is no level of activity that they experience that they don't involve me in some way, and that is so wonderful to have people needing you at those levels, and it just wipes me out.  I'm humbled by it.  And our church is very much like a family, like a big family.  We fuss and we fight and we love because we're a family.  And they've supported all of my activities. I mean, they let me go anywhere in the world I want to go.  And they offered me the banquet at The Peabody.  We built a new church, and I said, "I don't want to get a hotel.  All that money," so they decorated the fellowship hall like The Peabody.  The Peabody's famous for ducks, so they had everywhere, and that was my banquet at The Peabody, and I loved it.  I absolutely loved it.  And so I have a good staff, some paid, some volunteer.  And we're getting ready next Sunday, the first Sunday, to dedicate the old auditorium.  We built a new auditorium and tied it all together, and so we are in the process of remodeling the old one and we'll have a dedication on that, so we're trying to find some of those first members.  Some of the children are grandmothers now, who were children when I first went there.  At--and then, of course, the activities of--my civil rights activities.  I appreciate that, but I didn't make a break between that and being--it's an extension of my ministry.  And then trying to encourage younger preachers to extend the church beyond the walls.  If I can do that much.  I was so privileged to be one of the monitors for the election in South Africa I went to.  The first meeting that the ANC [African National Congress] had after they were decertified as a terrorist organization, was in Johannesburg, and they invited 600 people, and I was one of them.  It was right after President [Nelson] Mandela got out of jail, and that was a thrill for me.  And then to go back as a monitor was a thrill.  I've been back two, three other times.  And then to take him through the museum and to see him stand there and said, "This is where Martin died," and he cried.  I mean, I've had so many high points, I really have.  And to have been involved in that was, was--'cause I didn't go to Africa 'till I was fully a grown man.  I had no desire.  I wanted to go to Europe where all the castles and the knights were.  That's what I was reading, European History, so I didn't know anything about Africa.  I didn't know that all those countries spoke French.  What do I want to learn French for?  I'm not going to France.  Yeah, but the (French speaking).  So I went back every two years.  Dr. Leon Sullivan took a group called African/African American Summit, and I would go with him until he died.  I think Andy [Andrew] Young [HM] is going to keep it going, but I haven't been for two years.
Story_ID: 83509
Speaker 1: And rather than say I've paid my dues, I just moved to another level because there's still some dues to pay.
Speaker 2: Do you ever stop paying dues in life?
Speaker 1: You don't even stop.  You don't ever stop.  Even if it's no more than answer the phone up at the History Makers.  There's a level that you can be involved in.  It is.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: There is.  And really, I spent a good little time in the schools, colleges and schools, trying to inspire the young people.  I don't go in with the drug thing and the sex thing, I mean, let somebody else do that; I tell them how special they are, and how quickly they will be in charge.  I was speaking in California a couple years ago, in the San Francisco area where I'm going Monday, and they had a reception for me in a place called Pittsburgh, California.  Never heard of it, 60,000 people.  She came through the line to say hello, went on in the chambers, and they had a meeting just to make my visit official, and she winds up being the Vice Mayor.  So afterwards, I said, "Why didn't you tell me you were the Vice Mayor?"  She said, "Oh, I'm not into that."  I said, "I don't care what you're doing tomorrow, you are going with me to the schools.  She said, "I'd be honored."  The first school we went to was her junior high, and when I told the kids how quickly they will be in positions that we're in, I said, "As a matter of fact, I have someone with me today who was sitting right where you are a few years ago.  Now she is the Vice Mayor of Pittsburgh and next year will be the Mayor."  I said, "Come here, Yvonne."  And she stood up and they just went, "Wow."  And I called, and I said, "Have somebody give a release to Jet Magazine.  You need to be in there.  You're the youngest Mayor in California."  So she's in this month's--this week's Jet or something.  I'll see her next week when I go.  But inspiring them and encouraging them to get ready to clean up the environment and get medical care.  And I tease them, I say, "I want you to get a good job because I want to still get my Social Security, and I'm serious," and so they laugh.  But if I can inspire one or two of them, and I think I can reach more than that, and I continue to do that and I keep trying.  That's me.
Story_ID: 83510
Speaker 1: Sir, a slightly different question.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I haven't given that much thought to it, really.  I think people are going to remember you the way they remember you.  And I don't have--I trust them [laughter].  What I tell my family, I have no death wishes at all.  Nothing.  I don't have one.  Nothing.  I said, "No, give it all to me in life."  And that's it.  I say I don't have anything that you have to do for me after death.  No death wish at all.  None.  And they're going to remember me the way they'll remember me, and I trust them.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you sir.
Speaker 2: It's been my pleasure.  It's been my pleasure.
Story_ID: 83511
VIDEOGRAPHER: And anytime you're ready, we'll start with this one.  We're good to go.
Speaker 2: Well, the picture we're looking at here is a photographer with President [Nelson] Mandela and his daughter and yours truly.  From left to right, it's Samuel Billy Kyles-- I've forgotten his daughter's name, and then Mr. Mandela.  He came to Memphis.  Every year, the Civil Rights Museum has an awards dinner where we give away the Martin Luther King award.  We give a national award and an international award, and it comes with, I think, $50,000 for the international and $25,000 for the national, to people whose lives most mirror that of Dr. King.  We were so fortunate to get President Mandela to come, and this is at the church where he spoke to mainly young people, but to the whole city.  It was the time that I took him through the museum.  As a matter of fact, when he got to Memphis on a Tuesday, his schedule had provided that he would go through the museum on Wednesday.  He was so anxious, he said when he got to the hotel, he said, "What time is the banquet?"  And when we told him, he said, "Oh, we have time to go to the museum."  And we had to scuffle to get security and all that put together and he went to the National Civil Rights Museum.
Speaker 1: THE VIDEOGRAPHER:  What year was this?
Speaker 2: 2002.
Speaker 1: Right.  Next photo.
Speaker 2: This photograph is at Metropolitan Baptist Church.  We had a rally, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth rally.  The handsome young man in a chair to the left is yours truly, believe it or not.  The two young ladies were simply getting autographs from James Meredith.  This was right after Meredith had integrated Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi].  And we were at this rally and someone--Ernest Withers took that picture.  And I can't remember being that young.
Speaker 1: Now, what year?  I see the continental suits and everything, that's what, '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: That's where you get me.  It could be--it's in the 60s [1960]--
Speaker 1: Early 60s--
Speaker 2: --what year--it is, yes.  Look at how young I am.  I know it's in the early 60s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph Vice-President Gore's Air Force Two plane that I was traveling with him doing some campaigning.  I was giving him some great advice at that point.  He came back from his quarters to chat with me.  And--matter of fact, we were coming into Chicago.  The thrill for me was not riding Air Force Two, as much as getting from the Sheraton Hotel to O'Hare field [Chicago O'Hare International Airport] in 15 minutes because it was a Vice-President.
Speaker 1: Yeah. [Laugher].  Getting there that fast is really a thrill.  Getting to O'Hare in any kind of reasonable time is a thrill.
Speaker 2: This photograph is a group--I'm speaking to a group of young people in January 2002.  During the month of January, I do a number of speeches regarding Dr. King's birthday, and this was in Boston at the school where they tape the movie, Boston Public, the television program.  I was quite excited to be there.  They don't do much taping there, but they use the facade for that play, and I was speaking to some students at the school in Boston.  Matter of fact, I left Chicago and went to Boston.  I left Northwestern and went to the school in Boston.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: Here again, I had the wonderful opportunity to speak to these young people, and every chance I get, I will.  This is around Black History Month last year, and I was at a school.  It is interesting to me that the young people, they really are interested in the Civil Rights era, and I try to tell them, it really isn't over yet, and  they're curious about the life and times of Martin Luther King.  So I don't have the individual names, but --
Speaker 1: THE VIDEOGRAPHER:  Actually, I'm pulling them off the caption there by going in on it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: THE VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Here again, I'm speaking to a group of students, and they're very curious, as many people are, about that final hour of his--Dr. King's life.  Sometimes the administrators are nervous about the kids being attentive, but they really never have to worry about that once we get the groove going.  That's all it takes.  You can see from that photograph how attentive they are to what I'm saying.  And I was saying earlier, I don't get into the drugs and the sex thing.  I let somebody else do that.  I tell them how special they are.  I said, "Do you know there are six billion people in the world, but only one you?"  That is very special.  And I've had kids that come up and said, "No one's ever told me that I was that special."  And then I humanize Dr. King for them to let them know the power of one.  One person can have that kind of impact on the world.  You see how--they're really listening.  I didn't know the photographer was taking me.  I just go in and do what I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: The photograph that we send out to people who want some notion of what I look like.  I don't think it draws anybody to the meeting.  I doubt that anybody come to the meeting based upon that.  Sometimes they will put Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] picture up to the left and mine down to the right and show us on the same handbill.  I've tried to keep up with programs that I have spoken at, and I don't do a good job at doing that.  And sometimes we ask them to send us some photographs.  And then, you know, at this point in my life, I wonder that--picture that's sent when I accept an invitation.
Speaker 1: THE VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do you know when this was taking, taken?
Speaker 2: That's at least five years, and you should change every five years, because my mustache is not as quite on that as it was.  That's about five years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
