Story_ID: 9619
Speaker 1: I want to ask you what your favorite phrase or saying is?
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: I want to ask what your favorite vacation destination is?
Speaker 2: Cruise ship.  I just started cruising.  I don't care where it goes.  Can I answer like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't--just put me on a cruise ship, and I think eight days, which is what everybody--is not enough because when I get on there, I start counting backwards right away.  "Oh, I've only got seven more days, only six more days," and you look up and you only got three.  Then you're there.  You're back where you started from, but I love cruising.  Oh, I love it.
Speaker 1: The other--what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year?  October, the year [month] I was born in.  I love Indian summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Got a little Jamaican in you, huh?
Speaker 2: Jamaican, I guess, Indian, white.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Whatever.
Speaker 1: I gotta think about my favorite saying.  They're saying on the radio, in life, or what?
Speaker 2: Favorite--just favorite saying or phrase.  You said now.  Oh, did you--that wasn't your answer?
Speaker 1: I haven't answered yet.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I don't even know.  I never thought of it, probably subconsciously, some things that I say.  I have to think about that.
Story_ID: 9620
Speaker 1: But I'd like you to talk abou--because you grew up in the Ida B. Wells housing complex [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um hmm.
Speaker 1: But I want you just to talk about, you know,  those early years and, you know, what it was like.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and father really got separated, I guess, when I was two or three years old so I really never knew a father.  As a matter of fact, I don't even think she married him.  I'm not sure about that.  I don't think so.  So I was raised by her, and she was a very hard worker.  She--my mother worked as like a cleaning lady, maid-type situation for most of her life, and she like worked and made--if she made ten dollars a week, that was a lot, so--but, you know, back then stuff wasn't expensive--you know, bread three cents a loaf, milk four cents or seven cents a quart, and stuff like that, but that wasn't a lot of money, and I remember I used to have to beg for pennies to get candy, and sometimes she didn't have it for me.  But she was a good mother, and she instilled in me a lot of things that I use today.  She was a very high class woman.  She loved classical music, and she instilled a love of that in me, and she didn't like Amos and Andy [comedy radio program with stereotyped black characters], but I loved Amos and Andy, but that just gives you an idea of where she was, and she was a driving force for a long time, and we always talked about when I got into radio, just started, that maybe one day I was going to hit the big time, and we always dreamed about that big day coming, and it was just a dream that I followed, and I don't like being number two.  I really don't.  I just--I'm not a loser-type guy, and that was how I grew up.
Story_ID: 9621
Speaker 1: I went to--she put me--oh yeah, she put me in all white schools because she said that black schools were inferior, and she probably was right at the time.  I ended up finally in a grammar school which was white but turned black while I was there, but she sent me to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] where there were only maybe ten blacks in that school, and I remember crying because I wanted to go to Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois] because it was all black and all my friends went there, but her insight told her that was not the place to send me.  I don't know what would have happened to me had I gone to that all black school, I really don't.  But going to the white school was fine.  The first thing I noticed when I was standing in line was this cute little blonde lady with really nice legs, standing in front of me, and I kind of said, well, this is not gonna be too bad anyway at this school (laughs).  And it was really nice, and this was before--this was before black power.  We're talking about in the '40s [1940s] so--and  I say that to say that the struggles in the high schools, I think, began--power struggles when black power came in, and there were real struggles, lunch room fights and stuff like that, racially motivated things.  Before all that, we were not a "threat" so we were accepted so most of my friends at that school were white, and we went to each other's homes and just hung out together, did all the young teenage things together, and I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], and I was a captain.  I had a company of all white guys.  I never--I never really thought about it too much.  I knew there was a difference between us, but when I went to school, it seemed like it melted, and I was completely accepted in all the activities.  The teachers were always on me because I had a great memory, and I would not do homework, so one of 'em almost flunked me because of that, and I wrote this little play and did this play.  I was a devil.  I rented this--this is a high school guy now.  I rented this devil suit with a long tail, and I was head of this radio club, and I'll tell you about that, and I had the girls in the radio club dress up in little Daisy Duke shorts, and I threw 'em down a hole in the stage while singing this song, "the worms crawl in, the worms crawl out, the worms play pinochle in your mouth," and I'd throw another white chick down the hole, and I had smoke and stuff coming out of it, and the audience loved it, and this teacher said she was gonna flunk me, but she passed me so I got out of high school, but that's how I got into radio in high school.  As I said, my thoughts and ambitions were really high in this school. Hyde Park was such a school.  You didn't--some colleges would take you without having to take certain tests.  It was an awesome school, and it still maintains a track level, and they still have pretty good students at that school.  It's just tradition.  There were a lot of Jewish kids in that school.  They were so damn smart they made me sick, because they'd go home and study, and we had to scrabble.  We needed to keep up with them.  This guy named Moskolvich--I'll never forget him.  Every time the teacher would ask a question, Moskolvich would get up and answer it, you know, first off, but this is a driving, competitive thing.
Story_ID: 9622
Speaker 1: So I had built radios, you know, at the age of fourteen, fifteen, built crystal radios so I heard about this radio guild after extra-curricular activities in school so I got in it.  Now this was my first taste of racism in the school [Hyde Park High School, Chicago, Illinois]. When I got in it, the teacher--I'll never forget her name was Miss Clawson.  She got mad at me because I said "tin" instead of "ten," which I, you know, I changed, but she said, "colored people say 'tin' instead of 'ten,'" and she probably dropped that class so we kept it.  And there was a Jewish guy who was the president of it, and we would have--do little radio plays, and we had equipment that--we had a microphone and some speakers and turntables, and we'd put the speakers in one room, and we'd get in the other room and play radio, and we had--did radio shows and went to different places and did this, and then we would come from behind the screen and take a bow and stuff like that.  Well, this Jewish guy was a little hard on them so the girls--they booted him out and made me president so there I was.  I was president of this radio guild, and they loved me, and we had fun.  Then I heard about auditions at WBEZ [Chicago, Illinois radio station], which at that time was at 42.5 megacycles or something.  The whole FM channel was--had moved.  They started it at a lower thing.  In later years they moved it up to where [W]BEZ is now.  What is it, 91.1 or something like that?  They just shifted the whole spectrum.  That's neither here nor there--but I auditioned and I won.  They take two--they took two students from every high school in the city of Chicago so all these things--I'm the only black.  I'm getting used to this.  Sometimes I would feel intimidated; sometimes I wouldn't, and you know, when I got around everybody, it was fine, but I knew that there was racism all around me because you could feel it.  It was in the headlines, you know.  It's been there for a long time, and occasionally I would experience it in these different groups, but what we did was every Tuesday or Thursday at 7:00 or 7:30 spend two hours at WBEZ practicing, reading lines, practicing radio.  It was a workshop, and we would criticize each other, and they had an instructor that was very good, that got my speech patterns together at fifteen or fourteen, and that helped me have the type of delivery that I have today, which is a good way to start.  You know, to try to start to change your delivery at thirty years old is just almost an impossibility, although you could become a communicator, but to--just to have a great articulate way of speaking and breathing, it's good to start at an early age, and my mother had always corrected me at home.  She didn't like to hear me use black terms or stuff like this.  It's a wild story.
Story_ID: 9623
Speaker 1: No, the only child.
Speaker 2: You're the only child?  Huh.  And do you remember--put Chicago [Illinois] in a context for me then.  I mean, would--what was Chicago--you know, a lot of people hear about the Ida B. Wells housing project, and at that time they were a different place than they are now--.
Speaker 1: Oh, sure, of course.  You want to know what it was like?  We moved there.  My mother and I lived in one room 'til I guess I was thirteen or fourteen, and, you know, we had to move.  We lived in a rooming house, and I never had enough to eat, and so we moved to Ida B. Wells.  At that time they only charged what your income would bear, and whatever my mother was making then--I figure it to be fifty-two bucks a week, and that's all we paid.  We had one bedroom there and a living room and so forth, and it was really nice.  Ida B. Wells--folks really tried to make it what supposedly it was supposed to be--was a nice place.  People had Cadillacs [automobiles] and convertible Buicks [automobiles], and they had like shag carpeting or whatever kind of rugs they had, immaculate houses, little gardens, and stuff like that, but there were some poor people in there, too, but there were some middle-class blacks who lived there and made pretty good money, and I had my little girlfriends come over.  They'd ride the bus or streetcar and come over and visit me at 8:00 [pm], get back on the bus, and go home.  You know, that would be death for anybody now.  Or I could leave the house at any time and ride the El [elevated train], bus, or take my bicycle to school, and there were gangs, and we were afraid of them, but it wasn't anything--.  You would--I went to visit my old apartment, and I peeped in the window.  It was the Bud Billiken Parade [annual South Side parade in Chicago], and I got off the float 'cause it had stopped and went over there to look, and it just looked--from what I could see, it was just cobwebs and spiders boarded up and the caretakers--they said "it looks too bad, Herb.  We won't let you in."  I wanted to go in.  They said "let us clean it up before you go in," because a lot of those apartments are just abandoned, boarded up, and you know, they're going to, demolish all the public housing in Chicago so--but that--it transcended, it transcended to that.  Really, in my block, let me tell you there was a guy who was in med school, became a doctor.  There was a jazz trumpeter, Billy somebody.  He went on to become great, and a piano player--his name was Wesley Tucker.  I saw him down at Rush Street.  He was phenomenal.  All of that came out of this one little area 'cause, you know, we were not in gangs, and it was about living there and going to school and doing the best that you can.  And sometimes even today a talented kid will come out of--I'm not knocking it.  Some kids just want to get ahead, and they will come out of the projects today and make something of themselves, and they're the real fighters.
Story_ID: 9624
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young person?  What type of person were you?  Some people were dreamers, some people, you know, are rambunctious, some people are kidders, some people are--.
Speaker 2: I was always thin.  It might have been--stemmed from the fact that sometimes I didn't--where I used to live--always get a full plate of food (laughs).  I guess I was hungry a lot, and then I was--maybe I was just meant to be thin, kind of a, kind of a scary little guy, a late bloomer, almost a mama's boy, very late bloomer.  The rest of my friends--they were smoking reefer [marijuana] and taking girls to a hotel, and I said that is just terrible.  That is just terrible.  Of course, in later life I learned how to do that, too (laughs), but, you know, like--you know, a lot of guys were doing that at 15, 16, 17, 18, and I was just--I was a late bloomer.  My head really was into radio and upper-class things, you know, although I had a bunch of guys I ran with, and we were really, really close.  A couple of them OD'd [overdosed] on drugs.  I think one guy died--one guy died a wino.  It never affected me, you know.  I never picked up their habits, and they never tried to push that on me, and we were--we were all very close, but that's--that's the way I was.  I didn't have my first--have my first sex 'til I was nineteen years old, and, I mean, some guys had beat me a long time ago.  Nineteen--I think they said "man, what took you so long?"  That's kind of--I guess I would look at myself like that.  I'm just trying, trying to be objective.  I really didn't mature into a man until I started living by myself in my early twenties, and that's what--when I started to mature.  I was just too much of a mama's boy, I think.
Story_ID: 9625
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your mother.  Her name was Catherine, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What would--were there any things she had or did you know much about her, you know, her background, and why she'd want, you know, why she wanted so much for you or, you know, anything about--where was she--was she from?
Speaker 2: She was from West Virginia.  The whole family was just Indian-looking--(pause in interview).  They were from Harper's Store, West Virginia, but very close to Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, so we got--we kind of go back to that history.  One uncle I have is a chemist.  You look at them--you can't tell what [race] they are.  I think I was the darkest one in the family, and one uncle did something, you know, that they were all in education.  One uncle...one uncle went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  His roommate was Jesse Owens [Olympic gold medal sprinter]  and Mr. [John H. Henry] Sengstacke [newspaper publisher]  from 'The [Chicago] Defender' [newspaper] so those type things, if you have a family, by attrition, everybody wants to--and my cousins--what--well, one was a school teacher.  Two of 'em died of drugs so, you know, it's just--but there was a feeling in the family of achieving, and I guess that's the best I can tell you.  My mother taught school, she told me, in West Virginia years and years and years ago.  Why she came to Chicago [Illinois], I don't know.
Story_ID: 9626
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't--was much of your family, your mother's [Catherine Kent] family around, considering--?
Speaker 2: Yes, her sis--she had a sister here who had a big family.  Her sister never worked, but her husband worked at the post office, and they had five--I think five girls and one boy that died, and that was my family here [Chicago, Illinois].  Some of them went on to achieve, and some of them didn't.  I would have to research--I've really wanted to research my roots and see just what I'm about, where I came from.
Speaker 1: So there was not a lot of discussion in the family about the background.
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no).
Speaker 1: That's gotten a lot of--.
Speaker 2: Is that typical of black families?
Speaker 1: Well, I think in some cases.  Now my father's side of the family, they've been having family reunions for fifty years.
Speaker 2: Oh, we--okay.  We--they're starting to have some with us, too.  Maybe I should go to one, and then I would find out more.  That's where you can find out, but other than that I was--I was a loner.  That's what I was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was really a loner.  I didn't have any brothers and sister, and I could keep myself occupied for days, can still do it.
Story_ID: 9627
Speaker 1: And what motivated your interest in radio?  I mean, how--I know you said that you were, you know, building crystal radio sets when you were in your teens, but where did that--where did that thing come from?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I--there was an incident.  Being in the ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] in high school [Hyde Park High School, Chicago, Illinois], we went on field trips.  I loved to go on these little field trips.  I was into everything, you know, like the pick squad, pick platoon, male chorus--there--ultimately the radio guild, and the reason I got into there was because of this incident.  We all put our little uniforms on, and we went down to W--(pause in interview)--.  Put our uniforms and went down to WGN [Chicago radio station] in the top of the Tribune Tower, and I asked some guys at [W]GN--I think it's still there.  There's a theater that they used to do some of the radio interview shows, and they had an orchestra, and every Saturday night they did light classics like Victor Herbert's 'The Chocolate Soldier.'  They had operettas, little light things, and they aired them, and, you know, I was into that kind of music.  The soloist was a lady named Marion Claire.  Whatever happened to her?  She may still be alive, and I'm sure she'd be very old.  This was in the 40s [1940s], and so we went to see that.  Now waiting, sitting there in the audience, a guy came out.  I remember this announcer came out.  He was a white dude.  He had silver hair, and he walked up to the microphone, and he had--when he started speaking, he had the most glorious voice I had ever heard.  It was like it was golden.  You know, it was like diamonds, and it was shimmering, and I--and right then and there I said "I've got to be able to do that."  And I remember that to this day, and that stuck with me, and so when opportunities came like getting into the radio guild, stuff like that, I got in there.  I don't think I ever got a voice like his.  He had a great voice, but that's what I wanted.
Speaker 1: I don't know, you have a pretty good voice if you ask me!
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: If you ask a lot of people!--
Speaker 2: Not like that (smiles).
Story_ID: 9628
Speaker 1: It was really the spoken voice first that I wanted.  I--you know, it--I was just normally interested in music with my friends.  We used to listen to Lionel Hampton [jazz vibraphone player and composer] and go to dances and jitterbug and stuff like that, but I wanted to be an announcer, but it--I found a way to be an announcer, perhaps, was through music so I got into classical music.  I studied it.  I loved to listen to it, and I wanted to be a classical music commentator and a radio actor so--and at WBEZ [Chicago, Illinois radio staion] I had a chance to do this and become an actor.  I was in [Chicago theater troupe] Skyloft Players also.  This whole thing hooks together as we talk here.  We did dramas, for instance, [Christopher] Columbus discovering America.  They would broadcast this through the public school system.  They would also put it on like [W]MAQ and [W]BBM [Chicago, Illinois radio stations] at 6:00 a.m. Sunday morning to fulfill public service so when I give my history, I go all the way back and say "this is when I was on the air," because I really was, and they taught us how to run a board.  They had--I learned everything in radio before I got out of high school [Hyde Park High School, Chicago], and I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] college and continued my--I didn't graduate, but I went there for a couple of years--but anyway we learned all about radio, and that's how all of this got started.  But it became painfully aware to me that there were no black classical announcers or there wasn't black this, there wasn't black that.  One of my instructors at Northwestern told me, and I wrote about this in 'N'Digo' [Chicago-based African American magazine/newspaper].  He said--I got straight A's in college, everything straight A's--and he said "you're the best I got in here."  He said "but you're a Negro, and you'll never get anywhere so you need to forget it."  I said, "you know, just give me my damn grade, and let me out of here."  And it didn't deter me at this point.  It hurt me, but it didn't deter me.  As a matter of fact, it probably helped me.  Sometimes people put obstacles in your way, and you climb over them so I guess I'm a competitor.  I'm a laid-back competitive guy, and that's how all that got going.
Speaker 2: Now, why didn't you finish Northwestern?  What happened?
Speaker 1: I got a job.  I was working at NBC [National Broadcasting Company].  I was the first black hired at NBC.  I worked in the mail room, and again I had a zillion friends.  I went to a white high school.  I was perfectly at home there, and they also had an after work workshop, and I got into that and met the sound man, and then, well, I just--I've just--everything I did was centered around radio.
Story_ID: 9629
Speaker 1: I said earlier my theory--it's only a theory.  There was--and this is what my teacher told me when I was in the radio console.  He said, "you know, you're gonna be all right because it'll be about acceptance."  He said "you're a nice guy, and you're just gonna be accepted, and you'll be able to do your thing."  He was very encouraging, but I think in the late fifties [1950s] and early sixties [1960s] the turbulence when blacks begin to demand more and got more, then the racial lines became sharply drawn.  And in a school where everybody got along they had riots in almost every school.  It changed.  Englewood [neighborhood on Chicago, Illinois South Side] had terrible riots at CVS [pharmacy].  I should just center those schools and leave other schools alone, but it was the power--it was the power struggle between these two groups that "black is beautiful," and I've dated a couple of white ladies in my life.  I haven't done it recently, though, but I dated on--because they would come around--I was on the radio, and they were nice so we'd go out, and I dated one, and when I grew a natural [Afro hairstyle], she left me alone because that natural was a sign of violence, I think, to white people, and then there was--then there was a dividing line which--I think we have that today in many cases where we didn't have it.  I'm not saying there's anything wrong with it, but I'm just saying that this is just a theory of mine, and you asked that question.
Speaker 2: You know, that's--I want to ask one more question.
Speaker 1: But we still--we work together.  We still have friends, but the cultural differences are there, you know.  You--if--for instance at a skating party, it's hard for a bunch of black people to go to a white skating party because what the hell kind of music are they playing?  It might be easier for white people to come to us because of the kind of music that we play.  It might be more rhythmical or something like that, but the stuff that they play--and then if you're gonna go in a bar and they play something on the jukebox, it ain't your kind of music, you know, so these cultural differences need to be eased to get us--I would like to see us get closer together, but I'm the first one to say I guess I'm more comfortable around a bunch of black people than I am white people.  I don't know.  Am I different like that?  I don't know, but it depends.  There are some--you know, down at work you're fine.  You go home; everybody goes their separate ways.  When I went to these high schools, I would see all the white teachers on one side and all the black teachers on the other side, and I spoke about it once, and they said "you know, Herb, you're right.  We're really embarrassed that this is happening," and the students see this, and that's the way they grow up, and I guess that perhaps still happens.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 9630
Speaker 1: What was Chicago [Illinois] like?  What was Chicago like when you were growing up?  What was this town, you know--.
Speaker 2: At what age?
Speaker 1: I would say in your teens, you know, in your early years and your teens.  What was it like, and how is it different?
Speaker 2: It was prejudiced, of course.  There were areas you would--you couldn't go into.  We'd ride our bicycles in there. Those white guys would throw bricks at us.  It was--musically it was great.  We had a lot of dance halls, and the guys went out on Saturday night, and really dressed, got their shoes shined and wore suits and went to these parties and met girls.  It was--it was interesting.  It was a lot of fun.  It was, you know, learning, learning about life.  It was double-decker buses.  It was riding the El [elevated train] and the streetcar to get your dates.  You know, there weren't a lot of--as many affluent blacks.  You know, I think there's so many black millionaires quietly in Chicago.  It's just you'd never know, but there were just--most blacks just didn't have a lot of money then, but there were, you know,  doctors, lawyers, the upper, upper level thing with the doctor, lawyer, schoolteacher type thing, and there was a class thing which I understand exists today maybe.  All the really, really light kids hung together, and then a lot of folks my color hung together, and then the real, real dark ones hung together, and that is--that's the way it was in many cases.  Some of the parties that they had we couldn't go to, and then there were some parties that we didn't want to go to, and there were little Ivy League guys, and there were little roughneck guys, and it was culturally interesting.  Maybe we don't have quite that division in color like we used to, but I understand that in certain cases it probably still exists, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: When you--it still exists (unintelligible)--.
Speaker 2: (laughs) I've seen doctors involved into stuff like that.
Speaker 1: In fact what was--I saw a clip the other day that they were saying Spike Lee [director, screenwriter] was making 'School Days.'  You know, he had all the light-skinned women stand up, you know, with the guys in the nice hotel and put the dark-skinned women in the bad hotel just to create, you know, some feeling of hostility before the movie began. But what I--.
Speaker 2: Interracial dating was not as prominent as it was.  If you dated a white girl back then, people just would stare, outright just stared at you, and homosexuality was hidden in the closet, and when you saw a fairy man, it was really something to see, but, you know, like it's all different.  You know, it's just all different today.  There's acceptance to everything.
Story_ID: 9631
Speaker 1: Now let's go--so you dropped out of Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] really because--.
Speaker 2: I got a job, my first radio job.
Speaker 1: You got a job so it didn't even seem relevant, I bet.
Speaker 2: No, but now I'm trying to get back and finish my degree because I had pledged Kappa [Alpha Psi fraternity] and they had accepted me, and I want to go back, and I don't have my degree, and then so life goes on.
Speaker 1: You know who just went and got his degree, too, is Barry Mayo [entrepreneur, broadcaster].
Speaker 2: Did he?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Life experience?
Speaker 1: Huh-uh.
Speaker 2: Governors,  Board of Governors? That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, you know, he's like me.  You do--a degree does not make you any smarter, but you need to have it to go on, you know.  I'm a consultant, so to speak, and a teacher Sunday--summers at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], and that's just for kids in their summer program, and they really--they want me to teach older classes, but, you know, I'm going up to see to try to get a governor's degree with just life experience.  As far as I'm concerned, they need just to give it to me, all this stuff I've gone through, but it's not quite that easy.  You have to stand up and be quizzed, and they give you X amount of hours, so before I do that, I'm going to do some research so I can look good.
Story_ID: 9632
Speaker 1: Here you are.  You've gotten hired at WMAQ [Chicago, Illinois radio station].  You're also--around that time weren't you doing something else at the same time?  I--you were working.  I thought you were working there and working someplace else.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was working at--I left and came back to [W]MAQ as a mail boy, and then there's still a few people there who were there when I was there so it's always interesting to talk to them, and I was working nights for a deejay [disc jockey] named Sam Evans at WGES [Chicago radio station] which was at that time the big powerhouse black station.  All the black stations were on the--way on the other side of the dial in 1300, 14, 15, 1600 area, and we were 1350, 1370, and [disc jockey] Al Benson--he was the powerhouse, biggest black jock up to that time of all time, and also there was Sam Evans.  His whole station had black jocks on it intermingled with the Germania hour, the Polish hour, the stations like that which you'll probably never hear again.  It was so colorful.  That was one thing that we had back then.  We even had a station, WLAC in Nashville, Tennessee.  Everybody listened to it, and they had jocks called Big John R, Gene Nobles, and they were all white, but they could talk a lot of four letter word stuff starting with an "s," which was a slang expression that everybody knows about, and they were heard from coast to coast on this clear channel station [coast to coast radio station].  They had something called Randy's Record Shop, and you could send in for a record package of all the hot records.  When I saw these guys, I was so amazed.  They were all white guys, sixty-five, seventy-five years old, and they were just doing a heck of a job.  Anyway, that's what we listened to so WGES was the powerhouse station here in the city of Chicago, and Al Benson was the big guy.  He had purple suits, red suits, and I was afraid of him.  His daughter is--you know her.  I'll think of her name.  She works in, she works in Detroit [Michigan] now.  She worked for  Doug Banks [radio host].  She was his sidekick for awhile.  Anyway, Sam Evans had a chunk of that time at night so he gave me--he came to--he came to--we hooked up, and he wanted a young guy to work for him, and he came to [W]MAQ, and he said "come on, work for me," and "I said I don't know," 'cause he wasn't offering a whole lot of money, and so he went away.  A couple months later he came back.  He said "you know something?  You can stay here."  Sam Evans is really good.  He said "you can stay here for the rest of your life, and you might get a little executive position, but you ain't gonna get in radio because, you know, there's a color line, and that's gonna be hard for you, but if you come out, you've got a chance."  He sold me, and tearfully I resigned from NBC [National Broadcasting Corporation, owner of WMAQ] which was the best thing that ever happened to me.  I went to work for him.  I had been on the air at the age of nineteen, when they first found me this job in Gary [Indiana], and when that ended, I came back to [W]MAQ just like going back to your mother's cocoon, and he got me back out there again, and I stayed out there this time. I was really on my own.
Story_ID: 9633
Speaker 1: So tell me what that whole--what were those guys like, you know, [disc jockeys] Al Benson and Sam [Evans]?  I mean, what--who--what were they like and what were--we're really talking about the early days of black radio, right?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Al Benson was--he really taught me black radio.  I had to learn that, you know.  For instance, if he was eating a sandwich--a lot of people laugh about this--and it came time for him to get on the radio, he would go like that (pantomimes spitting out food into his hand, laughing) and then go on or he would gam [chat] a little bit in between records and stuff, but he didn't have a--was not master of the King's English or language, but what he had, he had an ability to communicate, and you just loved listening to him.  He communicated.  He was super, you know.  He would say "Mum Deodeant" instead of "deodorant" so what's the difference, you know?  And today modern radio has gotten--you know, I've heard white announcers murder English.  They don't need it.  What about the shock jocks that they have, you know?  It's all about communication.  It's all about communication.  It used to be that you had to have perfect English, perfect articulation, and maybe speak a couple languages to be a radio announcer.  The standards were exceedingly high, but they're not that high anymore, just "can you get ratings?  Are you good?"  So Al Benson was like this.  He sold his own radio time.  He had a lot of money, had big cars, was in the Bud Billiken Parade [annual parade on the South Side of Chicago].  He'd stand up; people'd just go crazy, and he'd walk into a room and proclaim that he was Al Benson, and people would just go crazy.  He was--I  loved him.  He was, he was colorful.  He was like no person you ever met, and all those black jocks were like that.  A lot of them had tons of women, big cars, suits, lots of money.  People loved them.  They were kings.  They were kings.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about how they got started or, you know, what that whole process was?
Speaker 2: You know something, I talked to Al Benson once.  He had many--he was such a great teacher, and so was Sam Evans.  Sam taught me, too, and  I was a guy that could really learn and put the stuff away.  Al Benson knew black history.  He knew about the incident around 26th and Prairie [Chicago, Illinois] when a band of Indians jumped on a bunch of white people and kicked their butt and killed some of them.  This is--this is history, you know, the black entrance into Chicago.  They really centered around that 31st Street and stuff like that.  That's where it all--that's where it all began, and he knew this.  He was quite knowledgeable.  He was from down south somewhere.  His nephews opened up a big record distribution place, Ernie Leaner.  His name was Albert Leaner, incidentally, Ernie Leaner and his brother, and they began to house records by [singer] Smokey [Robinson], [singer] Mary Wells, Motown stuff.  They were really big.  I talk to one of the sons now.  This may be something you might be interested in--the black distributors, record distributors, historymakers in the city of Chicago--but he was--we used to say "man, you don't talk too good," and he'd say "I talk as good as anybody." To him, he was just great, you know, but he--I was afraid of him, but I learned.  I learned, you know.
Speaker 1: Now what time period are we talking about?  What year are we in now?
Speaker 2: Benson was really big back in the '40s [1940s], maybe '47 [1947], '48 [1948], '49 [1949].  He was big.  Everybody listened to Al Benson.  He had a TV show.  He was big.  I really think he should be in the [National Radio] Hall of Fame [and Museum, Chicago, Illinois].  I think he should have went in there before me.
Story_ID: 9634
Speaker 1: Now, but that's interesting, you know, why in the--at this point I'm just trying to think.  It's in the '40s [1940s].  Did they [African American disc jockeys] rent radio stations from white owners or what was the--.
Speaker 2: They brokered time, so to speak.  This white owner at WGES [Chicago, Illinois radio station]--he made it.  Doctor Dyer--he made a ton of money.  He would let you sell spots, and you could keep 30 percent, and you could see easily without a lot of overhead you could make a lot of money like that so--and the spots cost at that time--check this out--thirty-five bucks for a minute so if you had, you know, $1,000 worth of spots on your show, what's 30 percent of that, three hundred bucks?  You could easily have maybe a thousand bucks an hour and so $300 an hour, and you're on the air.  In four hours you could get twelve [hundred dollars].  You could make a thousand bucks a day.  And [disc jockey] Al Benson he could--he was--with this power that he had of almost mesmerizing you, he could--he was a master salesman.  He could walk into a place.  I walked into this place, this little hamburger joint on 63rd Street [Chicago], and we went in there, and he let me sell the man, and the man bought, gave me the money, and then I went to sit down to talk, and Al said "let's get out of here."  I said "why does he want to get out of here?"  So we got out.  He said "man."  We got outside.  He said "man, once you get the money, you get the hell out of there before they change their mind," and you know, I learned.  He was a good--he was a good teacher.  He was a good teacher, a stern disciplinarian, and just the kind of guy that I needed.  I just appreciate him so much today.
Speaker 1: So he really helped launch--he and [disc jockey] Sam [Evans].  You said Sam.  Both of them.
Speaker 2: He and Sam did not like each other.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't--
Speaker 2: For awhile.  I don't think it was that bad, but it was competitive like our sales people in cubicles.  This is the name of the game, and I think sometimes competition--I hate it--makes me do better.  Every now and then you get a wake-up call.  You're in this game.  You know that, and you can go to a party and stuff like that, but there are people that you'd like to avoid.  There's--it's competitive.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: You get between these white lines in this game, and the game is numbers, right?  If you don't make the numbers, you can--only thing that will beat you home would be the front end of your car.
Story_ID: 9635
Speaker 1: Now they had--they had--they had different time slots.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were brought in for a third time slot.  Is that it?
Speaker 2: I was brought in to work with--I worked with [disc jockey] Al [Benson] once.  He got--he fired me, and then he rehired me.  Oh, it was just awesome.  Then I worked for [disc jockey] Sam [Evans].  I worked for Sam from I guess eleven, ten to eleven.  He was on for three or four hours, and I was a good warm-up man for him, and I gave him many good ideas.  I was creative.  He--I used to turn this blue light on and play the blues.  I played blues and jazz and beginning to play doo-wops.  Doo-wops didn't really come until 1953 so we're talking '50 [1950], '51 [1951], and I would say "man, why don't you pretend like you're going down in the basement to eat some soul food," so that's what he would do at 11:00 [pm] every night.  He'd go down in the basement and turn on a soft blue light, and you'd hear this harmonica in the background, and then he would describe this plate of greens and fatback and cornbread that he was eating and stuff like--it was a gas, you know?  It was a gas.  I gave him that idea, and he was very big with it.  He unfortunately succumbed a few--many years ago, a lot of tragedy in his family.  I think this game does not guarantee that you're gonna be happy for the rest of your life.  As a matter of fact, a agent told me once "you don't want a lot of money, man.  It just brings unhappiness," and you know that's true sometimes.  But people that don't have a lot of money say, well, I'll take the money and take my chances, but it does not bring a lot of happiness.  It's so--you watch the E Channel and Biography [cable television channels], and so many of the great people have had horrible lives and so much trauma, so much, so much trauma.  It's hard to lead a normal life and be a normal person.
Story_ID: 9636
Speaker 1: When did you get your--I mean, when did you get your spot on the air, this--in black radio?  While you were out there.
Speaker 2: My first slot was in 1949.  It was the first time I was on the air.  I had been on.  I had done stuff at a Catholic station.  I had done these things at WBEZ [Chicago radio station].  It was all free.  I'd done a couple little commercials.  I was in Skyloft Players [theater troupe], and some of those people went on--.  For instance, Fred Sanford's [character from television show 'Sanford and Son'] girlfriend [actress Lynn Hamilton] was a good friend of mine.  We were in 'Bell, Book, and Candle,' and 'Alzinia'--she went on.  You've seen her a lot.  She changed her name.  She went to change her name to--wasn't it Hamilton?  What'd she call herself?  She just changed it, but she made--she's a fine actress, fine actress, but, you know, I was always doing stuff like this 'cause this was what I wanted to do.  Anyway, my radio debut was in Gary, Indiana, in 1949 where I got paid thirty-five bucks a week for a sometimes seven day week, ten hour day, but I loved it, and I did--I did a Polish program.  I did a western program, and then I'm sitting down playing music, and the owner comes in, and you know, I'm playing some really nice stuff.  He says "what are you doing?"  I said "I'm playing music."  He said "this is a race program.  Play race music.  This is a race program."  I said "oh."  I really didn't--I didn't mind 'cause I just wanted to be in radio, and then the phone began to ring, and the people here said "man, when are you gonna play some blues?  Come on.  Play some blues."  So I found something.  I started, and I loved it.  Frankly, I frankly loved it.  You know, you had to live with racism back then and make the best out of it.  That was where the--they did call the black programs "race programs" back then, but I gained--I found out right away that I had some uncanny ability to make people listen to me.  I don't know what it was.  I got--I used to get over a hundred postcards and letters a day from those people in Gary, steelworkers and stuff like that, and I found out white people liked me, too.  It was a real, real thing, and the boss thought I was writing those letters myself.  I said "man, I'm not writing these letters."  He said "nobody gets this many--this much mail"--all there is to that--and that's when I played blues.  I played jazz.  I played all the black music I could.  I--my first interview was probably with [saxophonist] Johnny Griffin from [pianist, composer, bandleader] Duke [Ellington's big band].  What was his name?  Duke Ellington.  He wrote and played 'Sophisticated Lady.'  What was his name?  Not Johnny Griffin.  I'll think of it, but he was an unhappy man.  I remember that 'cause Duke--he had left Duke to do the 'Sophisticated Lady' thing.  Then he went back, but I just remember his tremendous unhappiness that--that he had, and then there was a guy named [saxophonist] Earl Bostic.  I interviewed him.  He had a big record called 'Flamingo,' and the radio station caught on fire, and the firemen came in, and they wanted to chop up the radio station.  I said "wait a minute, man."  They wanted to go right in there where we were playing records.  I said "no, no, no, no."  We had a little oil stove, and it was the only thing that was on fire so they put that out, and they went down the road, and they hollered "play some blues for us!"  Man, I will never forget that, but this was my thing at radio.  I'd go to work, and there'd be frogs underneath and the garden snakes underneath the console 'cause it was like out in the country.  And I'm on the air one time, and I slipped up and said "damn," and the (laughs) radio station owner charged in, and he said "oh, shit, man.  You just cussed on the damn air," and my mike was open.  I said, "well, you did, too, sir."  He was furious, and he stormed back out (laughs).
Story_ID: 9637
Speaker 1: Then I found out what it was to be like on the radio, and I had trained, you know, went to a white high school, white grammar school so you--I was totally unidentifiable.  I had to learn how to sound black; in later years I forced myself to do it which is no problem now, and many people came, they thought I was white, and I was black, but I guess they didn't mind.  This one lady didn't mind.  I was a nice young little guy, you know, so they were all cool except for this one incident.  They sold me doing commercials for Arthur Murray's Dance Studio, and they [the dance studio] found out I was black.  They were furious.  They said--they used the "N word" [nigger].  You're cannot have no N guy doing our commercials.  None of them Ns coming over here.  They were absolutely furious so, you know, that still happens today, you know, so that was--that was my--all this was during my first tour as a radio announcer, and I remember I lived in Gary [Indiana], thirty-five bucks a week.  I bought a car for $100, and when it wouldn't run, I had to take--on the weekends sometimes I would go home to see my mother in the projects, and I'd take the IC [Illlinois Central rail line].  I remember this porter sweeping up, and I said "hey, man, do you know me?"  He said "no."  I said "my name is Herb Kent.  I work on the radio," and he looked at me.  "I still don't know you, man."  (Laughs).  And now, you know, sometimes--I love people, but to go to a large crowd is sometimes a little frightening for me.  I can't get through it without signing autographs and stuff like that, and I've never turned anybody down, not really, so it's a long cry from--from that, you know, to today.
Story_ID: 9638
Speaker 1: So you left Gary [Indiana], the Gary [radio] station which was W--what was that?
Speaker 2: WGRY.
Speaker 1: WGRY, and then where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: I went back to [W]MAQ [Chicago, Illinois radio station] 'cause I needed a job, and that's when--I was there for just a short time, and that's when [disc jockey] Sam Evans came along and talked me out of there to work at WGES [Chicago radio station].  From that point on I just stayed in radio.  I made my living in radio.
Speaker 1: And then--so you were at WGES how long, and what was--that was here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: 2708 West Washington.  It was down the street from a tavern.  If you can remember in 'Ebony' magazine, this guy had cut his girlfriend's head off, and he went in the bar, and he had this little bag, and he ordered a drink and took the head out and sat it on the bar. I will never forget that.  It was in 'Ebony.'  I know I'm shocking you with these stories, but you just remind me of them as we go along.  Anyway, that's where [W]GES was.  It was old like graystone or brownstone, a very well-built building converted into a very nice radio station, and we all worked there with [station owner] Doctor Dyer, and we got our little 30 percent of everything that we sold, and we brought our records to work with us, sat down, and did our thing.  And that's where I began to be taught by [disc jockey] Al Benson and Sam Evans.  I was learning all along the way.  I had learned stuff at NBC [National Broadcasting Company, affiliated with WMAQ] from the white announcers, from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and then from, you know, practical experience in black radio.
Story_ID: 9639
Speaker 1: You were you were big celebrities, did you become?--.
Speaker 2: In what year?  What year?
Speaker 1: I'm talking of the time you were working at WJ - was it WJDD?  No WGES [Chicago, Illinois radio station].
Speaker 2: They were big celebrities.  I took off pretty good.  People liked me.  Al Benson [disc jockey] was the biggest guy, and then there was a guy name Sid McCoy [disc jockey, actor] who you've seen.  He went to Hollywood.  He was in a few movies and stuff like that.  He was one of my idols.  I wanted to sound like him and also [radio host] Dave Garroway.  Everybody looks up to other people, but what you're trying to say was how big was radio?  You would ask Al Benson.  I remember his saying this.  You can look at the rating systems, and perhaps it would be really good for you to look if you could go back that far.  I think they had--I think they had Arbitron [rating system].  If not that, some of the Nielsen and Trendex [rating systems] were doing radio back then, and they ultimately all went to TV, but I think that it would be really good for you to look in different cities to see how these programs were rated.  We knew that in the summertime these white teenagers would come in from college and swell our ratings, and that was a known fact.  You'd ask Al Benson "how many people listen to you?"  He'd say "a million."  Pardon me.  There were close to a million blacks in Chicago, I guess, back then, and he figured he had all of them, and everybody did.  It was just in the car, at home, more radio listening at home, I think, because you know you didn't have a lot of competition from around-the-clock cable or TV.  As a matter of fact, TV went off at midnight.  Does anybody remember that?  The planes, the flags flew, the 'Star Spangled Banner,' and it was off at midnight, and then it was back on like at 6:00 in the morning.  So there was a lot of radio listening at night, a lot of radio listening at home to answer your question, but TV slowly made--I guess slowly or quickly.  I can't speak about what I don't know precisely, but I'm sure that TV has made great inroads during that time because they had so many programs, soap operas, news, all kinds of stuff, you know.  Radio had it all because the 4:00 [pm], 5:00 [pm] hour belonged to teenagers--'Little Orphan Annie,' 'Captain Midnight,' 'Jack Armstrong,' all the teenage things, and then they had soap operas, too.  That's where soap operas came from, radio.  We need--all of us need to do research to see how big radio was compared to TV.  TV was in its infancy in the '40s [1940s], but it just has really grown, just really, really grown to what it is today.
Speaker 1: Did you find that there were things that you found surprising about being in black radio or things that were different or--I mean, just--I mean, do you--I know it was the personalities you were talking about, Al Benson and all--.
Speaker 2: Well, we were all personalities then.  Today they've drummed the personality out of radio except for persons like myself, but basically during certain time periods--let's say it's morning, sometimes afternoon--they'd just demand that you play the music.  They'd pick the music, and you kind of don't have a lot of time to talk, and it's a slick, smooth thing like that.  Personality is subjugated, and I'd like to see personalities come back.  I think that it would be great, but that entails a lot of talking so while you're talking, another radio station is playing music, and you lose out 'cause--people are now used to--"oh, you talk too much," and you hear people say that now.  "Oh, this guy talks too much."  Back in the day they loved for you to talk.  Our boss Leonard Chess [record producer] made us talk in between records.  He would come in the room and say "man, you're not talking enough.  Open up the mike.  While the record's playing, talk a lot of 'S,'" four letter word.  Holler, scream, and that's the way it was, but it's changed today.
Story_ID: 9640
Speaker 1: Now you went from WGES [Chicago, Illinois radio station] to WBEE [Harvey, Illinois radio station], no?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because I didn't enjoy selling [airtime] that much.  I did sell, but I wanted to--I was more of a behind-the-microphone deejay [disc jockey] type of guy that I wanted to do it without having to get out there and sell, but I did so this station came along, and they offered full-time employment for about eighty-five bucks a week, and I took it, and it was a lot of work, but they sold, and you did the radio, and that was WBEE which was owned by the Rollins Broadcasting Corporation.  They had a few other black stations that they owned, and I did that and was very successful.  We were kind of a giant killer.  We just really took a lot of listeners from WGES.  We were not as powerful, could not be heard as easily, but we--we were just awesome.  A lot of accounts came through there--Black Draught [laxative product], wine companies, furniture companies.  We had one furniture company that was really raunchy.  You know, there's a lot of that that would never get on the air today, and they would advertise three rooms of furniture for $90, and they'd--you know, kitchen tables, beds--they'd say even pictures on the wall, and you'd get there, and they'd show it to you.  This stuff is nailed onto the floor.  This was--you know, you can't buy that so they give you something else, no money down, and X amount of dollars for just real--the term was "schlock," a "schlock account," and I'm just not mentioning any names because I don't want any law suits for anybody.  So I dated this one lady, and she had bought a TV from this company that I advertised.  She couldn't pay for it so she told me that one night they broke the door down and came and took the TV away and resold it so we had accounts like that.  We had some Roosevelt Row--that's part of the reason these riots came.  People got tired of this type thing, you know.  They tore down a lot of those accounts that, that were just ripping people off, just ripping people off.  We had a lot of accounts like that, and then, of course, we had some car dealers.  We had--what was it, the Agar Meat Company, some kind of company, and they had a big--they said they didn't hire enough blacks, and they picketed the radio station and tried to get us to stop playing the spots, and--oh, they just--all of that started right, you know, back then.  That was in 1956, '55 [1955], '56 [1956], that this stuff - this stuff occurred, but it was--it was a good radio station.  Now it's a jazz station owned by a black guy.
Story_ID: 9641
Speaker 1: Now you went from there to WBEE [Harvey, Illinois] radio station to WHFC [Chicago, Illinois] radio station, later known as WVON?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: And what was--what was this now, a money move again?
Speaker 2: Well, here's how that happened.  A lot of the things that--no, we're not really through with WBEE, but we'll just.
Speaker 1: Oh, go on.  Go.  Go on about WBEE.
Speaker 2: We were in a one--a cinder block building in Harvey, Illinois, and we just took over the town of Harvey, and the white kids listened.  The black kids listened.  Everybody listened, and that type of programming--your morning shows were--first morning shows were religious shows every day, and that's where I met Reverend Watley, Jr.  He did one of those.  Jody Watley is his daughter.  I remember when she came through.  She was so excited that she was going to talk.  I was going to interview her because she knew I was a friend of her father's.  She was really nice, but they had the religious shows, and then they'd have a morning show, and then sometimes they would come back with a religious show.  Then you would have your afternoon show.  This station was on sunup to sundown so on sundown time we signed off in the wintertime at 4:15 [pm].  In the summertime we got extended till eight, eight-thirty [pm], like that, and it was the first time I made a $100 a week in my life.  I got a raise to that, and this girl gave me a party.  A hundred dollars a week--that was something, and I was living in Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois] paying $135 a month so that was back in the day, back in the '50s [1950s], stuff like that, but the station WBEE in Harvey made a lot of inroads.  We did--I did a lot of remotes on Sunday.  They would give me a little thing, and I would go to different churches and put them on the air, and the preachers would preach.  There were two of us.  I'd open up a church while another guy'd go to another church so the first church would maybe be on for two hours.  Then we'd switch to another church, and then I would go, and we'd stay out there all day.  I did not like that very much because those preachers were very--if you made any noise--I made some noise, and this preacher just said "who is that young man over there making all that noise?"  I said "oh, Jesus."  (laughs) They were quite, quite colorful.  That was back in the days of [Bishop C.M. "Sweet] Daddy" Grace and the Reverend Bonnie, and there used to be a guy that came through town selling crosses.  He'd sell these blessed crosses for, I guess, $25.  He'd come through, and that phone would light up.  We'd give him some radio time, and he'd start telling people about how these crosses cured arthritis, got your lover back.  You win policy, and the phone just lit.  He was a big crook, these blessed crosses, and we had a lot of stuff like that because it wasn't as well regulated, and--well, it might have been, but nobody cared what happened, you know, in black radio, just typical stuff.  And then we had car dealers who would break your leg if you couldn't pay, stuff like that.  You could get cars with no credit, and they'd let you know "you better pay for this," and I've heard.  You know guys couldn't pay, and they'd go back, and they'd just get a little whooping, stuff like that.  (Pause) Tell them it's Herbie Baby.  So, you know, I guess the upshot of this whole thing is that we had lower-class accounts.  This is the place where they could dump off, and they could really get into the black market, and it just wasn't--we had some really nice accounts, too.  We've had really bad insurance accounts where they didn't want to--as a matter of fact, I got one of the insurance companies to do my [Chevrolet] Corvette [automobile], and they stole it, and they didn't want to pay me.  They wanted me to take a lie detector test claiming I stole my own car, really stuff--they had they had some really bad insurance companies out here that would not pay and had high rates, stuff like that, so we had a lot of those.
Story_ID: 9642
Speaker 1: But in the meantime--pardon me--we [WBEE, Harvey, Illinois radio station] were playing 78s [RPM records] and 45s [RPM records] back in the '50s [1950s], and doo-wops were really big, and this is where I really cut my teeth in radio.  This is when--I knew there was something I wanted to tell you.  The Spaniels [R&B group] came along.  I'm the guy that helped to make them, the El Dorados [R&B group], the Dells [R&B group]--the Dells were like my brothers.  So are--so are the Spaniels.  I'm very close to them, the pioneers in radio, and I would have--be on all day long just playing so many doo-wops--the Platters [R&B group], the Cleftones [R&B group], just all kind of stuff.  It was a lot of fun, and black kids loved it.  White kids loved it.  I used to play this thing by [rock&roll singer, pianist] Jerry Lee Lewis.  I was--I was never racially deprived when I was on the radio because if a record was good, I would play it.  I played [country singer] Marty Robbins.  I played Jerry Lee Lewis, as I said.  If they had a good record, I'd play it, and folks just ate it up--'There's a Whole Lot of Shakin' Goin' On' by Jerry Lee Lewis.  I just had fans who just came through the door and brought me hot dogs, pizza and would just hang around when I was doing this thing. So it was quite colorful.  It was a lot of fun, and it was the basics of modern radio today.
Speaker 2: Were--were you as a deejay then able--you identified talent.  I mean, how did talent find you like, you know, the Spaniels and the Dells--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I was kicking butt on that radio.  Everybody listened, and they'd just come knock on the door.  It's a new deejay [disc jockey].  The Dells came over, and I had a beautiful collie dog, and he got loose, and I said "oh, god, my dog is loose," and I'm crying.  He said "don't worry."  We'll find him, and they went out.  They had little creeks and things, and they went out and found my dog, and we became friends, and I started playing their records, and they tell the same story today.  The Spaniels--I don't know when I first saw them.  I really don't, but I became quite close with them, and all these local groups.  Chicago [Illinois] was headquarters for a lot of doo-wop groups back then--the Danderliers [R&B group]--as I said, the El Dorados, the Dells, the Moonglows [R&B group]--oh, just even more than I can think of.  I would have to go through my list at home to see who was local--the Orchids.  Gee, I could just name these names.
Story_ID: 9643
Speaker 1: Some of those groups came out of Chicago [Illinois]--the Impressions with Jerry Butler [R&B group]--and it was just a big thing in black radio then, and it was big.  Doo-wops were big like from maybe '53 [1953], '54 [1954] through '59 [1959], at which time they began to die out because what happened--they took the lead singers.  I had a doo-wop group called the Kool Gents.  Out of this group came some national stars-- [singers] Dee Clark and Phillip Upchurch.  Dee Clark, of course, has passed.  Phillip is still alive, and we're still close and what happened--Vee-Jay Records took Dee Clark.  He had a magnificent voice.  They made him a single.  They did the same thing like for Ben E. King and the Drifters [R&B group].  What had happened, they just began to diminish the doo-wop groups, and they went for the single guys, and by '60 [1960], '61 [1961] they were just about out of here, but it's a known fact that a lot of phases in music last about three years, like disco.  The same thing happened to it, and three is a word.  I talked to the Emotions [R&B group].  They had maybe three good albums.  Three is a good--three years is a good time because none of us last forever, and music trends come and go.  One trend that has started and never abated, of course, is rap.  It started in '79 [1979] with 'Rapper's Delight' [by the Sugarhill Gang] and it has never stopped.  Just like blue jeans started down in Old Town [Chicago neighborhood] in the '60s [1960s], and people still wear them so some things like that would--basically some music trends are fleeting.
Speaker 2: Why do you think doo-wop was popular during that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, they were just--the girls were just crazy about these guys like the Daylighters [R&B group], the Deliters, and these guys had the hair all fried, whipped, and they wore these suits, and women have always--let me tell you, I find that women like singers.  Women do anything for singers.  I talked to a singer.  I said "man, can you can you take a woman to bed 'cause you sing?"  He says "can I?"  I said "well, I'm in the wrong game here."  They--they--women are really erotically aroused by singers, and this is just what they needed at that time.  I saw Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers [R&B group] come to town.  Frankie--what was he, twelve, thirteen?  These forty and fifty year-old women that we mentioned earlier grabbed him off the stage and put him all up in their bosoms and everything like that.  I'm watching this.  I said I don't--I don't believe this, but it was--I guess it was just--it was a trend.  You know, how can you explain any trend really?  It was a trend.  Everybody loved it.  The songs--it had the bass, you know--"boom boom da-doom doom"--and they had the little high tenor that the Bee Gees [disco group] successfully imitated, and they sounded great, and that was--that was--that was the biggest thing going.  That really was the biggest thing going.
Story_ID: 9644
Speaker 1: What was the relationship between the radio station, the record company, and the group, and has that changed?  What was the relationship then, you know, with the doo-wop groups at that time?
Speaker 2: If you're asking me if--.
Speaker 1: Who, who did the--was it the deejay [disc jockey] that really found or was it the--?  Did people self-publish?  I mean, what--you know, like?
Speaker 2: Well, for instance, I was at WGES [Chicago, Illinois radio station], and I was walking to my car and this little group of guys stopped me and explained that "we're singers.  My name is Delecta Clark, and here's John.  Man, we love your show, and could you listen to us sing and help us?"  I did listen to them, and I helped them.  I got them on Vee-Jay Records, and that's how that got started--that was a relationship then.  Then Vee-Jay Records put the record out, and I played it, and also other disc jockeys played it.  The Magnificents [R&B group]--there was a guy named Montague.  He discovered the Magnificents.  They went to Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  They had this--you remember that record 'Up on the Mountain?'  Oh, I guess I--pardon me, Julie [interviewer].
Speaker 1: Well, how does it go?
Speaker 2: "Doo doo doo doo doo, up on the mountain"--you know, I don't have my guitar here, and if I did, I don't think it wouldn't make a lot of difference.  It was a doo-wop.  It was a big doo-wop, 'Up On The Mountain,' and that's how some--a lot--the O'Jays [R&B group] got helped by a deejay name Eddie O'Jay who passed away a couple of years ago.  He named them after himself, the O'Jays, so a relationship existed.  Little groups would come up to big time deejays and say "please help me" because it was a thing, and it worked.  In many cases it worked, and the record companies would take over the group and take them on to stardom in a relationship like that, and then back then the deejays could play most anything they wanted to play, not like today.  They have a play list today which is necessary in today's radio because each station has a niche to fill, and they're all fighting for recognition, and they do surveys, and at night they want a certain kind of music.  In the afternoon they want a certain kind of music.  As far as I'm concerned, I do oldies or dusties, and I do that within certain guidelines.  I can't make them too old.  I can't make them too new so they're--it's really--I play what I want to play within guidelines.  That's the way I'd put it.  If I play too many old ones, I certainly hear about it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now were you with.
Speaker 2: I mean, real, real, real old ones.
Speaker 1: Old, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, but every now and then you want to play one like Sam Cooke 'You Send Me' or something like that just as a flavor--flavor record.
Speaker 1: But you were--wasn't that the time also where deejays were taking--or was it later where they were taking payola [cash or gifts paid to disc jockeys in exchange for airplay] or--you know, from record companies--.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure that it existed.  We just can't say that it didn't exist.  You know, I'm sure--I can't give you any specific examples of it, but I'm sure that it was around.  I'm sure that it was around, and they had the payola investigations, and no one ever went to jail for that.
Story_ID: 9645
Speaker 1: At really the doo-wop days when you worked at W--wait a minute.
Speaker 2: I was at--.
Speaker 1: WH, H--.
Speaker 2: HFC--I didn't--we haven't come to that yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.  Okay.  Boy, I'm--I keep thinking we're coming to it.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I left--they [WBEE, Harvey, Illinois radio station] worked me--they worked me two--two weeks in a row.  I was dead tired, and I overslept about three hours or four hours.  I was four hours late, and the station was four hours late getting on the air, and I got fired.  So I went to--but they really--you know, it's--you didn't think to use the term "stress" back then, but it was there, and they stressed you out many times.  It was so stressful.  I couldn't even do anything but come home and lay down sometimes.  It just--really, really stressful because I really worked hard at what I did and wanted to be a success and generally was.  It was as stressful then as it is now so they let me go, but this other station picked me up, WJJ--WJOB in Hammond [Indiana], and I went there and did really well.  I did so well that WBEE rehired me.  They realized they had made a mistake and stuff like that 'cause I was--like I said, I was the type of guy where I've had--bragging now--great ratings ever since I've been in radio.  I don't know whether that's a gift or what.  I'll sag every now and then because that's only human, but basically you hire me, you get good ratings.  You hire me, you get good ratings.  Why?  I don't know.  Maybe I just love the game.  So anyway I went to WJOB and that was--[W]BEE was all black owned by white people.  [W]JOB again was a white station, and I was the only black there, but again it was like going back to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I loved everybody.
Story_ID: 9646
Speaker 1: You know, this is one of the great jockeys, disc jockeys, in America today right here, Herbert Rogers Kent.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: On the air fifty-two?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two years [in 2000], yeah.
Speaker 1: He's the man--now.
Speaker 2: Here's a guy (points off-camera) who knew nothing about radio but is now our [at WVAZ, Chicago, Illinois radio station] boss, and I hope it stays that way.  We have our ins and outs, but he's not a bad boss and he's learned a lot. So [W]JOB [Hammond, Indiana radio station] was just a lot of fun, a lot of fun.  Those white people just loved me because I had a big white audience, and I went to Crown Point [Indiana] and did a county fair.  I got there.  Two things happened.  I got there.  A boa constrictor had escaped, and the state police were hunting it down, and I went to this big bus, and [pianist, composer, bandleader] Duke Ellington was sitting in this bus eating a big Tastee-Freez [soft-serve ice cream], and I got a great interview with him which I subsequently lost.  It would be worth money now, and he talked to me for an hour about music, and he was sitting behind the wheel of this bus so--and at Crown Point people were so nice.  There was a girl, a white girl from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  I say this not because she was white but because of the way Crown Point was at the time, and she went up there with with me--I guess ready to do something for the station because I had to do some interviews and broadcast from there or something like that so we began to ride all the rides at the county fair, and nobody--it was just so amazing.  It was just nice people up there, and for the first time nobody looked because I'm in these little cars having fun with this white lady, and she was really nice, and this was in 1959, and things have really changed since then, haven't they?  But no, you could still go with a white person, I guess--white lady and ride a ride, and nobody'd better look 'cause if they do, you'd sue 'em. (Laughs). If that's what you wanna do.
Story_ID: 9647
Speaker 1: So what was [pianist, composer, bandleader] Duke Ellington like?
Speaker 2: He was all about music.  He--he was real relaxed, and I asked him questions like "what do you think of rock and roll" because rock and roll was the terminology for a lot of music we did in the late '50s [1950s].  It wasn't what it ultimately became.  What they call rock and roll now today is just not--a lot of black music was like rock and roll.  The term was--Alan Freed, the deejay [disc jockey], coined that phrase just for, you know, for the Moonglows [R&B group].  They just basically would say the "Moonglows, [R&B singer] Sam Cooke, doo-wops."  That was all rock and roll music, a black--basically black music and some of white music, too.  (Pause) So when I was working at the Millionaires Club in 1979 and some of the white customers asked for some rock and roll music, I really didn't know what they wanted  'cause that was a different type of rock--does anybody in here know what white rock and roll music is?  Can you give me an example?
Speaker 1: You mean from the 1950s like Elvis Presley?
Speaker 2: No, I mean from like - somebody wants something in the '70s, like '79 they want some rock and roll.  [rock singer] Bruce Springsteen--was he?
Speaker 1: '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: '80s [1980s]?  [rock group The] Rolling Stones?
Speaker 1: I'd say Rolling Stones, Rolling Stones.
Speaker 2: I just think of that as rock, not rock and roll.
Speaker 1: Well, see, it's--there's some confusion here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, but when it started out like some of the white groups who sang doo-wop, Jerry, [pianist and singer] Jerry Lee Lewis, rock and roll, Moonglows as I said, Frankie Lymon [R&B singer] rock and roll, so anyway where were we about this record?
Speaker 2: We were--you had asked Duke Ellington about.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, so he said it was just--what he got me to understand that he liked it and the way music has evolved.  He himself was ahead of his time with his music.  I guess he wrote the 'Black, [Brown,] and Beige,' '[Black and] Tan Fantasy.'  Oh.  (Pause)  That station--you know I saw him--that was the most significant interview that I'd ever done with Duke Ellington, 1959.  I guess I had to be--I'm guessing thirtyish, something like that, and just a priceless interview.  He didn't have anything else to do, and we were talking about music.
Story_ID: 9648
Speaker 1: And I went back to WBEE [Harvey, Illinois radio station] and what happened--they had a strike.  The union wanted to organize it so we had a strike, and it was my first time looking at scabs [replacement workers].  They had these white guys came in.  They would come in and work the station while we were outside in the hot sun, and what--the way they broke the strike, since I was their number one guy, they found me a job in Chicago [Illinois] at WHFC [Chicago radio station, later WVON], and that broke the strike because they had lost--they had lost their number one guy at that time, me, but then that was my--my real entrance into Chicago at WHFC.
Speaker 2: And then what happened at WB--?  How did you get from WHFC to WVON?
Speaker 1: Well, WHFC--when I went on there, I just got a tremendous audience, and [record producer] Leonard Chess--I'd met him, and he asked me one day "do you think a guy would sell the station?"  I set that up, and Congressman [Richard] Hoffman--that's his name.  He was getting old, had a lot of money, and was tired of it, and he sold it to Leonard Chess, AM and FM for a flat million dollars.  And the very first year that Leonard was in there, he must have grossed four to five million bucks and never looked back, and I don't know what the--WSDM [Chicago radio station] was our FM station.  That's the Loop.  That station now--what could you buy that Loop for, seventy, eighty million bucks, whatever?
Story_ID: 9649
Speaker 1: I mean, how did he have that much money at that time?  Who was [record producer] Leonard Chess?
Speaker 2: Oh, he owned Chess Records.  He had [rock and roll guitarist] Chuck Berry, the Moonglows [R&B group].  He was one of the premiere local record labels in the world.  He had come up from just a guy that had a lounge, [El] Mocambo Lounge on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], something like that, and he saw how blues were selling.  He had [rock and roll singer] Bo Diddley, like I say, and Chuck Berry and made a lot of money.  He had the dough.
Speaker 1: Julie [interviewer], you should know Chess Records--he's moving to 1900 South Michigan [Chicago].  That's practically right next to.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right next to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's good.  That was no problem for him to have that million dollars.
Speaker 2: Do you--what kind of person was he?  What was he like, Leonard Chess?
Speaker 1: He was a very smart man.  He knew--everything he touched, it turned to gold, so I knew when he bought the station [WHFC, Chicago radio station] that we were going to get golden, and it's true.  He bought that station, and it became the first twenty-four-hour black radio station in the world [changing its call-sign to WVON], and everybody was a personality, not like it is today.  You know, [disc jockey] Pervis Spann was a personality all night long, [disc jockey] Rodney Jones, myself, [disc jockey Bill] "Butterball" [Crane], [disc jockey] Ed Cook.  Everybody was a personality, and they all talked and did things, and the station was just phenomenal.  I look for them to make a movie out of that station.  There's no way that they won't.  That's all--that's all in the air, and he was very fair.  We didn't push a lot of Chess Records because the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] would have been on us, but he did say that "just try to be fair."  And--but he would--I remember I played a record for him at another station, 'The Watusi,' six times and broke it, six times in a row.  They would break me at a radio station if I did that today, six times.  I did that on a couple of other records, but he was very smart, very smart.  He knew the record business, and he knew who to hire.  He got a bunch of folks up from Miami, Florida, and we went into a semi-format-type of radio.  We were not really format, but we were just somewhere in between.  He thought the tight format like at WLS [Chicago radio station] would be a little too tight for us, for the black listeners.  They still wanted to have it more colorful and more talkative so we were just right about in the middle, not really old time radio but not the brand-new radio.  But we--he did institute the cart system.  You know, instead of playing records they'd put all the records on--on like a tape cart, and you could press a button, and it would fire immediately, and it gave it a more instant sound with the little promos and like "WVON 1450."  That's--you know, that's history, and that's where all that started.
Story_ID: 9650
Speaker 1: So can you share some more stories around that--you know, at the time--from that time since there were a lot of personalities?  You had [record producer] Mr. [Leonard] Chess, [disc jockey, station owner] Pervis Spann, and others.
Speaker 2: I think what I enjoyed listening to was Pervis Spann doing the news (laughs) 'cause he couldn't pronounce the words.  Oh, it was just great.  Oh, it was--it was really great.  Every guy was just colorful there.  They called us "the Good Guys," but Pervis Spann trying to say "Nikita Khrushchev" was just great, and that's just one story.  Now what other kind of stories would you like?
Speaker 1: Any others that you remember.
Speaker 2: You mean at WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station]?  It was just--I guess what I noticed when I--Pervis Spann ultimately bought that station.  He was more businesslike than anybody.  You couldn't take the fact that he was "ebonically challenged" 'cause he had it up here (points to head), and he still does.  He's a very smart man, and he ended up owning that station.  And what you notice today, if you go in there, is it's so quiet.  When I went back, it was just so quiet as opposed to the hustle and bustle of the way it used to be, and I think that--I think that those disc jockeys were quite amorous and were amorous in every room in that radio station from on top the boss' desk to back in the wash tubs to the parking lot (laughs).  Hey, that's the way it was, you know?  That's the way it was.  That's what I hear.  I can't say that that happened, that happened for sure.
Speaker 1: What year are you talking about?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: We're talking about the '60s [1960s], maybe from the '60s [1960s], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965] 'cause that station started--when did it start, about 1961?  Probably about 1961, and it lasted till about 1975, something like that.
Story_ID: 9651
Speaker 1: Now, it [WVON, Chicago, Illinois radio station] was a big deal here in Chicago, though.  The fact that it was [on the air] twenty-four [hours playing black music]--it was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was the biggest thing ever to hit.  It really was.  It--I think you had to be envious of the public service it did.  It--we had our claws into everything that happened, and Chicago stations today want to be involved in the community.  They do everything they can, but with WVON it was just the most magical thing I've ever seen.  We were just a community station.  We could tell folks to go sit on the steps of City Hall.  There'd be five thousand of them there.  We had a--we had contests we did.  We were hooked up with the Black Power movement.  We were instrumental in [Reverend] Jesse Jackson's rise to success.  I think he was a country preacher. Rodney Jones [disc jockey] was the guy that noticed him.  Rodney looked at him.  He said "you see that young guy?"  I said "what?"  He said "he's gonna be the biggest biggest thing you have ever seen."  Rodney had insight--that was our program director--that was--that was unique, and that certainly came--certainly came to pass, and we talked about Jesse and did a lot of stuff with him.  I did a lot of stuff like bike [bicycle] rides.  I had the first big bike ride that ever happened in Chicago.  I did.  We all were doing stuff like this 'cause it was such a community station, and I can't tell you how many thousands of bikes came out because ten-speed bikes were beginning to be real popular, and we had three or four of those.  [disc jockey] Pervis Spann and Rodney Jones used to do shows at the Regal [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  They brought in the Temptations [R&B group] and the Miracles [R&B group].  Motown Records was cutting its teeth.  We broke most of the Motown Records for the world right through WVON.  If a record was to be big, it should have gone through WVON.  The station was just that--just a powerhouse, just a powerhouse, and you know I could just go on and on and on about that station.  It's just--just really great.  It set standards that exist today.  It's--let me tell you, I'll ask on my show--I work for V103 [Chicago radio station], and I'll say what's your favorite radio station?  Invariably somebody will say "WVON," and it's amazing because when I talk to them, they regress all the way back to the--to the days 'cause here I'm playing maybe a song by the Whispers [R&B group] or something, and they think "yeah," and they're talking to me.  "What's your favorite radio station?"  "WVON--oh, oh, I mean V103."  I say "that's okay."  They don't--they don't--they never get after me about it.  Sometimes we can edit that out.  Sometimes we let it stay in.  That station was so popular.  Like when I want to talk about it, I just talk about it, and that's something you really don't do at a radio station, mention another one, but we're mentioning this one, and the fact that it was absolutely great, and it was the purveyor of what is happening, what is really happening today.
Speaker 1: What do you think made it special?  Was it that it was community focused?  Was it the time?  Was it the personalities or was it just--it seemed like it was a big family, I mean that everyone was sort of like a family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.  We--we were the--it's hard to say why anything is number one or takes over.  It's just really hard to disseminate it, you know.  It just happened.  It was family-oriented.  The whole family listened.  We had stuff for everybody.  It was community and the preachers--the first time we really got a good foothold into the preachers--I remember Bishop [Louis Henry] Ford.  I remember all those preachers, you know, and we gave them a good play at the station.  They were with us.  Like I say, Motown Records was breaking big.  We had just played--the music was just phenomenal.  I was doing record hops drawing thousands of kids, and Rodney was doing the Regal, and the other guys were doing things.  We were out in the street.  The station was just whatever you wanted a radio station to be, and I think stations today would do good to heed some of the things that we did.  I like the idea of the personalities around the clock.  I mean, you know, today you just got to listen to music.  It's just so mechanized, you know, but it's a "catch-22."  If you talk a lot, the other stations are playing music so if they play music, then--the people have been--I think have been brainwashed to want more music.  When you talk too much, they'll complain.  In the old days they didn't complain.  They wanted to hear the disc jockeys talk about their experiences and talk stuff like that, but the whole format thing has just got so that the first thing that comes out of your mouth are your call letters, and then some stations would give you twenty seconds or thirty seconds to talk, and then you'd go into music, and this just kept on and on and on, so then the thing was more "music more often, more music more often," and that's what people want so this is still a "catch-22" to give--and I'm faced with that with what I do now.  How can I give more music and yet be Herb Kent?  So you have to learn how to talk, to compress what you say and try to be interesting in a shorter length of time because you just don't have the time that we use to have.
Story_ID: 9652
Speaker 1: You know I--you, I was told, invented characters.  You've always--and I'm wondering if this goes back to your Skyloft [Players theater troupe].
Speaker 2: No, I did all that at WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station].  That was--.
Speaker 1: I know but--I mean, where did they come from?  You've always been very inventive, I'm told.  You know, where you've always had characters or came up with names or--.
Speaker 2: Well, that just happened.  I don't think it happened in Skyloft Players, but I don't know since I wrote that play in high school.  I don't know.  I guess it was a gift, and a lot of my characters, especially the Wahoo Man, were not only characters on the air, but I took that thing to the streets.  I found me a casket from AR Leak [funeral home], and I found this young guy who was quite talented.  He's a--a millionaire radiologist now that played the part of the Wahoo Man, and what had happened in this particular thing, we went to--I'm sure some of our fans know about Chili Mac's [restuarant] on 47th Street [Chicago].  We went to Chili Mac's.  One night we were getting out of this [Cadillac] El Dorado [automobile].  It was preowned by [boxer] Muhammad Ali.  There was a big dent in the dashboard.  I don't know.  It looked like he took his fist and hit it or something.  I don't know what he did, but it was a nice car so I pulled this car up.  It had a switch on it.  The burglar alarms at that time would have a switch, an emergency switch, so you could flick the switch and the siren--you could make the siren go from inside the car so we got out of the car and go into this Chili Mac place. Every--policeman, pimps, prostitutes--everybody went to Chili Mac's so I'm getting out the car, and these two ladies come running across the street, not that way but diagonally, you know.  Ooh, they're terrified.  They're screaming, and this little old man with a dog and a broomstick is chasing them so they get away, and I said "man, that's something."  I had a guy there.  He was a little Blackstone Ranger [Chicago street gang].  He use to hang around me and a girl name Brenda so we--we go in and order this chili.  The next thing we know, this old man is in the chili place with us, you know, and he's glaring, and he comes over, and he stands over me, and he looks at my chili.  Now he's got running sores on his face.  I said "man, you're going to drip into my chili," so he moves on.  He goes.  Finally the guy behind the cashier said "old man, you've got to get out of here," and this guy looks at the owner and said "I'll kill you," and he runs out. So we finish eating our chili so we go outside.  He's outside and the little black dog, and he has his broomstick, and he's outside singing the blues. So we get in the car, and I start the engine, and he runs to the car with this broomstick, and he's going to hit the fender so I turn the switch on inside, and it goes "wow-wow," and he said "wahoo, wahoo.  That don't scare nobody," and he ran off so this little guy who's a Blackstone Ranger says "oh-ho.  Why don't we call him the Wahoo Man?"  (Laughs).  So he was the Wahoo Man from then on, and I did this character on the radio, and I had him recreated at the Art Institute [of Chicago].  They made me a rubber mask, and I got a casket, and we carried this guy around in there, and he would raise up from the dead as the Wahoo Man and scare people.  We really sent people to the hospital.  We sent a girl to the hospital.  She turned green and fainted 'cause, you know, coming out of the casket and stuff like that, and we had a big glass bottle like that, and I got some chitlins and hog maws and stuck them in there, and he was holding this on his chest so when you opened up the casket, there he was with this stuff.
Speaker 1: Where would you take the casket?
Speaker 2: Oh, we took the casket to NBC [National Broadcasting Company], and they put us out.  We took the casket to nightclubs.  We put the casket on the stage at the Capitol Theater, and we had a regular act.  We took it to Marshall [Metropolitan] High School [Chicago, Illinois].  We took it everywhere, and we played this song, [Johann Sebastian] Bach's 'Toccata and Fugue,' and if you know, that it's just the thing, and we had an American flag draped over it, and we'd have candles, and slowly you would see a gloved hand come out, and then the lid would rise, and people would start screaming, and this guy wore tennis shoes because he was fast, and a leg would come out, and then he would sit up, and people would start running so.  We're at the Capitol Theater, and some cops pulled their guns, and they said "Herb, we know you created him, but tell that MF don't come over this way" (laughs) so they were scared, too, so we always had an escape route and somebody with a car, and this is how we did this thing.  We knew which way he would run because the people would just part and give him room, and he ran down the aisle and looked like Moses parting the Red Sea of the Capitol Theater.  I will never forget it.  He got in that car and sped away.  We ran through gangs, and we ran through everything.  One time we set it up at Marshall High School.  Someone pointed up in the balcony.  We got the prettiest girl there, and he was beating her with a cane, with this stick, so the football team took out after him.  It was just pretending like he was beating her so the football team took out after him, but we had our escape route planned.  Sometimes they would get close enough to jump on his back, but he was real strong, and he would shake them off, run to the car, and get away, and for years the Marshall football team was looking for the Wahoo Man.  This was the most dynamic gimmick I ever had on radio.  We kept doing it until one day I came to the station.  You know, mothers would call in and say "my kid just peed on himself."  That happened so we did it.  Finally I came to the station.  I had this memo, this very terse memo.  It said "after tonight you will kill the Wahoo Man.  There will be no more Wahoo Man."  I was really hurt, but I did.  Some kind of way I got rid of him, and I did.  The guy that played the part is a radiologist.  He has a home in a Hawaii.  He earned part of his money going through college working for me doing that thing, and the real Wahoo Man disappeared and was never seen again.  The police say they were chasing him down a alley.  They came in one end of the alley, and he ran.  Another squad car raced around to the other end of the alley, and the two squad cars met, and he was nowhere to be found.  He just disappeared, and there was nowhere for him to go.  It's always been a mystery, and that's a true story.  So we did all kind of stuff like that at this radio station [WVON, Chicago radio station].  It had to help make it number one.  You know, you were just involved, and it was just your thing, and you were just involved into it, and people talk about the Wahoo Man today, and I had other characters, too.  I shouldn't--we just don't have time to get in them, and everybody--everybody had some kind of gimmick. Ed Cook [disc jockey] had a white bear rug that he laid on while he was doing his program supposedly, and then he was always doing stuff on the Dan Ryan Expressway.  He crashed a couple times 'cause he drank a lot, and one of--a dynamic guy was Joe Cobb [disc jockey] in the morning.  He was really good.  He was from Arkansas, and he was just really, really good.  The whole lineup was just phenomenal, just a phenomenal thing, and I could see a movie about it.
Story_ID: 9653
Speaker 1: Was [disc jockey Holmes] "Daddy-O" [Daylie] ever at [W]VON [Chicago, Illinois radio station]?
Speaker 2: No, Daddy-O was never at [W]VON.  Daddy-O was phenomenal--a phenom, too.  I used to listen to him in high school.  He was at WAAF [Chicago radio station].  Yeah, he was at WAAF, and he was a rhyming disc jockey.  Daddy-O--he should be in the [National Radio] Hall of Fame [and Museum, Chicago, Illinois], definitely.  He had 'Daddy-O's Jazz Patio.'  He was so smooth, and he'd play that good jazz in the morning on the way to work, and he'd be rhyming.  He was sensational, sensational.  He was at WAAF.  He was at some other station, too.  I can't remember the name of it, but he was the top--top jazz disc jockey.  I talked to him maybe--'cause I wanted to interview him, you know.  I talked to him maybe three years ago, and he's retired.  He said he doesn't want to be interviewed.  He said "just tell everybody I'm retired, and I'm doing okay."  We talked for a short length of time, but I think that would be just a great interview.  I'd love to get him.
Speaker 1: This is Daddy-O Daylie?
Speaker 2: Daddy-O Daylie.
Speaker 1: So was he--.
Speaker 2: Daddy-O's Jazz Patio.  He was very hip.
Speaker 1: Was he before Al Benson [disc jockey]?
Speaker 2: No, he was after and during.  And also there was another phenomenal jazz disc jockey, Sid McCoy.  He had different styles.  Sid came on late at night--.
Speaker 1: He had a great voice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Is it mocked or is it?
Speaker 1: You know he is still doing commercials.
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.  He's still doing commercials.
Speaker 1: He was in Hollywood [California].
Speaker 2: He's very close to eighty, if not eighty.  He's my hero, you know.
Speaker 1: You could never look at him and see it.
Speaker 2: Can you see it?
Speaker 1: You'd never think he was that age.
Speaker 2: No, no, he's--that's right.  He's just great so he was doing jazz at night, and Daddy-O was doing jazz in the morning, playing like George Shearing [pianist], and it was just--you know, it just takes me back.  It just--it really takes me back.
Speaker 1: And the Daniels girl.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Yvonne Daniels [disc jockey] sings.  Yvonne Daniels.
Speaker 1: She and Sid were together.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.  Yvonne Daniels is in the [Radio] Hall of Fame along with myself.  We're the first two blacks, deejays, to go in there along with a guy from New York, and Yvonne's father was [songwriter] Billy Daniels who was a--.
Speaker 1: Wrote 'Oh Black Magic.'
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  He's kind of a fast guy, but when he sang 'Oh Black Magic,' he'd turn a place out, and Yvonne could sing.  A lot of people didn't realize that when she--in her younger days when she felt like it, she'd open up that mike [microphone], and she'd sing, and I watched her.  She was just so smooth.  I don't--I don't think there is ever going to be another black female that can even approach Yvonne.  It's just too bad, too bad that we lost her [died 1991].  She was just--Yvonne was just super, but see, we had more personalities, I think, back then.  Very difficult to get into radio today and be a personality because they don't leave you any room.  If you get a job, they're gonna have your records there for you, and they're gonna give you only so much time to talk, and you're into the format so you have to really be sensational to break out of that.  Once you do, they'll probably "say you're talking too much, you're not adhering to the format," and you're out of there, but back then everybody on the air was--Sam Evans [disc jockey], Rock with Rick.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Sam Evans's campaign to get Al Benson off the air?
Speaker 2: I was just saying that. You were a little young then.
Speaker 1: No, no, I worked for both of them.  I had mentioned they didn't like each other very well.
Speaker 2: He ended up working for Al.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Al was a fox.  Al was the fox of all time.  He was the smartest man I've ever seen in radio.  He could sell radio time.  He could do anything, and he was not to be messed with.
Story_ID: 9654
Speaker 1: So what happened in 1970 when you left WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station]?  Is that--what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, here's what happened.  As I said earlier, nothing lasts forever.  You have an extended run if you're number one, before you're number two, before you're out of there, whether you're an artist, a newspaper columnist, (laughs) and what--isn't that right?  Sooner or later, you know, time gets you, deejay [disc jockey], so our station was just a monster for a long, long time, and then FM radio came in, and WBMX [Chicago radio station, now WVAZ] came in, and they had a slick sound.  They were stereo.  They began to play a more hipper type--I heard a more hipper type of music.  You know, we couldn't compete with that FM signal, and they just grew.  They became phenomenal as people thought it was a hip thing to listen to FM.  Cars were coming out with FM stereo, and it just sounded better, and the jocks were into a different type thing, and we--and I remember one day we were pulling--my station, my program at one time got twelves [ratings].  I beat out [disc jockey] Dick Biondi on a couple of occasions, and I was always like number one.  They called us all in and the Arbitron [rating system]--they called us in and told us one by one.  The station went down to ones, twos, and they then sold the station or had sold it. The new owners decided we were too old.  They did bring in somebody to try to spruce--spruce everybody up.  He taught me contemporary radio, fortunately, 'cause I can't be a '60s [1960s] disc jockey today in the year 2000.  It doesn't make sense, you know, and I was very progressive.  I learned the little system that he had, [disc jockey] Walt "Baby" Love.  Some of the other guys fought him.  It became very political.  Ultimately he left, and then they began to fire people one by one.  The first guy to go was--oh, he went to Indianapolis [Indiana]--[disc jockey] Jay Johnson, and then they fired someone else, and then they fired me.  Then it was really traumatic 'cause we had reigned supreme for twelve years or so.  Then they fired--they fired [disc jockey Bill] "Butterball" [Crane].  When they got to those guys, they came to work.  They had Pinkerton guys [security guards] with pistols because they really feared us because we were so well entrenched, and they had their stuff sitting outside, and they were let go that way, all because, you know, they hired younger guys.  The whole thing was we were getting older.  They hired younger guys, and they tried to fight this FM monster, but it was of no avail.  FM just came in.  The only station that--that even today does anything is probably [W]LS [Chicago radio station].  You know, they're a talk monster, and WGN [Chicago radio station], those big white stations, but FM just really, just came in and just devastated everybody so I was out.  I was out for not a full year, but it was not a good time of life for me, very devastating.  So we all have to take hits in this game because we live that way.  It's like I said, a football player just like getting it between those white lines.  You're in there by numbers, and it's not a bed of roses.  When your numbers go down, you go down.
Story_ID: 9655
Speaker 1: So did it cause you to rethink anything during that period or did you think you would get out of radio or you were just?
Speaker 2: I was really trying to get it together.  I wanted to get on FM, and I was thinking how I could get back in it.  I finally got back in on an FM station.  It wasn't really our fault that we got fired, but then I did--I did think that I needed to be more contemporary.  I needed to be more sellable in today's market.  You know, I knew that I--you know, we couldn't sit and just talk all day long and just play any kind of record we wanted to play.  It was--you had to have a specific type of thing that you were going to do to appeal to a specific audience because we do narrowcasting now.  That's the way all the stations are.  We're a hits and oldies station, V103 [WVAZ, Chicago, Illinois radio station].  We have "The Beat" [now "The Kiss"] which is 1035 [WKSC, Chicago radio station].  Supposedly they play black music for white people, and it goes on and on and on and on, but each station has an image now, a definite image where they try to cut in there and get those ratings and beat the other guys out, and many times the music crosses.  We today are owned by--what is it, AMFM or Clear Channel [media corporations], and they own five stations here in Chicago, and I think that, you know, we just overlap a little bit too much so we have to compete with each other owned by the same boss.  This whole game is bizarre.  Where were we before I got to that?  Oh, yeah, so when I got back in, [disc jockey] Rodney [Jones] helped me get back in.  He found this station.  He said "man, you can broker your own time,"so I did, and I came--I came on with some New Wave music.  I call it the "Punk Out Time," and it got to be number one.  I was on for two hours at WXFM [Chicago radio station], and I sold my own radio time, and I got back in, and that's where--that's where I went because that was an opening, and I could get back in that way.  Ultimately then they hired me back at WGCI [Chicago radio station], and I went back there because then it had been--how many years--maybe three or four years or something like that since they had fired us, and they had new ownership and a lot of stuff.  It just is very bizarre that I'm still here.
Story_ID: 9656
Speaker 1: So you came back to WGCI [Chicago, Illinois radio station, formerly WVON] and you spent five years there, right?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--since 1983--.
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I came back - that may not be accurate.  I came back in about '79 [1979] or '80 [1980], and I stayed there--I stayed there till about '89 [1989].  I was there about ten years.  I worked briefly at WJJD [Chicago radio station], and I hated it--with a passion.  I didn't want to go back there again.  It was very difficult to be a known black announcer with a lot of white ones.  I really felt it.  They made me feel it.  Racism is alive and well and flourishing.  Ooh, I hated that station.  I remember they had an opening on the FM, and I told the program director.  I said "you know, why don't you put me on there," because they just had me overnights on the weekend.  "Why don't you put me on" because I said "you know something?  I can bring you a lot of black listeners, and I won't lose a white one."  It was the longest pause, and he said "I'll think about it," and I never heard from him again.  So I've often said that this game we're in is just a racist game.  It's so racist.  You either work at a black station or a white station basically.  It's so hard to be black and be hired at a white station, maybe because of the cultural differences or whatever.  I'm not saying that it doesn't happen, but it just is a rule of thumb is--and when you're gonna get in radio, you're gonna gravitate toward a black station.  If you get in news, it might be better.  Then it's more wide open.  News is wide open, I think, but radio is not.  I mean, if I get out--if I get out of a job now, where am I going to work in Chicago?  [W]GCI.  If I don't work there, maybe WVON.  My options are over.  If I'm white, there are thirty or forty stations that I have options.  Those white guys--you know, they do travel from station to station.  Those are facts.
Story_ID: 9657
Speaker 1: So now you can't--would you say you had a little--there was a period of time where--what would--you really have found a newfound resurgence, right? So really from the time from WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station], I would say--what would you say the time period?
Speaker 2: My resurgence time?  Just quite recently here [at WVAZ, Chicago radio station].  When I--when I left [W]GCI [Chicago radio station] and they got me over here, it was like marrying the right woman, and you know how hard that is to do.  I've only done it once, and I don't want to try it again, but it was--it was a real marriage.  It was like peanut butter and jelly.  It was like AC and DC.  It was like whatever, salt and pepper.  It was really good.  My ratings were just phenomenal.  I just blended with the station.  This was the place for me, and I found my resurgence, which is--that was in 1989, 1990.  I've been at this station about ten years, and it's a--I've got to say, of all the stations I've ever worked, this has got to be my favorite, even though we're WVON, which is such a great station, but I guess maybe because I found my resurgence here.  It's like being born again.
Speaker 1: And do you think Herb Kent had changed much in the process?
Speaker 2: I matured.  Life matured me, and it made me more of a man, and it made me more of a fighter, and it made me more cognizant of other people's problems.  You know, I'm just not--you know, I'm just average guy as far as dealing with people.  I'm not heads above everybody else or anything like that.  I'm just a hard-working guy but more mature, and I think in this game what makes you sound so good are life experience.  Your good experiences and your bad experiences come out, and that's what makes you sound good to people because they hear all of this so I just--I'm still maturing, and I'm still trying to see what it is to be a man, which is not really not being able to knock down everybody you see, but, you know, what is a man?  What is maturity?  And I think it takes all of these hard knocks, and I mean some hard knocks, to get there.
Story_ID: 9658
Speaker 1: Why do you think you appeal so much to people?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know--because I'm crazy and impulsive and will say anything.  Sometimes I'm not a shock jock, but I guess it's the way I express myself and the love I have for them.  I really love my audience, and I have an understanding, an empathy for them when I'm on the air, and I really do my best to talk to them, and every now and then I'll come up with a creative thing that I think that they might like.  And I'm out with them.  I'm really out with them.  When I'm out, people walk up--you know, "Herb"--like they know me and I don't know them, but they've been listening for a long time, and I mean guys will kiss me.  I had to get used to that.  I guess that's maybe because I'm getting older or whatever.  They say man, I really love--gang dudes, everybody, everybody.  It doesn't matter--lawyers.  It doesn't matter.  They just--they will do that, and you know that's yuck--a guy kissing you like that, but I understand where it comes from.  It comes from a genuine love, and a lot of people--Bill Campbell [television producer, WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]  like will say, you know, I just--he said "man, you just really saved me when I was in Harlan High School [Chicago, Illinois]," you know, and he's a great fan.  I'm a fan of his.  He's a great guy, and a lot of people would say you know, "Herb, you raised me."  I can be in a crowded elevator, and somebody will say "I heard your voice.  You must be Herb Kent."  One drunk lady one night said "oh, you're Herb Kent.  I saw your voice"--you know, different little colorful things like that.  So I guess I've been around a long time and just a fixture with people so what?  Success--I couldn't tell you why anything is successful.  It just seems like it happens sometimes.  You know, you can analyze it and disseminate it, but sometimes it just--things just happen.  You know, sometimes you have to just ride with it and hope that, you know, success will happen.
Story_ID: 9659
Speaker 1: You know what I find interesting is when you were saying you were young and you said even now you're still a loner, very much, and yet you're just very much a people person.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that's--I can do that on the air.  I'm comfortable behind that microphone, and I just tell myself "I want to be more comfortable for my people when I'm out and get a little closer to them."  After all, you know, if they don't feel--I don't want to be unapproachable to them, and I just--I think when I did the TV thing [dance program] 'Steppin' at Club Seven,' I was a well-known jock [disc jockey], but that really did it.  That 'Steppin' at Club Seven' really did it.  I'm downtown [in Chicago, Illinois].  This white cop that's directing traffic, he says "hey, man, aren't you that guy on television?"  I talked to [Chicago] Mayor [Richard M.] Daley.  He doesn't even know I'm a disc jockey.  I said "who am I," and he said "you're that guy on TV." (Laughs).  You know, so that added another dimension.  Television is a different, different thing, and it does a job.  I was on the [Phil] Donahue Show [television program] in--I guess it's nineteen, maybe 1962 or something like that.  In 1975 people were still telling me that they saw me on that Donahue Show.  TV has got a lasting thing.  I'll see people that tell me today oh, man, I watch you every weekend on 'Steppin' at Club Seven.'  It's been off two years so those of us who work in TV know the power, the power, and the combination of the TV and the radio thing was just an awesome--it just elevates you to a whole new different thing.
Speaker 1: So now that you're--well, I have several questions, but now that you're continuing on the TV route, would you like to do more TV?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was extremely hard work.  It was very, very hard 'cause you know when--especially when you do something and then you have to do it again, that just does something to you, and then you do it a third time.  They say "did you like that one?"  "Yeah, that was good.  Now let's make a safety,."  (laughs) But, you know, under the lights and the discipline it's, it's--but I loved it, you know.  Sure, I'd like to do it.  I hope they revitalize that show ['Steppin' at Club Seven'].
Story_ID: 9660
Speaker 1: And the interesting about that show is that it exposed what was known in the black community but steppin' [Chicago dance style]--
Speaker 2: (nods for yes)
Speaker 1: You know, the dance itself.  I'm told that you--you were very instrumental in the whole thing of steppin' and its popularity.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Dating back to--the reason being I did record hops back in the '60s [1960s] when they used to bop, walk, and step, and that music that we played then has transcended all the way today the stuff that we do.  Yes.  That's all they did back in the day was like walk or kind of bop.  That what they did.  It was strictly a Chicago [Illinois] thing, and it has evolved into the dance of today, but today's dance is a bit different.  It--you know, it's more contemporary and stuff like that, but it does go all the way back to stepping, as they used to say, "stylin'", and, you know, it was really cool.  It just goes--it goes back.  I'm not the creator of it or originator of it, but I'm a purveyor of it, and I certainly helped it along, and I--part of the thing that I do is make personal appearances and do oldie records.  I do that two or three times a week, and I play this music.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it's such--what do you think is so unique you know, about steppin' as a dance form?
Speaker 2: Because it's so black and it's a Chicago style thing.  Let me tell you how black this thing is.  It's one reason I think we had a problem in syndicating this show.  White people just really didn't understand these people with these stepper faces that weren't smiling.  You know, steppers have like this cool look, and they don't like to smile so here you're trying to--somebody in Idaho said "do you want this show?"  "Well, no.  Why are they moving so slow?  They're not smiling."  They don't understand.  You know what I'm saying?  They like to see this--(bounces and smiles)--and you don't get that with stepping, and I was doing a interracial marriage once at the Cotton Club [bar in Chicago] so I was playing some [soul singer] James Brown.  I was playing like '[(It's Not the Express) It's the J.B.'s] Monaurail' and stuff that steppers like, and this white lady came up.  She was sweating and disheveled.  She said "sir?"  I said "yes."  She said "would you--would you please don't play that James Brown?"  I said, "well, why?"  She said "either play something that's either faster or slower, but that's driving me crazy."  She--you know, it was a tantalizing beat, which it is, that she--and then that made me realize just how black it was, but we're--more and more white people are getting into it.  We had a white winner for a grand stepper contest sponsored by Budweiser [brewery] and V103 [WVAZ, Chicago radio station].  This guy was from--oh, he was good.  He was from like Austria or someplace like that, Australia, someplace like that, and he was one of the winners, and I mean he was good.  The crowd was roaring when he did his thing.  He had the moves.  Ah, he was good, and there are a few other folks.  It could happen, you know.  We could have somebody--you know, if we could just get on the Johnny--Johnny Carson show [NBC Tonight Show, television show].  I'm dating myself.  We could get on Jay Leno [NBC Tonight Show] or something like that and have some steppers and a real great song.  It could happen.  It could blow big.  That's the way a lot of stuff gets started.  You need that input, and then all of a sudden what is not popular becomes popular.
Story_ID: 9661
Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to ask you about what - what you want to do in the future. You know, other things you haven't done--.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I think I'd like to be an early morning guy doing the news out someplace during a fire or at a candy store or something like that.  I'd like to get back into TV.  I'd like to continue that show ['Steppin at Club Seven'] or do a variety show on TV about either today's acts or oldie acts.  I'd like to do that.
Story_ID: 9662
Speaker 1: And, Herb, what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You mean what kind of thoughts would I like to leave here?
Speaker 1: Um hmm.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like--I'd really like kids to try to find out who they are and what they want to be as early as possible and go after that.  You can waste a lot of time not knowing, you know, what your talents are.  It's sometimes a little difficult, but I know that I got lucky at an early age and knew what I wanted to be, and I think that they need to have the stamina and the will to pursue these things, you know, and not get discouraged, no matter what it is. I think that they need education and a lot of courage and a lot of stamina to hit this world out there 'cause it's not a bed of roses, but they find out--find out what you want to be and go after that and go get it, and you could do that.
Speaker 1: Now I was asking--that was good, but I was asking a legacy question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What you want people to say about Herb Kent.
Speaker 2: Oh, about me?  (Pause).  That I'd like them to say--how can you put this on yourself, you know--that, that I was an achiever and that I was not a loser.  I hate being a loser.  You know, I would do anything to avoid being a loser.  I'd like them to say I was an achiever and maybe one of the best black announcers that ever--I wish they would say that.  Of course, I would not be around here to see that.
Story_ID: 9663
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to a few--what--from your vantage point you've been on radio for fifty-two years, right?
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Speaker 1: What has that given you in terms of a vantage point on the black community and the changes that you've seen?
Speaker 2: How do you mean that?
Speaker 1: I mean what--have you seen changes?  What are your--I mean, your views on--from what you've seen, you know.  Are you--have you seen progress?  Have you seen progress that's backwards?  Are you concerned?
Speaker 2: I've seen--sure, I've seen progress, and I've seen--I've seen folks slip back.  You know, I've seen--I've certainly seen progress in employment for blacks because when we came along, there were no black bus drivers, no black El [elevated train] conductors, no black sales ladies downtown.  I've seen this, but then it seems like we got this, and we're--and we're--we can only get so far (gestures with hands).  We cannot--we need to go further, and then, of course, I've seen the gangs come in and drugs and stuff like that which is not good.  I've seen that just, just devastate, devastate communities, people, families, and stuff like that, and that is not good.  I've seen technology in radio grow from--from 78s [RPM records] to hard drives.  I've seen a lot of tech--you know, everything is "dot com" now [January 2000], everything.  You--it's just totally unreal, and you have to get ready for that.  A guy my age just has to do that.  I use a computer when I spin records now, and it's not that it's coming.  It's here, and I've seen us do that, but basically--the social--I'm not too happy about the social side of things.  I just wish--I wish the black thing could get--we could get more.  We're not there--more, better radio and TV jobs, movie things.  I wish that we could get more and better jobs and run more companies.  We have some.  We're getting there, but it's not there yet, and I wish that gangs and drugs would go away, and that's a big wish, isn't it, because it's just taking too many of our young people, and you see the jails and all the black and Hispanics in there.  You know, what's wrong with that picture?  I just hate to see that.
Story_ID: 9664
Speaker 1: Do you--for radio I'm told that there are gonna be two main conglomerates.  I think it's Clear Channel.
Speaker 2: That's gonna happen.
Speaker 1: So what do you think--what impact do you think that will have on the industry?
Speaker 2: Well, what I'm told is that they'll have fewer announcers because when they control it, you can have, say, one guy to play oldies for the United States on a satellite or one guy to do new music, new black music.  There's--they're gonna do this, I'm told, so only the best guys will remain.  They don't need to pay--the first thing these big conglomerates do is start saving money so they don't have to pay a bunch of salaries if they can get a [radio host] Tom Joyner-like person for different phases of radio.  I see that.  As a matter of fact, they tell us that in our meetings, that "this thing is coming," that "this thing is coming," that there will be--there are some radio stations now that share one jock [disc jockey] overnight.  I mean, it's happening in certain parts of the country, and I guess when you get down to two--two giants like that, they'd--I don't know if that's gonna cause a monopoly-type thing or not.  I would assume that it will sooner or later because I'm sure that these two ultimately will be one, and I don't know, but I see--I don't see a lot of individual deejays [disc jockeys] if they can do it the other way.  We're--our station is going on hard drive now, and it--that's the technology of the thing, that you get one good--good announcer, then you can pay him to do the whole thing instead of having--and then you have better control.
Story_ID: 9665
Speaker 1: This whole scene is gonna change.  Also AM radio is going digital.  Then I sit and think "what is this gonna do" 'cause then AM radio will be stereo and competitive to FM radio, all of that, so within the next--.
Speaker 2: AM is about to go digital?
Speaker 1: They have a device that will do that.  They've talked about it for the last couple of years.  They're just trying to find a compatible--where everybody is on the same page, and it will sound wonderful, and it will go further than FM radio because AM does go further.
Speaker 2: That's what I have heard that like AM was gonna--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  It might.  It might.  You know, let's look at five years down the road.  It's scary--changes.  "Dot com changes" is what I call it, "dot com" digital changes.
Story_ID: 9666
Speaker 1: Now, you know, going into the--one time in your career you were told that you were old and sort of passe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now if they come to you this time, what are you going to say?
Speaker 2: What can I say?  I have to fight it.  I have to fight it.  They told me that--well, you know, there was one agent wouldn't handle me, but he's in jail, but I didn't put him there, (laughs) but that's that's no--well, you know, with the resurgence of '70s [1970s] music and with the stations looking for different ways, the different kinds of music, I still think I'm in the ball game.  My ratings show that.  I haven't felt--around here, at least, it's never an age problem so far, but at some point, you know, I can't live forever.
Speaker 1: Now that's--okay.  What makes--what keeps you young, though?  You got a very youthful--you know, appearance.  You--you're almost ageless.  You appeal across different age groups.
Speaker 2: Maybe thirty-five-year-old women.  (Laughs).  Don't I wish?  That would keep you hopping, though, I'm telling you.  Now what keeps me old?  I don't know.  It's just--well, I never feel--you know, like when I was--let me tell you I'm seventy years old.  I don't feel seventy.  I don't know what seventy is supposed to feel like.  I--when I was like fifteen, I said "man, when I get to be fifty, I'm gonna be old."  I'd see them fifty-year-old guys driving them Cadillacs.  "Why do they want something like that?  They're too old."  Fifty--you're just beginning, and I just don't feel old.  I like to ride my horse.  I've got a horse, and I enjoy being on the radio, and I can get around, you know.  The only person thinks I'm old is my daughter.  She gets on my nerves like that.  She just says "well, Dad, take it easy.  Take it easy."  You know, to her, I'm old, but I just don't feel it.  I just don't feel that way, and again, to answer your question, you just can't say why some things happen.  Maybe I'm just gifted that way.  You know, maybe I just feel--maybe I just--when I'm in a crowd, the only time that I know I'm seventy is when I look in the mirror, and I say "I look a little bit older than these folks" or I get my pictures back, and I'm taking a picture.  I say "I look a little bit older."  Sometimes I look just as good as they do.  Sometimes I think that I look a little old, but that's--that's when I know it.  Other than that, I don't--I don't walk down the hall and say "well, here I am, seventy years old, getting ready to do my show.  Here I am, seventy years old, getting ready to try to get this lady's telephone number."  I got this lady's telephone number, and let me tell you what happened.  She was really gorgeous so I said "page me," and so she paged me.  She didn't know how to page so her number came only halfway through.  I had given her my home telephone number so then she calls me up at home.  "You didn't answer the page so I'm not going to call you any more."  Now was that dumb or what?  Was that dumb or what?  (Laughs).  She was quite attractive, but I guess that just shows what I'd be faced with if I got her.
Story_ID: 9667
Speaker 1: So you have a--you have a horse, but your mother [Catherine Kent] loved horses.  Didn't you say that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I've had my horse four years.  His name is Dusty Stepper.  He's a sweetheart.  I love that horse.  It's incredible how you can love a horse, and he knows my car.  If he's out in that kind of pasture and I drive that car, he'll know it, and he'll follow it.
Speaker 1: Now what--how old were you when your mother passed away?
Speaker 2: Fifty-some odd years old, maybe fifty.
Speaker 1: So she saw your success?
Speaker 2: She saw it--yeah, she--oh, yeah, she did.  She saw it.  I was a success at WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station]--very, very big at WVON, of course.  Yeah, she saw that.  She didn't see this success that I've had with the TV show ['Steppin' at Club Seven'] and kind of resurgence, but she saw--she saw the WVON thing.  Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: And what do you think she would say now?
Speaker 2: She didn't like all that awful old music I played, but she did like [soul singer] Al Green (laughs).  What she would say now?  She would--she was a very strong woman, and she'd probably say you know, like "I'm glad to see that you did the things that I taught you, and you're not through yet," and that's one thing--I don't even feel that I've reached my potential yet.  I think there's more for me to do.  I'd like to be on the air every day, but they tell me that--you know, like my program is like dessert and candy to people so if they put me on every day, they don't feel that I would have the same impact that I have so what can I tell you?
Story_ID: 9668
Speaker 1: Now okay.  I just have a few more.  One, what are some of your favorite artists that you've worked with?  Now you're gonna say "well, that's a hard question."
Speaker 2: Well, [singer, songwriter] Smokey [Robinson].  They're [R&B group Smokey Robinson and the Miracles] favorites because I liked their performance, and sometimes I've been friends with them.  All-time Smokey, and there are some newer ones, too, that I don't know so well that I like.  [singer] Freddie Jackson was pretty good, Average White Band [R&B group], 'cause I get to know everybody so it makes it, like I say, somewhat difficult.  Favorite artist is like--maybe like ask what your favorite all-time record is.  One day it's gonna be something different than the next day.  A favorite artist--been a lot of females--I like [singer] Gladys [Knight] for her spirit.  [singer] Patti LaBelle is one of the most personable artists I've ever, ever encountered.  [singer] Phyllis [Hyman]--the way she battled her demons, you know?  I think [singer] Luther [Vandross] is just--Luther, [singer] Barry White.  I saw the 'Barry White Story.'  It just so interesting about him.  [singer] James Brown--I just can't leave him out, James Brown.  Some of the folks who've just come--as I say, success--especially if you're black, you have so many things you must overcome, so many things, and I'm sure white artists do, too--just so many things, and I just like a guy that has just overcome and come back, so to speak.  [singer] Tina Turner--I guess I'm a person--I like to see folks try and achieve, and I find that most of your artists are true geniuses.  They--it's a hidden fact.  The guy [Stephen Shockley] from Lakeside [R&B group] was fantastic at twelve years old to write like that.  Smokey--for instance, he--they term him as the greatest living poet, the greatest living poet, and James Brown--I mean, the way they drive.  They're just true geniuses in music, and I find a lot of them--all that is first in their life, and you know, their love affairs, sex, and stuff like that--sometimes it's second.  They're just really in love with what they do, and they're truly gifted.  Some people like Prince [singer, songwriter, guitarist] can play every instrument, and a lot--a lot of guys can play every instrument.  It's just not confined to him, and just--you know, I just love 'em.  You just have no idea what you're looking at when you watch them out there because you see them perform, but you have no idea just how maybe deep and involved they were.  I used to sit up at night and talk to [singer] Eddie Kendricks [of the R&B group The Temptations], and we became good friends, you know?  Some of them are gifted not only--like Prince, Prince is one of the most gifted guys in the world.  He not only plays every instrument, can write.  He can pick people like Sheila, Sheila E. [singer, percussionist] and Vanity [singer], and he can produce, promote, handle his own business.  He's a phenom.  He's just unreal, and yet there's always a loose screw because how many times can you interview a person like that?  He runs away from the camera.  They tell me sometimes you'll see him at a party, and he's sitting up like this (crosses arms), and he stays like that all the time so [disc jockey] Pervis Spann said "show me a genius, and I'll show you a crazy person," which I think is true sometimes, you know, but--you know, there's always something that--I guess if you're really good this way, maybe you're not good that way.
Speaker 1: Do you have any fond memories of the Big Band era?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  I--you know, I ran into a guy who used to have six bands, and I talked to him.  I read one interview.  [drummer, bandleader] Red Saunders had some, and who's the other guy in Chicago [Illinois]?  Morris Ellis [trombonist] .  Morris Ellis is still--.
Speaker 1: Today?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Today?
Speaker 2: Today he's still playing.  I love those big bands.  Oh, yes, the big bands, and a lot of people like to listen to 'em, and there was kind of a resurgence at one time.  I guess it cost so much to get 'em.  I don't know, but I love to listen to--I'd like to hear them again.
Story_ID: 9669
Speaker 1: Now, black music--what impact do you think it's had on--you spent, remember, you didn't start out--you started out to be an announcer and then your fame has come to being a deejay for black music--.
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes).
Speaker 1: What--what--and, you know, you talk a lot--'cause a lot of times in the black community you don't necessarily think that whites listen to the same music so I would like you to just comment about what impact black music has had on this society or the world?
Speaker 2: I think it's immeasurable.  I've always felt when they tried to ban disco that the music was getting too black.  They had Van McCoy and a lot of disco groups were half black, half white.  It was just--it was a black thing, and I think that the impact that they just--there's this one guy [baseball team owner Bill Veeck] just blew it up in Comiskey Park [baseball stadium, Chicago, Illinois] and tried to get rid of it [offered free tickets to everyone with a disco record to destroy], but it's--in a sense it's still here with us in house music.  I think black music has had its effect from day one from, you know, from the Swing Era.  All the things that blacks can do, they can really play music.  Music has an effect upon our lives.  If you are like me, if you're at a set and you're playing music and everybody is doing their thing and you blow a fuse, you'll hear a lot of times "hey, man, what happened?"  It's a physical thing.  "Hey, man, what happened to the music?"  Sometimes they'd cuss and stuff like that, and I said "wait, wait, I'll get it back on," and then they'd start--then they start back again.  But music is a device that triggers your emotions, and music has just impacted just everyone with its beauty and the rhythm of it.  Nobody has had the rhythm, I think, that black music has had or the colorful way that these blues artists describe what they're, what they're singing about like [singer, guitarist] John Lee Hooker--"boom boom boom, shot her right down."  You know, it just--music is just--music is just so powerful sometimes that it just almost frightens me, the power that it has, and when I look--I've been around it for so long.  You know, you can hear a song with a melody that'll drive you crazy, absolutely drive you nuts, or if you want a record, you'll go to any--you'd darn near stomp your own mama to try to get this record.  No, I'm just overemphasizing, but there is something about music that touches you, that reaches.  It's a God-given thing.  That's the only thing that I can say 'cause I can't under--you know, I can't understand exactly how it works, but I know that it does work.  When you have a melody and you have pretty music, it soothes you.  It can excite you.  It can do anything to you, and I think black music has just been--you can't match it.  You can't match it.  It's an imitated type of music.  Everything you do, it's imitated.  Everything black is imitated.  Look at [singer] Pat Boone (laughs). I knew this white chick.  She hated Pat Boone with them white gym shoes, singing his song like that--"Pat, Pat, Pat Boone," you know?  So it's a--it's a great, great music.  It's so expressive, and the blues just--you know, unfortunately I think that we're losing the blues, and I have a phrase, and people argue with me.  I'm saying "white people have stole the blues from us 'cause they know good music when they hear it," and so many of the young kids don't get into that form of music.  I kind of--I've sat up and had tears roll down my eyes listening to blues music, you know.  It's so expressive.  It's an art form, you know, so it's kind of a combination answer that I'm giving you but--about how powerful music is and how it has impacted, but it really has.  I'm not a music bigot.  I like all kinds of music, but I think our music is just--from the doo-wops to rap, even rap music.  I can't say--I cannot say that I like rap music, but I have to understand it as a art form, and they do what they do, and there are--to be truthful with you, there are certain little rap things that make me pop my fingers.  You know what I'm saying?  You know?  If they just don't get too way out with it, but it's--you just get tuned up to it, and we did that.  There you go.
Story_ID: 9670
Speaker 1: What impact did black disc jockeys have on the whole total scene of disc jockeys?
Speaker 2: Oh, we made the records.  You know, what would happen, they'd give you an A record.  We'd turn the thing over and play the B side, myself, like [disc jockey] Jack Gibson--you know, he passed away.  Oh, yeah.  We just--the deejays [disc jockeys] were the ones who made the records popular.  Without them, it would be just a whole different ballgame, not that the thing wouldn't have happened.  I know like at Motown [record company], [singer] Eddie--Eddie Kendricks [member of R&B group The Temptations] told me when they got a new record out, every artist had their own favorite deejay, and they would plan their itinerary, and Eddie said he would come to me over at the Peppermint.  Do you remember the Peppermint?  That was on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] or wherever I was.  As I said, [disc jockey] Eddie O'Jay named the O'Jays.  Disc jockeys had that freedom, and they--some of them had just really great ears, and they would pick out--you know, a record would break out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that way it would get to Chicago or it would break in LA [Los Angeles, California] or New York [New York] 'cause the disc jockey had played it on the air.  It might not have been the record that the record company wanted.  Many times it wasn't, and the record company--if the deejays broke it, the record company would have to scurry and repress the records and rethink their promotional thing.  They were valuable.  These guys had--like [disc jockey] Georgie Woods, [disc jockey] Frankie Crocker, and perhaps myself.  [disc jockey] Al Benson just made--just made records.
Story_ID: 9671
Speaker 1: Is there any particular mention of [disc jockey] Al Benson?
Speaker 2: Al Benson?
Speaker 1: Is there a mention--disc jockey history, do you think Al Benson--?
Speaker 2: He certainly should be in the [National Radio] Hall of Fame [and Museum, Chicago, Illinois].  He was so colorful.  He was a communicator, and you know, like when you listened to him, he had slurry speech, but he just loved--you know, you just felt comfortable, didn't you?
Speaker 1: Remember when he went to night school to speak better English?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that one 'cause it didn't do him any good (laughs).
Speaker 1: He'd say "ofta," "dis."
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he's--yeah, or "Mum Deodient," "Chicago's Last Licka"--oh, he just murdered the English.  Man, he was.
Speaker 1: That's when [disc jockey] Sam Evans tried to get him off the air. Bad example for school teachers.  And then he [ended up] working for him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Sam--you know, Sam had his problems, and Sam is an educated man.  He was a lieutenant in the Army.  He was in the ordinance thing, and he taught me.  You know, both of them taught me, but he just didn't set horses, but that's not unusual 'cause if you're in the sales effort, there's always competition.  If you're in this game, there's competition in that, too.  There's competition probably in what you do (talks to second interviewer). No competition, right?
Speaker 1: Do you remember Jack L. Cooper?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember Jack L. Cooper.  Jack L. Cooper was the first big black announcer in the city of Chicago, and he was the first one--he was nonidentifiable.  He sounded like a white man, and he was big.  Al Benson came in and moved him out of there, perhaps 'cause [W]GES [Chicago radio station] had a better signal, but Jack L. Cooper was all the rage.  He had his announcers that worked with him, and hell, heck, he was big.  Wasn't it in the '30s [1930s], '20s [1920s], late '20s [1920s]?  I used to listen to him when I was a kid.  I had to stand on tiptoe.  Al Benson came in with more modern kind of music and couldn't talk and beat this man out.
Speaker 1: But Jack had his own radio station in his house.  Remember out there?
Speaker 2: Out in Morgan Park [neighborhood on South Side of Chicago]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, they let him broadcast out there?
Speaker 1: That was the business, an interesting thing--.
Speaker 2: But he sounded good on the air.  He was a guy like me.  He practiced.  He wanted to be--I wish I could have interviewed him or could know somebody that knew him.  He wanted to be a radio guy so he practiced like a lot of us did, listening to white guys on the radio so then you couldn't tell that you were black, and we thought this was the thing, but you sure knew.  In later life some of these jocks became so big with ebonics that stations wanted them like that.  They wanted you to know what they were so they could sell them products.  You remember that?  I could name--I could name a lot of guys down south, Okey Dokey, a lot of guys.  They just came on.  They just came on black and just talking a lot of stuff, and these guys at WLAC [Nashville, Tennessee radio station] tried to sound black.  You remember John R. and Gene Nobles, stuff like that?  They were out in Nashville, Tennessee, selling nothing but black music, and Horseman, Horseman Allen, and they just had this thing down.  You didn't know.  They were so good.
Speaker 1: What about the guy name of Wolf, Howard Wolf?
Speaker 2: Oh, the white guy.  You're talking about.
Speaker 1: Wolfman Jack?
Speaker 2: Wolfman Jack.  Yeah.  Yeah, he had his little thing and he--there goes--you know, he talked like we did, but he was white so he got to be really big, but I'll bet you there were a lot of black guys who were a lot better than Wolfman Jack, but because you're black, you don't get anywhere.  It's a fact of life, not a good fact.
