Story_ID: 646516
Speaker 1: Good morning, Mr. Knuckles, how are you?
Speaker 2: Just fine, thank you, good morning.
Speaker 1: Good morning.  We're gonna begin by what's called slating and that's just your basic, basic introduction.  So first my name is Anthony Poole.  I'm the interviewer for today.  Scott Stearns is our videographer.  He's really behind us. Julieanna Richardson may be sitting in as an observer later on and Julieanna is the executive director for The HistoryMakers and the founder.  So keep an eye for Julie.  Could you first do us a favor and state your complete name and give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My complete name is Frank Warren Knuckles, Jr. [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles].  My date of birth is January 18, 1955.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 23rd, 2013.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And this interview is taking place at what address, today?
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], I believe is the address.
Speaker 1: That sounds right.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: It's a good thing I paid attention (laughter).
Story_ID: 646517
Speaker 1: And we're going to lead in with some basic warm up questions just to get the, to get comfortable.
Speaker 2: Break the ice.
Speaker 1: Break the ice.  Thank you.  First of all, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Wow that's a tough one.  Olive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: I thought it was gonna be tough but, actually it is olive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine and your favorite food or foods?
Speaker 2: I think pasta is probably my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation place or resort that you like to go to?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation place is at home in my own bedroom.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  And a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.  Autumn is my favorite time of the year, Indian summer.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I might.  I have to think about it.
Speaker 1: Well if nothing comes to mind that's okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I don't know how easy it is. It'll get over if I said it.
Speaker 1: It's, it's your interview so however you feel.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You want me to tell you what it is?
Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 2: All right.  The only thing worse than--the only thing worse than a bitch that's jealous of me is two bitches.
Speaker 1: Fine.  Thank you, that's, that's up to you, thank you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know some people that, in my family that're not gonna be proud to hear me say that but.
Story_ID: 646518
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna talk about, talk about your family and you and, and ultimately growing up in, in South Bronx [Bronx, New York].  Could you tell us your mother's name and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Annabelle Lyles, L-Y-L-E-S, and she was born in Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly what year she was born.  She was actually adopted by my grandparents [sic. maternal great-grandparents] because from what I was told, the story I was told is that when my mother was born, her mother died during childbirth and the gentleman that I know as my grandfather went to get her because she was--my grandparents, the people I know as my grandparents had not heard from her mother in a while and stuff like that and they knew she was pregnant and everything and she was alone where she was living at so my grandfather got on his horse, rode to her place and found that--found the baby sitting there you know beside you know her mother who had died throughout the course of the night during childbirth and they adopted her and brought her back.  Well they brought her back to they house and adopted her and kept her and raised her as their own.  And my grandparents were--they were sharecroppers you know.  They were part--I believe they were a part of the forty acres and a mule.
Speaker 1: That whole thing during Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: That the Union promised, you know, the President promised--
Speaker 2: Forty acres and a mule.
Speaker 1: --African Americans, former slaves.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And did you know your grandparents very well?
Speaker 2: I knew them, I mean I knew them for a little while when I was really, really young.  I grew--I spent my early years in Mobile, Alabama living with them.  I was born in New York [New York] but was taken back there when I was very young and I remember my early years like you know four, five, six, seven.  So I guess I was about maybe, yeah, about seven years old going to school in Mobile and then brought back to the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get to that because that's interesting because most of what I had read about your growing up in South Bronx so we'll get back to that part, thank you.  And you did say you knew your grandparents a little bit.  Can you talk about grandfather, grandmother a little bit?
Speaker 2: I remember being my grandfather's pride and joy.  I was his little black boy.  I was probably the darkest thing in the whole house you know but I was his favorite.  There was you know there was--I could do no wrong in his eyes.  I remember that much and my grandmother you know she was, she wouldn't spoil me the way he did.  You know she was the direct opposite but you know sweet woman.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandfather's name and your grandmother's names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Mim Lyles.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how would you (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) M-I-M.
Speaker 1: M-I-M?
Speaker 2: M-I-M, Lyles; and his wife, my grandmother, was Bessie, B-E-S-S-I-E, Bessie Lyles.
Story_ID: 646519
Speaker 1: And let's go back to your, your mother [Annabelle Lyles]. What was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: She was very sickly from what I remember.  My mother had asthma pretty bad, and that's what ultimately took her life.  But I remember her always being sick you know and I had to stay home a lot of times just to be with her to help her out.
Speaker 1: So she died about what age?
Speaker 2: Let me see, she was, she was forty-one when I was born.  She was forty-one or forty-four when I was born in that area and I was ten years old when she died.
Speaker 1: So she was fifty-one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was young.
Speaker 1: And besides being sick, are you raised by your grandparents as you said basically?
Speaker 2: Well once my, once my mother passed and stuff, I stayed in the Bronx [New York] with my oldest sister until I was about fifteen and then I left, on my own.
Speaker 1: But in Mobile [Alabama], you spend time with your grandparents, her parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's parents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles].
Speaker 1: Right and so did you have a lot of--much interaction with your mom playing, doing anything?
Speaker 2: All the time that while I mean she was alive yeah, I spent a lot of time with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of things did you do?
Speaker 2: Basically just looked after her you know.  I mean you know I do small things that seem; well they seem kind of insignificant I guess at the time you know, comb her hair, brush her hair you know.  I talk with her about different things like music and I would watch old movies with her on television.  You know the kind of things that you know a kid that young shouldn't be doing, you know, up all night long watching, you know, old, old movies on the late show and stuff like that but I did a lot of stuff like that which is the stuff that drew me to music I think a lot and art.  Because I would always have a sketchpad and pencil in my hand and I was, I was really interested in doing costume design for, for film and, and fashion.
Story_ID: 646520
Speaker 1: Let's get maybe on your--on your father's side of--
Speaker 2: I didn't know much about my father's folks when I was really young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's, father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Frank Warren, Sr. [Frank Knuckles, Sr. (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Senior.  Thank you.  And where was, where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Raleigh, Durham.
Speaker 1: North Carolina?
Speaker 2: North Carolina, excuse me.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Did he, did he talk much about growing up in Raleigh, Durham or North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I didn't know much about him at all as a kid growing up.  I mean I knew him.  I--my--they were separated my mother [Annabelle Lyles] and father was separated and I would see him occasionally.  I would have to sometimes go to his job you know to either get money to help, help my mom out or whatever the case is or you know if there was a problem with one of my brothers and stuff like that, I'd have to go and get him to sort the situation out.  But other than that, I didn't have an enormous you know relationship with him.
Speaker 1: And how far back do you remember interacting with your dad or not?  There was some sort of break there?
Speaker 2: The interaction goes back to from I guess when I was eight years old because up until I was about seven, seven and a half years old I was in Mobile [Alabama] with my grandparents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles] and then my mom decided to come back to New York City [New York, New York] and she brought, she brought me and my brothers back to New York and we landed in the Bronx [New York], which is where we stayed and my father was in the Bronx as well.  He was a mechanic in a garage in the Bronx up on Fordham Road and I remember sometimes having to take the bus up there or actually walking up there just to see him and you know I would do that on my own you know, eight, nine, ten years old just because I wanted to see him.
Speaker 1: Oh to see him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was, I'm trying to get a picture of when he was in the home and, and, and--
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember him being in our house at all growing up.  I've seen photographs of him holding me standing next to my mom, but I don't ever remember seeing him around the house at all.
Speaker 1: And you told me a little bit about him but how would you describe him as a person, just from what you knew.
Speaker 2: He was--I've never done this before.  I've never described him before.  He was he was a bit laid back, kind of fun.  He was a musician from what I learned.  He also, he played guitar and he played--he had--he played in a band and he also, he was also a baseball player you know.  These are things that I learned you know over the years you know.  Finding old photographs and you know meeting some of his other children you know.  My half-brothers and sisters and you know kind of sort of comparing notes from what we knew of him.
Speaker 1: And so he had remarried or had another family?
Speaker 2: Yes, he, he had remarried.
Speaker 1: And where did that family live?
Speaker 2: In Queens, in, in Jamaica [New York].
Speaker 1: Let's--and did you know anything about his parents or siblings?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know anything about his, his family until I would have to say about 1993.  I met some relatives you know from his side of the family who I happen to put an album ['Beyond the Mix'] out in 1992, '91 [1991], '92 [1992] and they had--one of the family members happened to see it in the store.  They just said, "Well he must be a member of our family." Because you know the name Knuckles is not common.  So they reached out to me.  They sent me a letter.  I was living in New York at the time, invited me to a family reunion and that's how I connected with them and stayed connected with them since.  There, there was, there, there was a search through the family tree to try and find him and his brothers and members of his side of the family and stuff, not, not with the greatest success you know but I stayed connected to them because again you know the name Knuckles [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles] is not common and because you know it was the, the first, my first contact with anyone from his side of the family you know and they embraced me and pulled me in and you know made me feel very at home you know because up until that particular point, I really didn't have much of a family other than you know the, the friends of mine that I made family.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I didn't have any really any real relatives that I knew.
Story_ID: 646521
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna get a little bit to, to your growing up in New York [New York] and down in M- Mobile [Alabama].  So in Mobile you're, you're--what's your earliest recollection, childhood memory from like let's say, how far back can you go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say I was about five years old.  I can remember.  I remember we moved into our house that was a small house around the corner from my grandparents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles] and this house didn't have indoor plumbing, at least there wasn't a proper bathroom with a tub and toilet and all that stuff in it, and my mother [Annabelle Lyles] used to pull out this big tub, metal tub that she would fill up with water and we'd all have to bathe in it.  That whole thing I remember that.  I remember being hit by a car when I was about six, five or six years old and breaking my leg.  My niece, my oldest niece, who lives down there now with my oldest sister, she was my first best friend.  We were really, really close.  I was like a shadow to her.  I followed her everywhere.  I did everything with her.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Demetra.
Speaker 1: Demetra.
Speaker 2: Gorcey Demetra [Gorcey Lyles], G-O-R-C-E-Y, Gorcey Demetra; and she was my first best friend.
Story_ID: 646522
Speaker 1: And in, in your, in the home that you had moved into, a small home, you had--did you have brothers and sisters back, back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a brother and a nephew that lived with us, my sister in the Bronx [New York] that I lived with after my mom [Annabelle Lyles] died, her son, Michael.
Speaker 1: And what was your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Kevin [ph.].
Speaker 1: And I think you said there was a nephew also?
Speaker 2: Yea, Michael, Michael Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what it was like well just growing up?
Speaker 2: I guess it was I guess it was as normal as I can expect or describe what normalcy was back then because I didn't know any other kind of life.  You know, I mean, I had family around me, you know.  You know, you know as I said my mom was always sick so, you know, somebody had to stay with her.  Somebody had to be with her and I was always the one that had to stay and be with her.
Speaker 1: But did you--what about things like family get togethers, dinner times, going to church, what other things going on?
Speaker 2: Well my mom was a Jehovah's Witness so of course on Sunday we had to go to the Kingdom Hall and sometimes you had to go out and do field service with her on Saturday mornings.  You know tapping on people's doors you know trying to get them interested in The Watchtower and the Awake! magazines doing that, which was something I was never crazy about.  When I think back about it now you know, tapping on people's doors early on Saturday morning after people had been working all week, last thing in the world they wanna do is get up and have to answer their door to this.  And so you know I mean of course since, since I was a little kid, all the different jokes and things like that I seen in movies and stuff about how people react to, you know, to it and stuff like that.  It was all the same things I was thinking you know and feeling as a kid you know growing up.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you--what was your role in, in getting up on Saturday mornings?  Did your mom make the pitch? Did she ask you to say anything or do anything?
Speaker 2: Well you know, we, we all well not all of us, it was easy for me to go because I was always with her anyway.  You know my brother wouldn't go.  My nephew Michael occasionally would go but they didn't want to.  They didn't wanna be bothered with it and stuff you know and they were like a couple of little rebels any way so if they said, no, they meant no and my mother wouldn't try and force it on them.  And I didn't you know of course at the time I didn't realize it was as easy as that to say no.  But you know somebody needed to be with her anyway you know and so that was me and I couldn't say no.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like you were very close to your mother?
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: And how--can you tell us any stories about how she was, as in terms of her affection towards you or your your brother, just a little bit more just to get a (unclear).
Speaker 2: She, she indulged me a lot even though we didn't have anything or much of anything.  She indulged me a lot.  She, she knew that art was where my head was at and, and she saw me having a future in it you know.  I would sit--you know she never had to worry about me being out on the street because for the most part I'd come home from school and I would either sit at the kitchen table with the radio on you know or next to my sister's stereo you know and listen to her music and I have my sketchpad and you know and a pencil and I'm just drawing and doodling so she never had to worry about me and where I was at when it came to that.  But it was something that she always you know pushed me to do and pursue.  And she wanted me to take it all the way.  And I made it--I say I made it to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology] in New York [New York] and that's when I got hit with the deejay bug and the whole music thing and by the time I made it here to Chicago, [Illinois], I went to the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for about a year as a student at large.
Speaker 1: Well, we'll get to that in a few minutes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 646523
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights, sounds and smells that you can think about growing up in Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights, sounds and smells?  Fried chicken and peanut butter are probably the smells my grandmother [Knuckles' maternal great-grandmother, Bessie Lyles] I--you know like everybody's grandmother made the best fried chicken in the world you know but there was only two foods I would eat.  I would eat her fried chicken and if I wasn't eating fried chicken, I was eating peanut butter and jelly you know.  You know I would eat peanut butter and jelly to the point where I would make myself sick eating it and stuff you know and I remember I guess, I guess I must of got constipated or something from eating too much of it or something like that and my grandmother tried to get my grandfather [Knuckles' maternal great-grandfather, Mim Lyles] to force me to take this syrup of Black Draught which was a laxative.  There was that medication and then there was this other one called three sixes [666 Cold Preparation].  I don't know if you remember that.  These are, these are real old medications from back but--
Speaker 1: Also medications may be that you see down south with families--
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly, exactly.  Stuff like that or Citrate of Magnesia and stuff like that things to just loosen you up if you will for lack of a better description.  I remember lots of stuff like that you know.  And I didn't understand it for a while you know especially when you know, you know I thought my grandfather was the one that would always protect me in case anybody tried to do anything wrong to me and stuff and then when he held me down to force that syrup of Black Draught on me it just changed my whole relationship with him.  Because I didn't think that that would happen you know.  I needed to take it and looking back on it now, I understand I needed to take it because you know the situation I was in and stuff but when he--when she got him to hold me down to force this medication down my throat and stuff it was--it just changed my whole relationship with him.
Speaker 1: Thank you for letting us know about that.  So that's part of the sight, sounds and smells--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but what else and fried chicken and peanut butter, what else about sights?
Speaker 2: Sights, wow, seeing the Ku Klux Klan riding around at night through some of the--through some of the neighborhoods and stuff and you know it be, it be hot outside you know and all the kids out in the street until late in the evening sometimes you know and us all being forced inside because these KKK people are riding around in their cars through our neighborhood and stuff like that and it just wasn't safe to be on the street.  I remember seeing stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So that situation you can tell us a little bit more how did your grandparents handle that or your mom [Annabelle Lyles]?  Did they tell you come on in or you just--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes exactly.  Because it's, it's like the word was spread through the neighborhood you know.  You know one of my grandparents' friends or one of my grandmother's friends you know who may have lived a couple of blocks over might have seen a car drive through the block or something like that and she immediately called.  You know and it's almost like the telephone game because this one would call this one and that one and all of a sudden you know it set off a chain reaction and all the kids were called in off the street.  And that's pretty much what happened.
Speaker 1: Do you remember about what age you were when you might have first seen that? You moved to New York [New York] later on, age seven, so how far back you think that was?
Speaker 2: I think I may have been about four or five.
Speaker 1: And going further with it, those unfortunate sights, did you ever see anything unfortunate?
Speaker 2: Like people being hanged and stuff like that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, I can't say that I did.  But you know I mean I had memories of you know my grandfather telling me many times about friends of his and some of his brothers and stuff like that you know and the slaves for when they were slaves.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents have to sit you down and tell you this or it was kind of those unspoken things about the KKK?
Speaker 2: It was one of those things that was spoken about like around the dinner table or something like that.  It was one of those conversations that came up.  Why it came up I couldn't tell you but it was--
Speaker 1: Maybe going a little bit further with that, the interaction with white folks in the community at that age, do you have any memories about how that was?
Speaker 2: The only memories I have of that is my mother going to work for--being a domestic and going to work for a lot of white people.  Those are the only memories I have.
Story_ID: 646524
Speaker 1: Any particular sounds that come to mind?
Speaker 2: Any sounds?  The only sounds that I remember for the most part was music.  The only sound that stood out was music and a lot of it was you know country, country western.
Speaker 1: Did you have a radio back then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandparents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles] had a radio.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any particular tunes or anything back then?
Speaker 2: I remember this one song that they used to play all the time on the radio, "If you wanna be happy for the rest of your life, never make a pretty woman your wife" ['If You Wanna Be Happy'] that song and later on I think it was 'Heard it Through the Grapevine' ['I Heard it Through the Grapevine'] by Marvin Gaye.  I heard it--I haven't before I heard it done by Gladys Knight.  Such a, you know such a cross section--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --between you know a lot of blues as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Blues and some jazz.
Story_ID: 646525
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Knuckles [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles], we were talking about sounds, and you mentioned listening to the radio mostly country tunes and some other tunes.  I think co- were there any, any of those radio shows you remember anything like that?  Remember like 'The Lone Ranger' anything kind of pop into mind?
Speaker 2: Well, we had television so--
Speaker 1: So you had that?
Speaker 2: --I mean I remember watching shows like Ed Sul- well on Sundays it would be Ted Mack amateur hour ['The Original Amateur Hour'] that would lead into like 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] or something like that on Sundays.  That I do remember.  Radio shows you know that had stuff like 'The Lone Ranger' and things like that you know.  I mean radio I basically listened to music on radios you know riding around in the car with cousins and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Maybe I took you too far back.  I was thinking down south to it that's why.
Speaker 2: No, that's okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you.  Were you listening to any--did, did your grandparents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles], your mom [Annabelle Lyles] have LP [long play] record player?
Speaker 2: They did.  They did.  I remember my grandparents had a, a phonograph with the you know with the you know wood gramophones with the big horn on it and stuff like that which I guess I didn't realize was such a luxury to have back in those days you know.  They had one of those that sat in the living room.  In the living room we weren't allowed to go into the living room too often you know.  That's where they kept all their precious everything, you know.  I remember there was, there was a cocktail table and it was, it was wooden for the most part but then there was glass on top of it and underneath the glass was a whole family photos of everyone in the family from when we were kids and babies and stuff like that growing up that sat under the glass and so had pictures of my mom when she was young, lots of stuff like that and different chachkies and stuff that my grandparents had collected and stuff over the years.  That was--basically adorned the living room and children weren't allowed in there because we weren't allowed in there or the dining room when either one wasn't being used because you know children can tear things up.  You know what I mean, so we weren't allowed in there for that reason.  But I would sneak in there every now and again.
Speaker 1: And what would happen?
Speaker 2: I would sneak in there every now and again and just marvel at everything that was in there.  My grandmother used to have these doorstops that basically keep the doors open and stuff and they were all like, they were all these sleeping cats made--I guess they were made out of concrete or some kind of stone that would hold the doors open or hold them close whatever the case.  I remember I used to sit and just marvel at these cats you know.  These little things that--they were doorstops basically that would hold the doors open and in the hallway in the house, there was, there was a gas, a gas heater that you know in the middle of the night or early in the morning, my grandmother would get up, she would go and she would stand in front of it and hold her nightgown up in the back just to warm up her backside and stuff like that.  And I remember I used to and my grandfather has his favorite chair that would sit right next to it and I used to always sit like right at my grandfather's feet when he would be sitting there reading the paper and I would be staring into the furnace and stuff because it always reminded me of just the grill in the back from where the fire ran up just the grill always looked like the inside of a cathedral to me.  And I had a crazy imagination you know.  Children--as children often do.  So I would look in there and that's what I would see is just a major cathedral with you know with choirs and angels and things like that all floating around.  I mean I had that kind of imagination as a kid.  You know sometimes I would sit there and I would draw all these things.  I wish I knew where all this stuff was now.
Story_ID: 646526
Speaker 1: So you liked, you liked drawing back then?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: What, what type of things did you draw?
Speaker 2: Some of everything.  I would you know sometimes I would draw some landscape scenes and some things like that, you know from just what I saw looking into the furnace and stuff you know.  I did a lot of sketching of--because fashion was something I was really interested in, I did a lot of that you know costume design and stuff like that from watching old movies you know with my, with my mom [Annabelle Lyles] and stuff like that. You know, whatever just kind of stuck in my memory.
Story_ID: 646527
Speaker 1: So let's, let's look at back in the days when you are at Mobile [Alabama] well you remem- about school, when do you remember your first school experience, how far back?
Speaker 2: The first school experience was me going to kindergarten at this school, what's the name of it?  I'm trying to remember the name of it.  It was, it was a little schoolhouse because I mean the last time I went to Mobile had to be back in the '90s [1990s].  I would say like maybe around '95 [1995], '96 [1996] I took a trip down to Mobile and it's a little schoolhouse that's what it is.  I mean but as a kid going there, it just seemed like it was so much bigger and so much more massive you know and all these kids and there were all these huge trees that was on the grounds around the schoolhouse and I just remember it, it was just all so fascinating to me and being a sensitive child, I responded to everything in a real sensitive way so.  And I remember one morning going to school, I ran out across, I ran out across the street instead of holding onto my niece's [Gorcey Lyles] hand to cross the street, I ran out, I dodged out and got hit by this car.  I remember the car distinctly.  It was a big black; it was I think it was a Cadillac.  I believe--I think it was a Cadillac.  I remember it had these big chrome bumpers on the front of it and stuff.  This car hit me and I woke up on the sidewalk and the last thing I remember hearing when I got hit by the car was my niece screaming and stuff you know and apparently there was a write up in the newspaper about it you know, about a little boy being hit and you know they thought when she screamed they thought it had happened to her, something had happened to her because she screamed so loud and stuff.  But we were on our way to school, she was walking me to school whatever the case was and that was probably one of the most profound things I remember happening.
Speaker 1: You said you broke your leg?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I broke my leg.  I remember ended up in the hospital and my leg was in a cast and when I came home from the hospital, I went home to my grandparents' house and I--my grandfather [Knuckles' maternal great-grandfather, Mim Lyles] gave me his bed to sleep in and stuff you know and which you know I just I don't know what I was thinking, I mean I just felt so, so grand that my grandfather would give up his bed for me to sleep in it and stuff you know and sometimes he would sleep there with me and stuff you know just because I mean he was, he was devastated by it all.  I didn't realize how much, but he was really devastated by it all.  I mean we were close you know and I guess when he found out when they told him about what had happened and stuff, it must have really done a number on him 'cause I remember, I remember him crying over me one night when I was asleep, I woke up and stuff and my grandmother [Knuckles' maternal great-grandmother, Bessie Lyles] said he was praying that I was gonna--I think that was when I first came home from the hospital.
Speaker 1: This is partial because not that you were hit, but you must have been unconscious for several hours?
Speaker 2: Yea I guess when they had me on the sidewalk.  I came to for, for a couple of minutes and at that particular point my niece, she was hovering over me and my grandmother was there and my grandfather was there and she was crying and my grandmother was crying; and people, you know every- people were concerned that much I do remember, people were concerned.
Story_ID: 646528
Speaker 1: And so you're at this small schoolhouse [in Mobile, Alabama], which I'm just gonna take a guess was all black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Do you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Yes (unclear).  And so you're in kindergarten so that was maybe in 1960 or so.
Speaker 2: Yea it had to be around '60 [1960], 1960.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Tell us about the school and, and how many kids were there, about what classes you were taking?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking it might have been about there might have been about fifty maybe sixty kids I'm thinking.  It was a little, it was in, in all senses of the words it was a little old schoolhouse, you know a frame schoolhouse painted gray, I remember and there was, there was a big yard in the back and as I said before there were a lot of very tall trees and I used to spend a lot of time sitting under trees, daydreaming.  I did a lot of that as a kid you know.  If I see, you know if I see the proper kind of tree, I would sit under it and I would just drift, I would just, I would just completely go away you know the world around me would go away.  I would just completely drift.  I did a lot of that as a child.
Speaker 1: So you might be doing a little cloud watching and things like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cloud watching and just, just drift, let my imagination just take me away.
Speaker 1: And where would it take you?
Speaker 2: It would take me oh wow; let me see if I can remember.  It would--I don't know. It would take me, I can't remember exactly.  I just remember they were always very beautiful places, soft places where, you know, I mean not, not kiddy places where you know a child would just lose their mind in a candy store. It was never anything like that. It was just always places where, you know, everything you looked at and you touched and people that went in and out of it was something that was just all beautiful and really sweet and really lovely and it was always that way.
Speaker 1: Sounds beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it really was.
Speaker 1: That's good.  So let's go back to the school. Was it separated anyway by classes? Kindergarten, first grade, second grade or how did that work?
Speaker 2: It might have been separated by kindergarten and first grade.  I remember I must have been about five, four or five.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers?
Speaker 2: No.  Not very well, no, not very well.
Speaker 1: Not necessarily their names but just what they were like or supportive or helpful?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were, I mean, they were all very, they were all very sweet, very nice women.  'Cause it's kind of hard to describe them, you know, nice, gentle, really sweet, fine country ladies you know for lack of a better description you know they were always very you know, they hovered over all of the kids that was there as if they were their own, you know and this was back during the time where, you know, if a child stepped out of line, you know neighbors had the right to, you know, put you back in line you--and teachers would do that and down there you know teachers would spank a child that would step out of line.  Not that I ever got spanked for anything, but I've seen it done you know and I remember it happening.
Speaker 1: What about friends that you had at school?  Do you remember anybody back in those days?
Speaker 2: I had one friend I remember he was really close. His name was Brian [ph.] and I remember I couldn't say his name right.  I could never say his name.  His name was Brian, I used to always call him Brown 'cause I could never pronounce the word Brian.
Speaker 1: And did you play any sports or play out there in the yard?
Speaker 2: I played out in the yard you know like most kids do but I didn't play any sports no.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And Brian, you ever, ever per chance see him later in life?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you just remember--
Speaker 2: He could walk in this room right now and I wouldn't recognize him.  But I don't think he would recognize me either.
Story_ID: 646529
Speaker 1: So you, you, you're in kindergarten 1960 or so; and then so by 1962 or so you're into, back to, to the South Bronx [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do you remember first about the move to South Bronx?
Speaker 2: I was--one of the first things I remember is the kids making fun of my accent because I had a very heavy southern drawl you know from being in Mobile [Alabama] and coming you know and they used to always make fun of me.  They would always say, "Say Hollywood." And I would say the word Hollywood and it just sounded so funny to them.  You know that's one of the first things I really remember the most is being made fun of you know and then when they learned my last name being made fun of that too.  It just seems like I was always the butt of somebody's joke that I remember the most.
Speaker 1: What--do you remember what the particular neighborhood was called?  I mean it's called the south Bronx, but was there a particular part that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Where I grew up it was Fort Apache [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Fort Apache.  I think there was a movie made some time ago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Fort Apache Bronx ['Fort Apache, The Bronx'], yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Exactly yeah.  That was the neighborhood I grew up in.
Speaker 1: And what was that block? I'm not as familiar with South Bronx specifically, but 92nd Street what was that?
Speaker 2: Well I lived on a street called Stebbins Avenue.  There was a six corners it's where Stebbins Avenue ran into Westchester Avenue, which ran underneath the elevated train and which also 163rd Street ran right into it so it was like six corners and the train stop that you would get off at the subway stop you get off at to get to my block was either Prospect Avenue or Simpson Street, Intervale Avenue and they all just kind of sort of merged on one another growing up in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Let me just get, this is for myself and for future generations a little bit of context around the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: South Bronx back then was what, what demographics if you know back in those days?
Speaker 2: What demographics, you mean?
Speaker 1: White, Hispanic?
Speaker 2: It was black and Hispanic.  It was black and Hispanic majority, but black and Puerto Rican.
Speaker 1: And the rest of the Bronx was--what was that, which demographic?
Speaker 2: Well I never ventured far out of the neighborhood you know.  The furthest I had ventured out of the neighborhood might have been to a shopping area down on Third Avenue and 169th Street I think it was.  That was pretty much it.  I never really ventured much out of the neighborhood at all, so I never knew too much beyond that.
Story_ID: 646530
Speaker 1: And let's, let's go to your neighborhood, just within a few blocks were there other families that, that you--well let's, let's back up a bit.  What was the building like that you were in?  Was it an apartment building, house?
Speaker 2: The building I lived in?
Speaker 1: Yea.
Speaker 2: It was an apartment building.  It was right across the street from the elementary school that I was--that I was attending, P.S. 60, Public School 60 [The Longwood Academy of Discovery, Bronx, New York].  It was di- I mean you can walk right out my front door and right into the front door of the school. How convenient was that? And at junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York] I went to what you call now middle school was half a block up the street you know so everything was right there.  It was, the apartment building it was five stories, tenement it was row of them up and down the block and stuff and it was I mean it wasn't a bad place; it wasn't you know at least it didn't seem like it at the time.  It was, it was pretty neat and decent I thought.  But I mean but it was a slum.  It was.  You know in the basement, this was back when, back in the basement there would be coals that was getting shoveled into the furnace just to heat the building and stuff like that and there was you know.  There were coal trucks that would come around that would deliver the coal through the front of the building through the chute in the front of the building and stuff and as kids sometimes we'd go downstairs to the basement and play in it.  You know because it'd be like mountains of it and you know inside the basement there that would get shoveled into the furnace just to keep the building warm, keep it heated.
Speaker 1: When you moved back to New York [New York], I think you said you moved back to your older sister's. Was that her place or whose home was that?  Whose apartment building?
Speaker 2: When I moved back to the South--what you mean from, from Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my older sister was living in that building with her husband.
Speaker 1: And I'm trying to remember so your mom [Annabelle Lyles] came back with you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your grandparents [Knuckles' maternal great-grandparents, Bessie Lyles and Mim Lyles] stayed?
Speaker 2: Stayed in Mobile.
Speaker 1: Mobile.  So who, who was in the home besides you and your older sister and your mom, if anyone?
Speaker 2: Well it was--well my oldest sister was in the apartment across the hall from us--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: --with her husband and her daughter.  And my apartment it was me, my mother and my brother Kevin [ph.] and my nephew Michael [Michael Johnson (ph.)] who was my sister that live across the hall, it was her son Michael.  We all lived across the hall.
Speaker 1: And, and I'm sorry, tell me your sister's name again?
Speaker 2: My sister the one in the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Anice, A-N-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Thank you and her husband's name?
Speaker 2: Oneal [Oneal Brunstorff].
Speaker 1: And what was his name, last name, or their married (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brunstorff, B-R-U-N-S-T-O-R-F-F.
Story_ID: 646531
Speaker 1: That sounds like a good situation, you're basically across the apartment building rooms from your sister--oh, by the way, how close were you with your older sister?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I don't think we were very close.  I think, I think when my mother [Annabelle Lyles] died it kind of ruined her life.  It, it--that's the way I always felt.  I was like you know me being forced to have to live with her, you know, it kind of ruined her life to a degree because you know even though she was married to Oneal [Oneal Brunstorff], you know, she was young, you know what I mean. She was--she had to be like around thirty, thirty-two at the time and you know she had her own life.  She had her own ideas mapped out for what she wanted to do with her life.  She was a nurse, she was a nurse's aide at the time but she was going to school for nursing and she you know she wanted to get her, she wanted to get her license and stuff like that so she could be a you know a nurse and she was just at Jacobi hospital [Jacobi Medical Center; NYC Health + Hospitals/Jacobi] in the Bronx [New York].  But you know she had two kids.  She had Michael [Michael Johnson (ph.)] and she had Debbie [Debbie Brunstorff (ph.)].  You know Debbie was Oneal's daughter that lived with her and somebody had to watch these kids and stuff you know and once my mom had died and stuff like that, her and Oneal were no longer living together and she was seeing someone else, this other guy Charles [ph.] who lived up the street, and she had a daughter with Charles and so somebody had to watch these kids now.  Who got elected, you know?  I got elected, you know, to look after them and stuff and for the longest time I remember when, when Lisa [ph.] her last child, Charles' daughter was born and stuff like that, I used to take care of that kid every day you know bathing her, feeding her, taking her out in the stroller and walking you know all the rest of this different stuff, the baby was always with me and everybody in the neighborhood you know whenever they would see me, they would see that stroller you know and I got--remember getting offered a lot of babysitting jobs because I was always taking care of, you know, of Lisa and stuff but that's not work, that's not what I had in mind to be somebody's babysitter, but you know I, I got elected to do it so.
Speaker 1: And you, you come back to South Bronx [Bronx, New York] at the age of seven so--
Speaker 2: Well this is, this is--my mom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is further on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this if further on because my mom died when I was ten and you know it, it turned out to be a bad situation for my sister because I guess you know my mom would have been ultimately taking care of her kids while she's--while she's at work and living her life as a single woman because at this particular point her and Oneal had split you know and she seeing this guys Charles and stuff and so somebody had to look after the kids, but somebody had to make sure that everything was gonna be all right at home and you know and then plus me having to you know live with her at this particular point you know was probably more than she wanted to take on.
Speaker 1: So let me draw a picture and then you help me get this, get this picture clearer to me.  Come back when you're seven.  Your mom is still not well.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your sister is helping raise her children and, and, and maybe you to a certain extent, who's taking care of mom?
Speaker 2: I was taking care of mom.  You know, you know my sister, it was, it was a blessing that she was working at Jacobi hospital you know because you know if there was any kind of emergency, I could always call her on her job and they would dispatch you know an ambulance to come and pick her up and do whatever you know and at least I'm there to watch and monitor everything that's going on with her and you know make notes of all the different stuff for her for the doctors at the hospital if you know if ever the situation arose and stuff.  So, but for the most part you know I'm basically taking care of home.
Story_ID: 646532
Speaker 1: Let's go to school now.  Schools you said elementary, P.S. 60 [The Longwood Academy of Discovery, Bronx, New York]--
Speaker 2: Right across the street, P.S. 60.
Speaker 1: P.S. 60, right across the street. What was school like?
Speaker 2: It was, it was good.  I really enjoyed it.  It was good.  I, I had teachers that encouraged my art work and really pushed it.  And you know there were, there were gym instructors that tried to get me involved in sports and it wasn't something that I was interested in you know but I had other teachers that would back me up and just say well you know sports is not what he's about.  You know he's about his art work.  You know and they would encourage that and they would push the field in (unclear) and stuff so for that it worked.
Speaker 1: Sports, why were they pushing you in the sports?  Were you a husky kid?
Speaker 2: I was tall.  I was tall.  They were trying to get me involved in basketball, you know, it's what all the--I guess it's what all the kids was doing, you know.
Speaker 1: Also a lot of kids are playing basketball and, and you were more into the arts.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Exactly.  I was tall and then yeah, and I was husky so they just thought you know basketball, football he should be playing and I wasn't interested you know and by the time I got into junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York] which was a half a block up the street, the actor Lee Marvin, his brother [Robert Marvin] was my art teacher in that school and he, he's the one that really pushed for me to go High School of Art and Design in Manhattan [New York] because he thought it would be the best place for me.
Speaker 1: But back still in elementary school primarily you're, you're let's say second grade or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: Well I went, I went into the school in the third grade.
Speaker 1: Third grade, thank you.
Speaker 2: I was eight.  So I went in in the third grade.
Speaker 1: Third, fourth, fifth, six grade before junior high school, did your--
Speaker 2: I was there third through the sixth grade and the seventh grade I went into junior high school.
Speaker 1: So do you remember any specific teachers back, back in elementary school, anybody?
Speaker 2: There was one teacher that I had.  Her name was, I can't remember her name. She was the, the most gorgeous black woman I had ever seen in my life.  She reminded me a lot of, of I used to watch on television, I used to watch 'The Avengers' and she was like a black version of Emma Peel.  You know she was the first black woman I saw with hair that long and silky and she was you know she was thin and you know very fashionable and just a sweet.  I can't remember her name now.  I hate that I can't remember her name but she was gorgeous and I remember that she I just thought she was everything.  I thought she was everything.  I was, I was stuck to this woman like glue.  And she just left such an impression on me.  I mean I used to sketch her a lot when I'd be sitting there doodling you know, you know in my notebook and stuff like that. I would sketch her a lot.  She stood out the most; and Lee Marvin's brother, who was my art teacher in junior high school.  The two of them stood out the most.
Story_ID: 646533
Speaker 1: So if you're into--well you're also--what about music?  Were you taking music classes there?
Speaker 2: I was taking music classes in junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York].  I was playing bass, upright bass.  I was part of the orchestra.
Speaker 1: But what other classes were you interested if any, and art you're obviously excited about, but elementary school [P.S. 60; The Longwood Academy of Discovery, Bronx, New York], any other classes that excited you?
Speaker 2: Well in elementary school there was you know the only, the only other class that excited me it was the same one that excited all the other kids and that was recess.  You know I mean there, there was nothing else but you know I think a class that really excited me a lot was probably penmanship, which is something they don't teach in school now, which is really frightening that penmanship is not even taught and I had one of the best hands in the school and I think you know being, being so close to art and being involved in art, I think that had a lot to do with it.  But we didn't have many classes to change and stuff like that in elementary school you know, you know different teachers would come in and teach different things.
Speaker 1: So when that recess bell rang for class, what would you do?  What would you?
Speaker 2: I would go out to the schoolyard and kid of sit around and watch what was going on.  Had my lunch you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have any friends that you hung out with at lunchtime?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a couple, I had a couple of friends yeah.
Speaker 1: Anybody you remember back in those days?
Speaker 2: I had a close friend named Ricky [ph.] who lived right next door to me.  We both lived across the street from the school.  Ricky and I were really close and there was another friend of mine Lance [ph.] who lived in the building next on the other side of me.  I used--I mean I used to really like Lance a lot but Lance had--Lance always wanted to be Superman.  Superman, he used to read Superman comics and he always wanted to be Superman and I remember him standing on the fire escape outside of his apartment once with a cape around his neck, that's how I first met him when I first got to the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], he was standing on the fire escape looking like he was ready to jump off and just fly away and stuff and everybody thought he was going to and they were so afraid you know and I just thought, whoa, wow (laughter). And I took to him immediately like you know like a duck to water and we just became the closest friends.
Story_ID: 646534
Speaker 1: --To the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: What, what caused that?  What was the reason you moved back?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any say, and I, and honestly I really don't remember why we did it.  I don't remember the move to Mobile [Alabama].  I guess I might have been an infant when that happened.  I remember the one thing--I had went--a friend of mine took me, a very close friend of mine, took me to the movies.  He was like my best friend.  He lived across the street--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERUPTION)
Speaker 2: --he had took me to see 'Sweet Charity,' the musical 'Sweet Charity.'  I think it had just come out or something like that and there's this one number in the film that stuck with me and I used to tell myself this all the time, "There's gotta be something better than this."  And that's what was going on in my head all the time I sit there, sitting there sketching and doodling and doing whatever, you know, my means of escape because there's just gotta be something better than this.  And it was basically about you know the whole life that I was living and you know who I was living with and how things were you know growing up there in the South Bronx with my sister and my mother's [Annabelle Lyles] gone now and all.  I just kept telling myself there's gotta be something better than this.
Speaker 1: So your mother passed away you were about--what was life like?  Let's get an understanding of your life.  I mean let me just jump in.  What was life like?
Speaker 2: It was, well I became a punching bag to my--for my sister and I didn't understand why.  There was a couple of times that she almost killed me.  She almost pushed me out of the window twice.  Once, she beat me with a cast iron skillet.  You know she--and I didn't learn until later on what the problem was.  She had violent PMS [premenstrual syndrome], which is what it was but you know when you're a boy growing up in a house you know with women, you know I mean basically it was her and my mother you know and my little niece.  You know and you're not taught about these things.  You're not taught about these issues that, that women have and stuff like that you just don't know and there was nobody around to teach me anyway.  So I didn't learn until much later on you know that that's what she suffered from and that's what caused all those violent attacks is you know she had violent PMS and I was a punching bag.  I mean I was--I would get the worst of it you know and that's why I used to keep telling myself you know, "There's gotta be something better than this."  And then one day I just got up and left.  I did.  I just got up and left.  I was in high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] at this point and I got up and I left and I moved in with a couple of friends of mine that I was in high school with 'cause their mother had remarried and stuff and left them the apartment that they were growing up--that they grew up in and they invited me to come and stay with them.
Speaker 1: We'll-
Speaker 2: That was my way out of it.
Speaker 1: We'll get back to maybe a little bit later on in high school when you get to that point in time and talk about that.  So, were you the only brunt of her violence, or anyone else?
Speaker 2: I was the only one.  I mean her, her daughter Debbie [Debbie Brunstorff (ph.)] didn't get it that way you know.  You know neither did Lisa [ph.] the youngest, you know, I mean I took care of both those girls you know and you know, it was a bad situation I could, I could do no right you know.  You know even if those girls wanted to have their own way and so they could lie to their, you know, lie to my sister and tell her, "Well Frankie [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles] said that, and Frankie did that." And stuff and she would take it at face value and stuff like and would beat the hell out of me for you know for whatever case was and it's, it was just a bad situation.  It made for a bad--I mean I had friends on the block that knew what was going on but of course there was nothing they could do you know.  I mean this one friend of mine, Michael [ph.], he would--that lived across the street you know invited me to come live with him and his folks and stuff but, you know, but that could have been a real nightmare you know.  I'm living across the street.
Speaker 1: Did her husband ever intervene in anyway?
Speaker 2: No.  I think Oneal [Oneal Brunstorff] intervened once.  I think he intervened once.
Story_ID: 646535
Speaker 1: So these, these explosions of violence would just come out of nowhere?
Speaker 2: They would come out of nowhere basically.  But you know it, it took a while for me to understand what it was you know and how I came to the understanding of what it was it was just from watching 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] one day you know.  Just from watching one of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] shows to what she was talking about you know of women having violent PMS [premenstrual syndrome] and stuff like and that's what rang, that's what rang the bell you know, that's what that was and then immediately I had to forgive her.  I had to immediately forgive her or else you know I don't think she and I would ever came together again before she died you know.  And I came you know I came to terms with it, I forgave her for it and everything and when I moved back to New York City [New York, New York] in '87 [1987] one of the first things I did was I looked for her.  And I found her you know and she came to visit me you know in my--in the place where I was living at the time.  I had a really nice loft in Chelsea [New York, New York], she came to visit and she spent a lot of time in Chelsea.  So I could have been passing her on the street and didn't even know it.  Because she, I mean she--her nose was always buried in a book and she spent a lot of time at the Strand Book Store you know on, on Broadway and 14th Street [sic. 12th Street, New York, New York], you know and I lived not far from there and so that's why I said I probably could have ran into her, bumped into her so many times on the street and didn't even realize it and stuff but you know but I reached out to her you know to get together with her just to you know clean the slate or whatever you know and I managed to do that with her and a year or so after that she died from cancer.
Speaker 1: This is about 1988?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like around '88 [1988], '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Thank you.  When you had--when she did this and basically just went off on you, did you retreat; did you go to a friend's house, what was your escape?
Speaker 2: I had no escape.  I couldn't leave.
Speaker 1: So what did you do?
Speaker 2: I curled up in a corner.  I curled up in a corner I mean you know neighbors across the way could see from their window, could see what was going on and stuff you know.  You know one time she had me hanging out the window and stuff like that. There was neighbors--the neighbors in the building across the way you know could see what was going on. They was all screaming at her telling her to stop. That she was gonna, you know 'cause I was halfway out the window.  So it was all kinds of stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Sounds like a pretty tough situation.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) What--did he see the movie 'Precious'?
Speaker 2: Yes, of course.  I was supposed to work on that film.  Lee Daniels is a friend of mine.  He wanted me to score the film, but I took ill and wasn't able to to work on it.
Speaker 1: So did the movie remind--were there any parts of the movie that reminded you of your (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well my sister wasn't as hideous as that character was in 'Precious.'  I mean maybe it's easy for me to say that now that I better understand what her problem was you know.  But I don't remember my sister ever being as as hideous as, as that.  I mean that character in that movie she was--I mean I connected with it the moment I saw it you know in the film immediately.  But my sister wasn't as bad as her.
Speaker 1: So talk about what you would think about when you were living inside your head and you had these incidences. Can you do that?
Speaker 2: I think I can.  Like I said the, you know, the main thing, the main thing that was going on in my brain was that there's gotta be something better than this.  I mean I wanted a better life than that.  You know I wanted to live in a better place than that you know.  I'm, you know, I'm tired of having to deal with cockroaches and, you know, her coming home in a mood, you know because her day didn't go well and me having to be responsible for her responsibilities to her children and that whole kind of thing.  I had no life of my own you know.  I'm fifteen years old you know and, you know most kids between thirteen and eighteen think that they're supposed to have a life of their own and that it should be respected and stuff you know.  If you can remember back to when you were that young and stuff like that, you know, when you came--you feel like you're coming into your life and therefore you wanna have, you know, a say in things, you know, concerning yourself any way.  And then to not have any of that, you know, it's, it was like being in prison to a degree.  I guess I didn't think of it as being a prison; I just knew that I wanted better than that, you know.  That was the theme of my life back then is that there's gotta be something better than this.
Story_ID: 646536
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So let's talk about the drawing a little bit, and what, what role drawing played in this?
Speaker 2: I think it was my, my means of escape. When I look back on it now it helped a lot.  It even helps me now when I feel myself at a very stressful point where I can't, I can't control what's going on, you know, it keeps me from getting out of control.  You know, it kind of centers me.  It pulls me back to the center and it keeps me in one spot and it, you know, it helps me to deal with whatever is going on around me that I can't control.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You said you were drawing in ink--I mean ink, I mean pencil.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And watercolors and all kinds of--I mean I had the whole, I had the whole setup.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is in junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Junior high school, high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York].  Even to this day I mean I have, I keep a sketchpad at home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So what kind of sketches were you doing back then?
Speaker 2: All fashion, it was all fashion, men's wear, women's wear--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And--
Speaker 2: --career stuff.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --going into were there any particular individuals who were inspiring you in terms of art, your drawing in elementary school [P.S. 60; The Longwood Academy of Discovery, Bronx, New York] or junior high school, anyone in particular?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, no.  In junior high school Mr. Marvin [Robert Marvin] basically taught me how to focus and hone in on my skill when it came to sketching the anatomy and, and you know the designs that I was creating.  He just taught me how to sharpen my skills with it and how to make it more clear and concise.  Whereas, you know, before that I guess I was kind of sort all over the page, if you will, you know.  How--you know, he taught me how to really focus on balancing out you know the features in the, you know, in the face, you know, your eyes and your nostrils and you know so that everything looked, looked proper versus one eye up here and another one down here you know that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Did you, did you--who were you sketching?
Speaker 2: I wasn't sketching anyone in particular.  Every now and again I might see a, a certain character or a certain movie star or something like that and I might sketch them.  I think I sketched Bette Davis a couple of times; and, and Joan Crawford as well.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right. Right.
Speaker 2: But I mean, I looked again I looked at a lot of old films with my mom [Annabelle Lyles], so.
Story_ID: 646537
Speaker 1: And Mr., Mr. Marvin [Robert Marvin] that was Lee Marvin's brother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  What, what grade was that?
Speaker 2: That was the seventh, eighth and ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And sounds like he was more than just a good teacher for you.
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: I guess he was to a degree he was kind of like a guidance counselor even though not an official one you know.  You know he was, he was a great sounding board to speak, you know, to speak to and bounce ideas off of and you know whenever things was not right you know I could, I could speak to him about it and he would just kind of sort bring me down because I would get very heated when I would speak.  And I guess he picked up on all of that.  You know and he would just fluff me right back down.
Speaker 1: When you say you got very heated, what did that look like or sound like?
Speaker 2: It looks like everything was red and black, red, black and smoky.
Speaker 1: Can you put that in different terms?  Red, black and smoky anger, passion?
Speaker 2: Well I would say that the red and black was definitely anger you know.  Smokey was just the atmosphere I think.  You know it's like looking at these colors you know in a smoky atmosphere.  It just made everything dense and not very clear.
Speaker 1: So but I got a sense that when things got heated, heated in what way when you were talking?
Speaker 2: I would get hot.  My, my, my attention span would just get really, really sharp and apart from that, the level of my voice (clears throat), excuse me, would change.  My attitude would change.  I'd become more angered you know and mean versus just soft and easy spoken.
Speaker 1: So, on any given day you're in junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York], how did that come out in terms of that heated passion each day, what type of--how did you feel going to classes and?
Speaker 2: I used to really look forward to, to going to school every day because it just (cough), excuse me, got me out of you know it just got me out of all that darkness and you know I've got someone that's teaching me how to really sharpen my skill with the artwork that I was trying to create and things I was trying to do with it.  'Cause I remember there was a point where I really wanted to be an illustrationist.  I would copy different illustrations I would see in like The New York Times, fashion illustrations I would see in The New York Times and Women's Wear Daily and all of these different magazines and newspapers and I remember focusing on that at one particular point and it was just something that I wanted to do.  But I would you know unless I got out of my immediate environment and stuff like that, it was very hard for me to concentrate on it.  Because I remember I tried to do it at home sometimes you know and there's just all kinds of foolishness going on in my house, I can't focus you know.  I could you know I don't think I was a very good student in school yeah because I would you know I would carry that to school with me you know and if you got it you know trapped up here, you know you can't pay attention to the lessons that you're being taught, and you can't succeed at any of them because you got all of that foolishness that's going on at home blocking, you know, the learning process.
Story_ID: 646538
Speaker 1: So if you can't get an escape from all that drama at home, besides your classes where do you go?
Speaker 2: I would go to my music I think.  I would you know I would sit and I'd listen and I'd have my sketchpad and I can drown it all out with that.
Speaker 1: This is in junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then into high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York], I'm sure?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I mean by the time I got into high school I learned how to go out to nightclubs.
Speaker 1: So you, you listen, you got your artwork and you're listening to music, what type of music were you listening to back then in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was listening to a lot of sophisticated stuff, some jazz, bossa nova I mean you know I can--it was difficult to listen to a lot of soul and R and B because it was, it was just so emotional to listen to it and stuff and even to this day I still get real emotional when I listen to certain songs.  But I would listen to a lot of when I'm sitting down with you know with pen or pencil in hand and stuff like that I'm listening to I don't know Sergio Mendes and you know Gil Gilberto [sic. Gilberto Gil] and all these different Latin jazz artists you know and stuff like that versus you know or I'd listen to a lot of classical music as well.  I'd spend; I'd spend time you know at the New York Public Library for music at Lincoln Center [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York].  You know sometimes I would cut school and just go there and sit there with the headphones on and I'd be listening to so many different kinds of music there you know and just completely escape, spend days there.
Speaker 1: I think I read somewhere that you might have been listening to some jazz music?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister, yeah.  The one that I was living with in the Bronx [New York] after my mom's [Annabelle Lyles] death. That's where it started.
Speaker 1: Any particular artist that you remember from that genre, jazz back in those days?
Speaker 2: Wes Montgomery, Sergio Mendez who else, Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington.
Speaker 1: I wanna shift gears just a little bit and we'll come back.  Where--why were you getting emotional?  Why would certain R and B--what songs would make you emotional and why?
Speaker 2: Aretha Franklin 'Ain't No Way.'  That's the main one.  It still gets to me today just thinking about it now.
Speaker 1: Was that because of the lyrics?
Speaker 2: Yep and the performance.  Songs like that.
Speaker 1: What about, what about that song speaks to you, that's what I'm just wondering because it's, "Ain't no way that I felt--." It's a love song, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In many respects.
Speaker 2: It's, it's the line itself, "Ain't" excuse me, "Ain't no way for me to love you if you won't let me."
Speaker 1: So was that speaking to your personal experience, do you think?  Okay so you always--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I know The 5th Dimension have a song that I liked.
Speaker 2: I listened to a lot of 5th Dimension as well.
Speaker 1: And I would cry. You know, one, one--
Speaker 2: Which song.
Speaker 1: --one last--
Speaker 2: One that's about dancing?
Speaker 1: Right, oh my god.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: One that I'm constantly listening to.
Speaker 2: Yeah sure.
Speaker 1: I didn't have any love affair on the horizon (laughter) but that song really spoke to me.
Speaker 2: I listen to a lot of their stuff too.  I think my favorite song by them was 'Love's Lines, Angles and Rhymes,' which I--to this day, I still don't understand what it's about.  Because it must have been written by somebody who was on some serious acid.  That's what I always thought.
Story_ID: 646539
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Why don't, why don't we, Tony [Anthony Poole], why don't we start exploring the club scene, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  'Cause he's, he's escaping, he, he--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --he definitely--so who's introducing you to the club scene?
Speaker 2: Well I'll say it differently.  You said that you started going to nightclubs when you were about fifteen?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: How did that happen?  Were you hanging out with some friends or?
Speaker 1: I had my best friend at the time, Larry Levan.  Larry was from Brooklyn [New York] and I met Larry up in the Bronx [New York] one Saturday afternoon, he was in my neighborhood [Fort Apache, Bronx, New York] visiting his folks was visiting some people in the neighborhood with his mom and we started talking and hanging out and then before I knew he was coming in the neighborhood a lot and we just became really, really close.  And I started following him around.  I followed him down to Manhattan [New York] you know and going to all these different clubs and parties and stuff and that's how it started.
Speaker 2: But you two are about the same age?
Speaker 1: Yea we were the same age.
Speaker 2: Fifteen, sixteen years old?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And so what clubs were you going to or house parties or?
Speaker 2: Well there were a couple of juice bars down in the East Village [New York, New York].  One was called the Planetarium and it had a sister club that was on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] called the Jungle [ph.] which was a block away from my high school, the high school I went to so we would go there and then hanging out in the Village back during that time, you know, there was, there were lots of loft parties and different psychedelic clubs you could go to and hang out, you know, because they weren't selling alcohol and stuff like that, you know they were easy to get into.
Speaker 1: And where was the Village located?  Some of us know but some of us don't.
Speaker 2: The East Village in Lower Manhattan [New York].  I would say between I would say between 14th Street going south to like Houston Street and from Broadway going east to the East River you know and then the opposite direction is Greenwich Village, the West Village which is on the West Side so but hanging out we would go to places like Fillmore East which is on St. Mark's Place and the East Village and you know some of everyone was performing at Fillmore East.  You know major rock bands from back then.  It was a whole psychedelic period you know what I mean.  The Vietnam War was going on you know and it was, it was all psychedelic, it really was you know in every sense of the word and stuff but in high school, Larry went to high school in Brooklyn, he went to Boys High [Boys High School; Boys and Girls High School] in Brooklyn.  I went to High School of Art and Design [New York, New York] and there were a number of different clubs in the neighborhood where my school was at that was easy to go to so Larry would come to meet me at school and we'd hang out after school and we either go to Central Park [New York, New York] or go to the public library listen to music at Lincoln Center [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] and then you know instead of me heading straight back to the Bronx, I would just stay down in Manhattan and we'd go to some of these other clubs that we could get into because most of them had a door policy that you know if you're there at nine o'clock when they opened the doors, you got in for free you know and a lot of them had buffets so you could, you could eat at these clubs as well and we'd go and we'd hang out and we eat and dance all night long and.
Speaker 1: So you have two young guys from the Bronx, South Bronx.
Speaker 2: He wasn't from the Bronx. I was from the Bronx.
Speaker 1: Oh you was from Bronx okay.  Thank you he's from Brooklyn.  So two young guys just basically escaping to at times Lower Manhattan. So was this part of your conscious or unconscious desire to get out of all that drama at your sister's, with your sister?
Speaker 2: I would have to say unconscious yeah, probably.  I mean I didn't think about it that way.  It's just that I was never in a rush to go home to the Bronx anyway you know so if there was something that I could do that would keep me in Manhattan, keep me downtown then yeah sure.  I did it.
Speaker 1: And sounds like also you, you've got an eclectic range of music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about--
Speaker 2: Well, well I learned to listen to everything. That was, that was part of my own personal education about music is to listen to everything. You don't have to like it all but you have to listen to it all.  You know and I think that that was all part of my musical education which is what made it possible for me to write and produce music in the way that I do as well as you know what I'm playing, when I'm deejaying you know the sensitivity that, that's involved in it.
Story_ID: 646540
Speaker 1: Which kind of gets to what's, what's in your, your mind when--here's this range of music and how, how do you--this is difficult in some ways, how do you visualize this so how does this come in?  It comes in through auditory but what do you see when you see acid, acid rock music?  What goes on in your mind you know?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of what I saw when I would be sitting underneath those trees as a little kid daydreaming a lot of the things that I saw when I was just staring off into space daydreaming, I think a lot of that is what I see when it comes to the music that I develop, I write and I had worked with you know I work with a couple of killer programmers and these guys have all have been classically trained and with them being classically trained musicians, they taught me a lot about developing music and writing music from a classical vantage point which is what made it easy which is why I said you know I have to listen to it all.  I don't have to like it all.  You know and even when it comes to students and people and young people that I meet that are trying to do the same thing that I'm doing, one of the first things I tell them is you have to listen to it all.  You don't have to like it but you have to listen to it all because you'll be surprised at what your subconsciousness draws from each particular genre of music or style or whatever it is that seeps into your subconscious and helps make the music that you're trying to create you know better than what it is.  It could be something that you would never think of using you know.  But it will find its way in and it'll add that extra spice that's missing from that piece of music that you're trying to develop.
Speaker 1: So as you're expanding your range of music that you listen to, you and Larry [Larry Levan] go down to say Fillmore East [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was it--how did that feel when you go to a show that something out of your whole normal range and you were--what did it?
Speaker 2: Well we were kids so you know everything was bigger than, than life itself you know what I mean and the sound of course is bigger and you know you got the Winter brothers on stage you know. I didn't know who the Winter Brothers were.
Speaker 1: Johnny Winters [sic. Johnny Winter] and Edgar [Edgar Winter] (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Johnny and Edgar both you know what I mean I didn't know who they were.  You know and then you got people like LaBelle [Patti LaBelle] backing them up and all kinds of stuff like this you know what I mean?  Living you know living in Manhattan [New York] and especially on that Upper West Side you know and these people live in the same neighborhood.  You bump into them in the supermarket, when you're walking down the street and Ashford and Simpson [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] you know all these people who I you know had an enormous amount of respect for and their music and the style of what they were doing taught me you know all part of my life now as friends.  I mean these people are friends of mine now you know what I mean and to see my life come full circle you know because these are people that I'm revering and everything as a kid and watching them until now being in a position where these people are friends of mine and you know and I sit down and I converse with them like I'm conversing with you now and, and talking about you know how much influence you know what they've done has had on me doing what it is I'm doing you know and by all intents and purposes you know to them you know hey, I'm just a you know I'm just a club deejay what do I know you know even though they know me a little bit better than that you know just from the music that I produce and stuff you know.  They've tapped into that particular side of me, which puts me in a completely different place than most other quote unquote club deejays you know, so.
Story_ID: 646541
Speaker 1: The Round Table or Tamberlane [New York, New York], which was like right immediately where my school was.  I was basically leaving places like that at 4:30, 5:00 in the morning and riding back to the Bronx [New York] just to shower and change clothes and have to turn around and come right back down to you know to go to school.
Speaker 2: So you were out club--hanging out you and Larry [Larry Levan] and you're just describing staying up as late as--how late, how late did you stay up sometimes?
Speaker 1: Well, sometimes almost around the clock you know.  You know I had no interest in running back to the Bronx you know.  If I--yeah if there was someplace I could go and I could hang out and I can dance and listen to music you know it was, it was definitely a means of escape.  It's what we did.  It's back then you, you only had to be eighteen to get into a club you know and there are a lot of fifteen, sixteen year olds that could pass for eighteen, nineteen so.  You know a lot of the clubs back then you know they needed bodies on the dance floor when they opened the door because it looked like the place was busy and it would make you wanna come in and so you know a lot of us that's what we would do.  We'd be at these clubs by nine o'clock and fill up the dance floor and stuff and.
Speaker 2: Did you party to the wee hours then?
Speaker 1: Sometimes yeah.  Sometimes we'd stay until closing, depending on the club and how good of a time it was.
Speaker 2: What were some of the names of those clubs again that you were at?
Speaker 1: Well one was the Tamberlane, which was a few blocks away from my high school.  The other one was the Round Table which was also in the same neighborhood, the Jungle [ph.] which was also in the same neighborhood.  This is in the, this is the Upper East Side, not well, Midtown East I should say not Upper East.  It was Midtown East so it was like in the 50s, the 40s and the 50s on the East Side between Lexington [Avenue] and say let's say 3rd Avenue and 2nd Avenue, 1st Avenue.
Speaker 2: And that's Manhattan [New York]?
Speaker 1: In Manhattan, yes.  'Cause my school, High School of Art and Design [New York, New York] was on the corner of 2nd Avenue and 57th Street.  And so basically we would stay in that area, pretty much.
Story_ID: 646542
Speaker 1: What about school?  What was going on with school about that time when you're out hang- hanging out, and?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I would still make it to school.  I mean at that point, I mean you know there were certain days you know of the week that you go to certain places like Tamberlane [New York, New York] was usually on Wednesday nights.  So you know it didn't interfere with school on Monday and Tuesday you know.  On Monday and Tuesday you definitely had to be there to get the work done.  The Jungle [ph.] would be on a Thursday night you know.  As long as you know we had things together on Monday and Tuesday and we were there you know and getting the work done on Monday and Tuesdays you know it made for the rest of the week I guess to be more tolerable by the, by the faculty and staff at the school and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: What high school is that again?
Speaker 2: High School of Art and Design [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And we kind of jumped from junior high school [John Dwyer Junior High School, Bronx, New York] to that. How, how did you get into that high school?  Was it by--
Speaker 2: I had to, I had to, I had to audition for that and test for it.
Speaker 1: And what was that process like?
Speaker 2: I had to go in and I had to take a portfolio of some of my work so that they could see it and then I had to sit there and sketch and draw some things out for them as well.  I was trying to actually go to Fashion Industries [High School of Fashion Industries] and it was the same thing.  They're public schools in New York [New York], you know, and you have to audition to get into those schools just like Performing Art [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], which is where they filmed the movie 'Fame.'  You have to--it's an audition process you have to go through in order to get in there and they're public schools so that's what I had to do.  I had to go and sit through this whole process of sketching and drawing and you know and then I had to also show them how good I was at you know sewing, if I knew anything about sewing and that kind of thing you know and pattern drafting and which I thank god knew something about before I got in there.  It helped a lot.  Anyhow but Fashion Industries didn't have any room so I ended up at High School of Art and Design.
Speaker 1: Was that an intimidating process?
Speaker 2: For me, yes it was.  For me it really was an intimidating process because I, I don't believe in competitive sports in the sense of being competitive you know and if you have to be you have to be tested because you're competing for a particular position, it just didn't sit well with me you know.  I, I, I just always bare the mindset that if you're good at what you do, then it speaks for itself you know what I mean.  If you got to compete with someone else for that particular position, it just kind of, it just kind of puts a damper on it.  But I'm just talking about from my own vantage point you know.  So this was like you know in this particular business when people say well you know, "This one's a better deejay than that one." There's no such thing you know.  Every deejay has his own style, his own craft and and his own way of working it and doing his own thing and therefore builds their own audience, people that like them.  You know they may like me better than one or like him better than me whatever the case is you know.  But some, some people get caught up in their thinking because this audience prefer them to me or someone else that that makes them better and it's, and it really doesn't.
Story_ID: 646543
Speaker 1: Your high school, you, you get accepted; and then what was the environment like there, in terms of fellow students, teachers?
Speaker 2: It was the most radical thing I had ever been a part of because this was back when this was like the, this was coming up towards the end of the Vietnam War and stuff like that and you know hippies were all, it was all about hippies and stuff like that and while I was in high school, High School of Art and Design [New York, New York], this is the first time I went to a school with rich kids in it.  You know I mean there were rich kids, there were rich white kids in this school that had--who came from money you know and this is a public school.  These are kids that would by every other reason normally would be in a private school, but they weren't.  They were in a public school and you know they would do radical things like you know call for walkouts at certain lunch periods and stuff like that just because they didn't like what was on the menu that particular day and the whole student body would get up and walk out.  You know and when we walked out, we would walk to Central Park [New York, New York] and hang out around the fountain in Central Park and just you know everybody be smoking pot or taking acid or whatever the case is and just tripping out you know.  I mean, I, I didn't know anything from that or how that whole thing you know existed or came about, you know but to be all of a sudden a part of it and caught up in it.
Speaker 1: So help out some other folks that are watching this in the future or the present, in the movie 'Fame,' some folks have seen it, but school is sort of a wide open, radicalized?
Speaker 2: It really was.  It--this is, this is the first--well this was the first time in my life that I realized that I actually had a voice that I could use you know and, and, and make a statement where you know and actually be heard.  You know school before that you know you were a child and you stayed in a child's place.  Children were meant to be seen and not heard, that whole kind of situation.  And you get into high school and now you know you're a young adult and you're looked at that way and you know you have opinions that are heard and listened to and adhere to and all the rest of the different stuff you know it was I mean it was, it was a total freak out.  It really was.  Because you know you live in a house where you don't have a voice, where you're not even a person you know what I mean and then all of a sudden you end up in a school where you learn you know you learn to be the person that you are you know and have a voice and and speak up to things that you know that are right and wrong.
Speaker 1: So at what point in time you kind of feel that you--I'll use the word emancipated, that you were transformed, was it the first day, months?
Speaker 2: I would say, I would say probably the--my whole first year in high school in the tenth grade.  That's when I learned.
Speaker 1: And how, how did it show up in you in looking at yourself?  What did you--what did it feel like?  How do you--when you look in the mirror, what did you see?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't just that, it was just recognizing the fact that I can do what I wanna do you know and you know if I, you know if I said something or if I spoke to someone or if I spoke to some subject anything, there's always someone that's listening, you know what I mean.  I had an opinion and it was being valued you know.  That, that's a big change in a person's life that's been, that's been shut up for so long you know, you know when all of a sudden you're living in a world now, you're going to school and you're surrounded by likeminded people, likeminded.  You know, they're all the same age as you, they all do the same things as you do, you know they're all involved in art you know, being creative you know and having a voice in it.  You know it made a big difference.
Story_ID: 646544
Speaker 1: Any specific, any close friends that you remember back in you know freshman year that were similarly like- likeminded, like yourself.
Speaker 2: There were a number of friends I had in high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] that were very much like that.  Joseph Coleman [ph.] and James Ishman [ph.], who were two of my closest friends.  I lived with them while I was in high school because I had left home and I moved in with them and me coming from the Bronx [New York] you had to to grow up in the South Bronx you have to know how to fight, you have to know how to hold your own you know.  Being a young gay black kid growing up in the South Bronx, you know, I was a target all the time and stuff you know what I mean.  But they learned after a while to leave me alone because they knew that I would fight back and that's all they wanted you to do was fight back.  You know learning you know when I look back on it.  But a lot of guys I went to school with and stuff like that you know they would get picked on all the time and they would never fight back.  And I find myself a lot of times having to stick up for them fighting for them and stuff and I would end up in trouble from time to time just because you know somebody would pick on one of them and I'd have to jump in and intervene and you know I'd have to fight their battle for them and stuff like that you know and I'd always end up in the principal's office you know because I beat up some, beat up some of the guys you know that was picking on one of them.  And then I have to tell them, "Listen this is what's going on and this is what happened."  And you know, "They're not gonna stick up for themselves.  You know and I can't stand there and watch them be beat up like that." You know so.
Speaker 1: So was that--we kind of didn't even talk about that to a certain extent but growing up in South Bronx, you gotta be tough.  So when did you have to defend yourself, get into fights and things like that?
Speaker 2: It's, it didn't happen too often but it happened often enough that I knew I had to you know I mean I got a brother and I got a nephew here that could probably you know back me up or help me out and stuff but they weren't willing to you know so I always pretty much felt like I was on my own and I had to look out for myself.  You know and I did.  You know and because I, and because I did, I mean I got, I got better respect than you know most of a lot of other kids you know.  I mean you know there're bullies, there're bullies everywhere and they'll take advantage if they think they can do it and get away with it.  And I just wasn't having it.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 646545
Speaker 1: And so in high school, there came a point in time, you're, you're, you're at this, at your school and you decided, you were gonna move out; when was that?  And move away from your--
Speaker 2: In my first year in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: And where did you move to?  What part?
Speaker 2: Washington Heights with my friend Joseph Coleman [ph.] and his family.
Speaker 1: Where is Washington Heights, which part of New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well Washington Heights is Upper Manhattan.  It's, it's above Harlem [New York, New York] if you keep going north you go--coming out of Harlem you go right onto Washington Heights before you get up around The Cloisters [The Met Cloisters, New York, New York].  This is up around the George Washington Bridge, that whole area, that's, that's Washington Heights.
Speaker 1: And whose apartment was, was this?
Speaker 2: It was, it was Joseph's mother's apartment.  Joseph and his brother Robert [ph.], their mother had remarried and moved across the street into this new high rise that was built called the Bridge Apartments [New York, New York], which sat right out at the foot of the George Washington Bridge, so she remarried and moved in there and left the boys there in that apartment that they grew up in and so they invited me to come live with them.  So I went to live with them there.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.  So who was the oldest?
Speaker 2: In the--Joseph.
Speaker 1: And how old was he?
Speaker 2: Joseph had to be seventeen at the time.  Joseph was seventeen, I think I was sixteen and his brother Robert was fifteen, fourteen, fifteen.
Speaker 1: So how did that feel to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It felt great because I, I now I can live somewhere where I can, I can be myself and I can do my thing and I you know I'm living with you know the two other artistic people you know 'cause fashion was Joseph's thing as well.  Joseph was--when I got into Art and Design [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] he was, Joseph was I think he was a junior at that point.  He was like seventeen, sixteen turned seventeen.  And so to be able to have that freedom you know.  His mother said, "Yeah sure, you can stay.  The only thing I expect you to do is to go to school like you're supposed to and be responsible for yourself and make sure that you know you're responsible to the house."  You know the only thing I had to do was just make sure that my room was clean, my bed was made and you know I didn't leave the place a mess.
Speaker 1: Did they expect you to contribute financially?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't, well I was a kid in school and no she didn't, but I got a job working at Bloomingdale's I remember and you know I worked at Bloomingdales and I worked at Bonwit Teller [Bonwit Teller and Company], both of them and because I needed to have money in my pocket so.
Speaker 1: Going back just a little bit when you're making this transition, did you--how did you tell your family, especially your sister that you're?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I just got up and left.  I got up and left and I was gone for the longest time and they didn't even bother looking.  I know they didn't bother looking because they would have sent someone to the school looking for me.  And my sister was dating a police officer at the time and they never came looking.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So there are a couple of things you said so, this family, so the mother is living across the street right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And why is she letting three boys live together? Is she just liberal or what's going on?
Speaker 1: Well she had just remarried you know and I guess maybe her, I'm just assuming, maybe her husband didn't want the boys there you know in the house with them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is she--this is a black family?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay it's a black family okay.  Okay and she said as long as you just--but you're all artistic?  Are you all artistic?
Speaker 1: Yes we are.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay are you all doing the club scene at the same--at the time?
Speaker 1: Well Robert wasn't going out.  Robert was the youngest and he wasn't going out, no.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: But the rest of us were.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But the two, two of you were?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and then you had your other friend who you were going out with his name is?  I forget now.
Speaker 1: Larry [Larry Levan], yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Larry.  Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 646546
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So I just wanna, so I'd like to just cover up a few things.  One what is your curriculum at the school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York]?  You know, what is the curriculum that you're following; and are you claiming--?
Speaker 2: Commercial art.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you're, you're majoring in commercial art?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And they had a good program there?
Speaker 2: They had an excellent program.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  So you were thinking that you would go and do illustrations?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay were you--did you still have--were you having fashion to add to it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Fashion design.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you want to do fashion design?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now who else is at the school that we might know that attended the school?  Are there other people that you know attended around the time you did?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, I don't think it'd be anybody you would know.
Story_ID: 646547
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Let's talk about the different clubs and their personalities.  So you said the--I forget what was Thursday night?
Speaker 2: The Jungle [ph.] was on Thursday night.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thursday and so what was the atmosphere of the Jungle, what is it known for?
Speaker 2: It's a juice bar and it's on 59th Street.  Its right at the foot of the 59th Street Bridge [Queensboro Bridge], 59th and 2nd Avenue.  It, it's a juice bar.  It's--the interior is laid out with lots of foliage when you come through so it looks like you're in a jungle and then you come into this clearing that's the dance floor area and everything and there are number of different pillars in the, in the middle of the room and stuff like that.  A lot of the artwork is that of like you know of wild animals and so on and so forth.  It's sister club was called the Planetarium which was down in the East Village [New York, New York] which had the walls were painted black with a lot of stars and planets painted on the walls in iridescent and you know that there was a black light that was used to make them all glow and then there was also planets and things like that you know models of planets and solar systems and stuff hanging from the ceiling you know mixing with the lighting and things like that.  But these were juice bars.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now when you say juice bars, what are you saying?
Speaker 2: They're not selling alcohol.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So no alcohol but a lot of drugs though around among the attendees?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know if it was a lot of drugs.  Again you know I was really young hanging out there and stuff.  They were after hours clubs that you could go there and you could dance all night long.  I imagine that there were drugs there.  A lot of drugs I don't know, you know, but these two clubs were sister clubs you know and they were themes you know.  One was the jungle, the other one was planetarium and they were decorated that way you know what I mean and they were dance clubs basically (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So what are some of the songs that you associate with the clubs coming out of that time period?
Speaker 2: One of the songs I remember distinctly is The Isley Brothers 'Get Into Something.'  Another song is called 'Black Skin, Blue Eyed Boys.'  I can't remember who it's by.  They were, they were semi kind of rock dance songs you know.  And a lot of you know, a lot of popular R and B stuff danceable R and B stuff for that particular period and we talking about '70 [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So when you, you had mentioned, well let me ask you which of the clubs did you like the most, did you have a favorite deejay in any of the clubs or?
Speaker 2: At any of those clubs?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The only club I had a favorite deejay at was at the Loft, David Mancuso's Loft.  Larry [Larry Levan] took me to David Mancuso's Loft for the very first time one night when we was supposed to be going to the Planetarium.  We met in front of the Planetarium.  He said, no we were going somewhere else.  And he took me to David Mancuso's Loft and David Mancuso was probably my first favorite because his loft, well it was his home and he was having, he would have these parties there every weekend but it was his home you know what I mean and you felt like you were in someone's home, you really did, which was really, really nice to me.  It was very comfortable.  Everybody that worked for him in that place were really sweet and very nice people.  They looked out for you, you know.  Always made sure you know you were never hungry or thirsty for anything.  It was laid out like it was his home.  It was really fantastic so he was probably my first deejay that, that I really, really liked and then that summer, he was closing going away on vacation.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So this is the summer between what year and what year?
Speaker 2: I would have to say the summer between '70 [1970] and '71 [1971].  He was closing to go away on holiday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Now is that between your jun- junior and senior--no was that, what, is that between your junior and senior year [at High School of Art and Design, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 646548
Speaker 1: And he [David Mancuso] was closing to go away on holiday for the summer; and I met this other kid Nicky Siano who was opening up his own place called the Gallery [New York, New York] you know fashioned behind with the Loft was and he was opening that up and he invited me to, he offered me a job and Larry [Larry Levan] and I used to, Larry and I during that period was always invited to like the best parties and you know and club openings and all those kind of things because I think because people used to think that if they saw me and Larry there that the party, it was the party to be at and so we were club kids back them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So your friends, you would draw other people with you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: If we--you know then we knew a lot of people and if we were at these parties and stuff we would you know it would be the party to be at.  So that's, that's pretty much how it started you know.  So Nicky invited me to come work at the Gallery for him and I went to work at the Gallery and I brought Larry along with me.  You know and basically we were decorating the place and hosting the parties throughout the course of the evening.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you were getting other kids to come then.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay I mean or young people to come?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  So where were they coming from? Schools or just other people you, you would lead other people to?
Speaker 1: Well you know there's, they were coming from other schools but you know there's, there's like a coterie of kids that you know that all knew or travel on the same wavelength. They all knew what parties are which, which was the best place to go to, who was doing what so on and so forth that sort of thing.  You what I mean and because Larry and I both you know were pretty much visible everywhere at all the best parties you know we pretty much made a name for ourselves that way and people would follow us wherever we were.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So talk about so the job. You were decorating the Gallery and what other things were you doing?
Speaker 1: We were hosting, hosting the parties there as well.  So we would--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now would he give you a cut you know for hosting the parties other than work you would do?
Speaker 1: Yes, he would, he would pay us, he would pay us a nice salary you know and sometimes you know he'd give us you know sometimes he would give us acid and stuff to just give out to the crowd and stuff like that and--just to get the party all hyped up and stuff you know you we did all kinds of crazy stuff like that.
Story_ID: 646549
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What happens after that then?  What are you--that was the summer between, that's the summer between--at what point are you thinking that you'd like, you would like to deejay?
Speaker 2: There was never a point that I thought that I would like to do it.  I was offered a job by another close friend of mine, his name was Tee Scott and he was the deejay at a club called Better Days, a bar in Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York] on 49th Street, west 49th Street and 8th Avenue.  He--because Nicky [Nicky Siano] because Tee used to come to the Gallery [New York, New York], he thought well I know the music you know.  He just thought that I would be perfect to come there and play and so I told him, "Yeah, listen I can't do this. I--you know, one I don't have records."  He was like, "You can use mine."  He was like, "You know all the music.  You know what's what."  He was like, "Everybody knows you, you know everybody likes you.  So sure you know it's an easy job for you to do."  'Cause he was already playing there five days a week and the place was getting ready to open up two extra days because they wanted to be open all week, but he didn't wanna play those extra days so it was his job to find somebody else to do it and so that's when he invited me to do it and I went and I played there for about six months, maybe nine months.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So this is, this is before you go with the Gallery?  Or is this after?
Speaker 2: This is, this is while I'm working--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  At Gallery?
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're doing okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I'm at the Gallery on the weekends, Friday and Saturday nights and I'm playing at Better Days on Monday and Tuesday nights.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You know 'cause most times I always think of people who deejay is that it starts at home you know with the records, they have their own records and their spinning records and things like that.
Speaker 2: No.  It didn't start at home for me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you were just really sort of thrown into it but as you said you knew the music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So what is that experience like?  How do you develop your style then at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, by the time I had left Better Days and went to work at Continental Baths [New York, New York] with Larry [Larry Levan], I had lots of time to focus on just listening to music because I mean it's a bathhouse for one and no matter what music I put on it's basically background in there.  I mean because people were not there for the music you know it's just background.  So and the place had you know a cabaret and dancing on the weekends and stuff like that and so I have all day, every day you know to listen to music you know and learn the music backwards and forwards inside and out and stuff like that and learn how to put, put the music together that way you know so that come the weekend you know I pretty much have a repertoire together of something that I can do that can be hopefully entertaining and that's how it started.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and describe the bathhouse?  You said it was a bathhouse right?
Speaker 2: It was a bathhouse in every sense of the word a bathhouse and it was, it was a bathhouse slash entertainment complex.  It was the first of its kind.  Bette Midler got her start there so did Barry Manilow, LaBelle [Patti LaBelle] got their start there.  On the weekends they would--there's cabaret in the place and they would do shows at the cabaret and after the cabaret after the shows that the cabaret would finish you know and then the dance floor was opened up for people to dance and hang out and stuff like that.  And on the weekends was the only time they would let women in, because it, it was a bathhouse, for sure.
Story_ID: 646550
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now at this point in time are you, do you, are, are you starting to live any type of a gay life in that way?  No?
Speaker 2: I th- well yeah I guess I was.  I guess I was you know.  I mean I'm living my life pretty open if that's what you're, if that's what you're asking. Yes I am very open.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, I'm just okay.  'Cause I mean those times were a little different than now--you know nowadays, that's all I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But you, a lot of times if you're in artistic circles that was just you know that wasn't even spoken about necessarily.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And we're also talking about New York City [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: --you know about Greenwich Village, the Upper West Side of Manhattan [New York] you know where you have nothing but artistic and creative people living you know so there's, there's nothing to worry about.  You know there's freedom like you wouldn't believe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And then the club scene, it's all music, it's hot, it's alive you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --anything goes.  The beat controls you know all of that's going on, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Story_ID: 646551
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So I'd like you to talk about you know because is this, I'd like you to talk about Tee Scott.  So was it Tee Scott--I'd like you to talk about some of these people like Tee Scott and Larry [Larry Levan] you know I mean if you would just describe them and some of the times you had together.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well Tee Scott was like a big brother to me.  Larry was more--you know Larry was a year older than me.  Larry was more like a little brother because Larry was like, Larry was like a butterfly.  He for lack of a better description, he, he was, he would flutter around and he, he brought--he, he would always bring so much energy and so much spirit to everything.  People just took to him immediately.  Tee was, Tee Scott was more like a big brother to me, very talented when it came to putting music together, had great taste in music, was a great producer as well before he died and solid.  He was a brother, you know just a solid brother that you know.  I remember he, he always had a big butt and he would play records without you know in his stocking feet.  He would kick his shoes off and you know whenever you look in the deejay booth you know all you see is his big butt moving and and him in his stocking feet and just his taste in music was just super, super beyond.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So can you describe some of your best times together?
Speaker 2: Some of my best times was, was at Better Days bar [New York, New York] when Tee would be playing on a Sunday you know Better Days bar it was, it was a round dance floor, circular dance floor and actually the club was built in two different circles.  There was, there was a main circle out in the front where the main bar was and stuff like that.  That room was built in a circle as well you know and there was--there was a big round bar that was there and then you take a few steps up and then you come into the main dance floor which was built inside of a circle as well and he would get that place rocking on a Sunday you know.  Some of my favorite times to always be there is on a Sunday of like a holiday weekend or something because he, he play a little gospel with what's you know what, whatever was popular at the time and it would just you know the spirit would come into the room and everybody would feel it, and connect with it, and that kind of thing.  Amazing.
Story_ID: 646552
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you said like Pat- 'cause I--you know Bette Mil- Midler, Midler and Patti LaBelle they were hot--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --I mean they you know they could get everything and, and I think also you know we think of Bette Midler as a you know as a comedian, but she you know she really was a singer too you know.
Speaker 2: She was, she was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All of it.
Speaker 2: --she was, she was you know she was the queen of the house.  She was what was called then a fag hag but you know she was so entertaining.  She really was, she was so entertaining.  Wayland Flowers and Madame, remember with the puppets and stuff like that, he was there.  You know these all the people that were mainstays in this place you know and to see them you know daily downstairs you know I could be in the deejay booth and they're in the cabaret rehearsing for their shows later that evening or whatever the case was, it was really amazing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you're young too, you're like eighteen years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm like around sixteen, seventeen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Seventeen years old.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.  I mean LaBelle they were known as fag hags I mean they attracted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, but this is the Upper West Side [New York, New York].  You have to assume then because Continental Baths was on 77th Street, West 77th Street and Broadway in the Ansonia Hotel [New York, New York].  And everybody lived in the neighborhood you know Patti LaBelle lived in the neighborhood, Nona Hendryx, Sarah Dash, they all lived in the neighborhood.  I remember running into Richard Chamberlain in the supermarket all the time.  Nick Ashford [Nickolas Ashford] and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson, they lived in the neighborhood.  I mean some of everybody lived in that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 646553
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, now you do that and then when do you decide that that's what you wanna do?
Speaker 2: Production?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Ten years into it I began to realize that you know, okay you been doing this for the past ten years and you need to make a decision whether this is something you're gonna seriously pursue or get out of it and go back to school and get your degree.  That's what I used to tell myself.  I just thought that you know the next logical step after deejaying for ten years would be to move into production; it just made sense.  You know and I started getting involved in post-production work doing remix work and it just took off from there.
Story_ID: 646554
Speaker 1: We knew Robert Williams then but it wasn't when we first met him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, so could you just tell us a little bit about one other person that was in your life, Robert Williams, and what happened that you?
Speaker 2: Well Robert, I met Robert at David Mancuso's Loft at one of the loft parties and I didn't, I didn't know that he was from Chicago [Illinois] anyhow but he was you know he was somebody I used to dance with on the dance floor at David's loft and we became friends, me, him and Larry [Larry Levan] we all became friends and stuff and you know you go to a club you know you see somebody on the weekend and you only see them at a certain clubs all the time you know you may sometimes you don't even speak with them.  You know you get on the dance floor they'll dance with you whatever the case is and you'll dance together all night long and never say a word to one another and then all of a sudden you don't see each other again until the following week.  Every now and again you might bump into them on the street in the middle of the week but not too often but it was you know that's what life was pretty much like back then and so anyhow Robert Williams was--he was also a member of the Loft and David Mancuso's Loft you know to go to any of the parties there you had to be a member.  You had to have membership in order to get in.  And Larry, excuse me, Robert is from Chicago and Robert was the one who brought the concept of David's loft here to open as the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] and then his original intent was to bring Larry out here to be the deejay, the resident deejay but Larry wouldn't do it because Larry was building Paradise Garage [New York, New York] at the time and so I was his second choice.  And that's how I ended up there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I think there is a little bit of a humorous story where you and Larry sort of got in a situation and believed Robert intervened?
Speaker 1: Well I know what you're, what you're talking about.  There was, there was an evening we were leaving this bar called Stage 45 [ph.]. It was on East 45th Street and Larry and I we were walking up the street towards 2nd Avenue because it was, it was--the place was set just off the corner of 2nd Avenue on 45th Street so we were walking up the street and there's a bread truck sitting on the corner outside of this restaurant and so Larry had the bright idea that we were gonna open this bread truck and steal some stacks of donuts.  So I'm me, being the fool that I am, I follow Larry into this truck you know and we come out with stacks of donuts like this you know wrapped in boxes and stuff like that and we go running up 2nd Avenue.  So as we're running up 2nd Avenue, we run smack into a police car that was sitting on the corner you know and we both ended up at--in the, down in the Midtown, Midtown South [Midtown South Precinct, New York, New York] I think what it was called then.  Anyway it was, it was the police headquarters downtown [New York City Police Department]. And because we were both juveniles, we ended up in the spot for juvenile camp in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] which was in the neighborhood that I lived in.  We end up in this place and so the next morning you know Robert comes in and Robert is a juvenile counselor.  Robert Williams is a juvenile counselor.  We didn't know that that's what he did for a living you know.  He's a juvenile counselor.  He walks in and sees the both of us and said, "What are y'all doing in here?" You know.  And I'm, I'm afraid at this particular point.  I'm scared to death we're in this place and stuff you know and Larry is like, "Oh well you know after you left, after you left last night--."  You know Robert is busy trying to hush him up about what he was doing, you know, "We just hit this bread truck that was up on the corner outside of Smiley's and," yada, yada, yada, "we went running up 2nd Avenue and ran into the police." And so you know that's how we came to know Robert a little bit better and then he kind of sort of looked after us all the time that we were there.  You know I couldn't call my folks and tell them I was in this place.  'Cause they wouldn't, they wouldn't have came and got me anyway.  They would have just left me sit there so I didn't even bother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So they, so I mean when you talk about your folks, really your sister I mean there was really it had the relationship had really sort of disintegrated in some respects (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there really wasn't much of one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.  So you were developing your family outside of the home in, in this way (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Story_ID: 646555
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So when, when he, when he just suggests and I'm talking about Robert Williams suggesting you know you come to, to Chicago [Illinois], so because I remember going to the Warehouse.  I moved here in 1980.  It was really a hot club.  You know I mean--how long had it been opened by then?
Speaker 2: We had been open since '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay so it was a place to go and it had different levels.  You know you would dance on different levels.  It was only place like it here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So talk about this because it's a whole different market here, Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah well coming here to open the Warehouse it was the concept itself was new to Chicago.  Chicago didn't have anything like it.  Didn't know anything like it you know I mean there were a handful of people from here that had been to New York City [New York, New York] that had been to the Loft and other places like that that knew of the concept but for the most part people in Chicago as a rule didn't know that kind of concept as a club.  And when we opened it here it was, it was definitely a whole new phenomenon and you know we started attracting a lot of college students you know and they wanted to use the place for their fraternity parties and sorority parties and so on and so forth and the concept just began to grow and take on a life of its own.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But the other thing about it and I think about this, so Chicago is not New York, and it's a very racially segregated city.
Speaker 2: Very.  Back then, very.
Speaker 1: Hasn't changed much.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And so the thing is that you--the community you grew up in is very diverse.  Here, it's not diverse but the Warehouse by the time I got there was di- you know it had a diverse crowd there.
Speaker 1: Well I was, I was trying to bring that in.  That was, that was my main objective is to get this club to be what, what it wasn't.  You know I mean it--when I got there it was predominantly black, gay you know that was pretty much it.  And I just thought that you know there need to be a little bit more diversity in this club you know what I mean.  There need to be, there need to be some white kids hanging out here.  There need to be some straight kids hanging out in here as well you know what I mean because there, I mean these are people that can respect and enjoy the music as well so why aren't they here?  And so you know what I mean but Robert and my other partners their, their train of thought was very narrow minded.  They, they didn't see or understand why it needed to be that way you know and I you know I used to try to explain it to them, "Listen, it creates a better understanding all the way across the board when you got likeminded people and they're not all doing the same thing.  They're not all cut from the same cloth."  It's you know it makes for a much better situation I would think.  "And besides what we're selling here is a party anyway."  I was like, "And you know and a good party, especially a good house party you find all different kinds of people there you know thinking the same way, feeling the same way.  They may not be acting the same way, but you know it just makes, it makes for a better situation."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So how did you do that, here?
Speaker 1: I took a couple of jobs working at a couple of gay bars on the North Side that normally wouldn't hire black, black deejays.  I did that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What were the clubs?
Speaker 1: One was Carol's Speakeasy in Old Town [Chicago, Illinois] and the other one was I worked for Chuck Renslow at a couple of his events and also this place called Cheeks up in Boystown [Chicago, Illinois]; and it, it attracted--you know me playing there attracted those people down to the Warehouse.
Story_ID: 646556
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you took jobs just playing certain nights of the week or is that how it worked (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. During the week, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  'Cause all, this is all evening and you know early morning work really--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --so you, what time would you get up usually?
Speaker 2: Well the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] was only open one day a week you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Saturday?
Speaker 2: Yeah on Saturday nights.  It was only open on Saturday nights.  But you know if we rented the place out on Fridays to any of the fraternities or sororities and stuff then you know then we had that as well to deal with but we also you know me playing at these other clubs you know it could be you know Tuesday or Wednesday or Thursday you know and some of these other clubs on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Who, who attracted--who were your, who was here for you like you were for the--you and Larry [Larry Levan] were in New York [New York]?  Was there anyone here also helping draw, you know, drawing people to the, to the Warehouse for you?
Speaker 2: I did a lot of it on my own.  I did a lot of it on my own, you know, Robert [Robert Williams] and I both did it together pulling people in.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I was wondering if there were--if you came across people like Cal Ashford [ph.] or--
Speaker 2: You know Cal? Yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cal used to come.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --and then there was another friend of I don't know his name--Randson Boykin [Randson C. Boykin], he used to try to get around a lot but Cal, Cal I knew him quite well.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: This is about 1977 when the Warehouse opened?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The sound that was a heyday of disco is that about that time?
Speaker 2: Well disco, disco was commercial but the Warehouse wasn't playing a lot of disco.  We weren't playing a lot of disco there.
Speaker 1: What was the sound that was coming?
Speaker 2: Mostly R and B, Philly sounding, a lot of the music out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And can you just expound on when you say the Philly sound?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff], would've came out, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Go on girl.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What? Well no I just say that's the Philly sound (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) No I don't know I just love you for being able to answer it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't know how many different journalism people I get interviewed by who don't know, you know, and so.
Story_ID: 646557
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So okay, so this, so--I wanna know, so what, what--the thing that we're talking about is house music and house music, it's interesting 'cause house music is huge as Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] creation and not you know not New York's [New York, New York] creation, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --what were you, what were you doing here and how, how was it made possible?  So let's you know let's talk about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  When Steve Dahl blew up all those disco records in Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois] and they declared disco dead--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And Steve Dahl was one of our--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --he was one of our deejays.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  He was a big radio personality, WDAI [WDAI Radio; WLS Radio, Chicago, Illinois] I think it was.  Anyway when he blew up all those disco records out in Comiskey Park I guess a lot of people were under the impression that it was going to affect the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] because the very next day twenty-four hours after they did the whole disco demolition so many discos around, in and around Chicago changed formats like overnight.  They, they either shut down completely or they went country western remember.  Because 'Urban Cowboy' was the movie at the time and so therefore they took their lead from 'Urban Cowboy' and so that became the whole sound of what was going on.  You know they killed off disco.  But it didn't have any effect on the Warehouse because one we weren't mainstream commercial you know and you know whatever disco records I was playing at the time you know wasn't even the same thing that they were playing at any of those other mainstream discos so but with disco being killed off and everything, I had to creatively find a way to keep the audience coming there 'cause now there's not a whole lot of music that's coming out with real energy to it so I had to creatively find a way to recreate some of the stuff that I was already playing to keep the audience interested I coming.  And that's when I started doing a lot of post-production work of my own reediting, using drum machines and things like that to create tracks of my own and re--redesigning a lot of current stuff at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So talk about how you did that and is anyone else doing that at the time that you're doing that and that you're you know you've observed or you see you know in any of the clubs or things like that that you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's no one else in Chicago that's doing it.  There are other people that are doing it probably in New York and probably in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] maybe but not in Chicago.  I think I was the only person that was actually doing it in Chicago.  And you know in recreating all the songs and redesigning all these songs just to make them something special.  The only place you're going to hear this is at the Warehouse.  So you know so a lot of people came there for that reason you know because the music is unlike you know what you hear anywhere else.  And it worked.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But essentially what you're doing, you're taking different tracks and mixing them together.  I mean so can you talk--
Speaker 2: I'm reediting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're reedit- that's what I'm saying you're mixing them together.
Speaker 2: I'm taking current, yeah music that was current at the time and completely reediting it you know and adding certain elements like using drum machines and things like that to refashion these songs and just completely reproduce them you know from working with, you know working with the vinyl itself.  And just turning this music around just to keep my dance floor interested.
Story_ID: 646558
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And so how did you know you were having a success?  So you're going out, you're, you're, you've--at what point in time so you start in 1977, at wh- how long does it take you to make that an integrated place one, because?
Speaker 2: I gave myself five years to get it off the ground.  It happened within two and a half, three.  By 1980 it had begun to really turn around.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So how much is the club making on a you know and what what is the--I mean the club is making a lot of money in a night right?
Speaker 2: Well it looks like it's making a lot of money in a night but it wasn't.  It wasn't.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: It was only five dollars to get in.  You know what I mean and it was only five dollars to get in and I think we, we averaged I would have to say we probably averaged between eight hundred and a thousand people.  That's on average.  Holiday weekends and stuff like that you know the number would go up because you know people in town on holiday or whatever the case is you know and if we were open on a Sunday you know there would be more people so.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So how are you supporting yourself then?
Speaker 2: I'm living there at the club itself.  And I mean I would get a small salary from it you know enough to survive on.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the club lasted so when you look at--what is the house music count?  Because house music actually goes to New York [New York].  I mean this is the first time that right?
Speaker 2: What do you mean it goes to New York?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well what I'm saying is how long--the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] was, was popular how long? Nineteen seventy-seven [1977] it opens and then it--
Speaker 2: I mean I left there in '83 [1983]--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You left okay.
Speaker 2: --to open the Power Plant [Chicago, Illinois] in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And why did you leave?
Speaker 2: Creative differences.  The club needed to grow beyond what it was and I kept pushing for it for changes to be made, that needed to be made.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what were those that you were pushing for?
Speaker 2: Structural basically.  You know I just thought that people are spending good money to come here every week and they're not seeing any changes being made.  You know what I mean if I'm the member of a club--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You mean in the physical place?
Speaker 2: In the physical place itself.  Now my train of thought is that you know if I'm paying good money for membership to this place and stuff and every week I come here I don't see any changes, you know I mean granted I can hear the changes in the music and the music has grown but if the place itself structurally is not changing you know then you know I'm gonna get pissed because it's like I'm spending all this money to be a part of this and I don't see any changes being made.  So what's the money being spent on?
Speaker 1: Can I ask a question?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Of course, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, to Julie's--to Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] point, house music's coming out of Chicago [Illinois] in the early 1980s but it's basically in some ways underground.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. (Yawns) Well the club, excuse me, the club itself is underground, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) It's underground.
Story_ID: 646559
Speaker 1: And at some point in time I think you even told a story I have to kind of lead into it that someone was talking about--heard something on the radio and they were saying, "That's, that's house music," and you were like, "What is that?" What is that about 1983, '84 [1984] so when it starts getting introduced to to outside--
Speaker 2: Oh you mean when the kids start calling it house music?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, if you can talk about that.
Speaker 2: I was riding out south. I was with a friend of mine on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and we pulled up to a corner to a stop light and there was a tavern on the corner and in the window was a sign that says, "We play house music." And I asked him what--who it was and he was like, "It's that mess you be playing down there at the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois]."  He said, "That's what the kids call it, they call it house music."  And that was the first time I had ever seen it you know or heard it being used.  And he was like, "Yeah, it's that stuff that you be playing down there too."  So I was like, "Oh okay, okay."
Speaker 1: So that was around 1983, '84 [1984] or--?
Speaker 2: That was around '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: And just that term itself, I've heard different versions of what house music, not the genre but where that word--the term came from.
Speaker 2: What, house music?
Speaker 1: Yeah Warehouse or from the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah from the Warehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: You know you have to remember at this particular point you know we got a lot of young people that are coming there.  College students you know some people fresh out of high school probably 'cause I had friends that were, that were school teachers and stuff that used to come there early on and they stopped coming because they started bumping into the students of theirs when they was on the dance floor (unclear).
Speaker 1: Question another question, you know everybody thinks because the music is New York [New York] or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but what were--did you ever get friends of yours from New York call you up and say, "What is going on in Chicago [Illinois]," about that?
Speaker 2: No.  No never.  I never got calls from New York about it.  So Larry [Larry Levan] was the only person that would call me about it you know and he and Larry didn't call anybody too often you know so but I would send him everything that I was working on you know.  I mean early on you know house music didn't sound anything like what it does now.  And the industry by and large just could not be bothered with it because it just sounded too primitive and just not clean enough you know for you know to want to get behind it and you know and really make something out of it.
Speaker 1: To that point, could you for, you know, education of future generations kind of describe what's the essence back then of house, what that sound was?
Speaker 2: It was early electronica, fused with a lot of, a lot of classic soul and some gospel to enhance it all.
Speaker 1: You introduced I believe the drum, drum machine or something?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I had you know I had one that I used to play with live.  But for the most part you know it was, it was the beginning of you know a deejay based phenom, I guess for the lack of a better word.  It was, it was deejay based music; you know it was, it was stuff that was being created for the dance floor you know by deejays for deejays.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You know who I was thinking of and I hadn't--remember when I saw you earlier out there was Chip E.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's who I was thinking because he's, he's turned into an editor but he--that's who I was, I was thinking of.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because yeah he, he has that film--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm. That's right.
Speaker 2: --out 'Unusual Suspects' ['The Unusual Suspects: Once Upon a Time in House Music'].
Story_ID: 646560
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you decide you know creative differences, are you pissed off at all though because you've really sort of built a following, you know you've invested in Chicago [Illinois]; are you pissed off at all?
Speaker 2: I guess I was to a degree you know.  They didn't you know, they didn't think I would leave.  I probably didn't think I would leave.  He was like, they're like, "He's not going anywhere.  He's just being dramatic." You know and I had to prove my point you know.  It was time--I mean for what the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] was all about it should have been I just thought that it should have been presented a much better base.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're talking about a more sophisticated, a more nuanced--?
Speaker 2: Well, it I mean we've got people coming in from all over the world now to to check it out you know and it's a little hole in the wall is basically what it was you know.  And it was embarrassing to a degree you know.  I find myself making excuses and stuff like that for the place of why it looked and sounded the way it did. You know half the time, you know, people would be coming in from out of town that know me better than that.  You know and stuff and so I find myself doing that a lot you know and that's what would just really get at me all the time you know and I'm trying to change, make these changes, structural changes in the place you know and you know my partners are like, "It ain't broke, we're not fixing it."  You know so I was like, "Okay well I guess it's time for me to go."
Story_ID: 646561
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now had you, you, you enjoyed Chicago [Illinois] though during your time here, though (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah absolutely.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what did you like about it?  How did it differ from New York [New York] for you and what did you?
Speaker 2: Well for one it's a cleaner city to live in.  People I found people here are a lot more, a lot more friendly.  The people you know the people in New York you know I found that I was able to do things here you know on, on, on a small scale that would have a grand effect you know and people really appreciated it you know without you know without getting caught up you know or getting lost in you know it was--Chicago had never had anything like this before so.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So you--it was easy 'cause you could be a big fish in the small pond in some respects?
Speaker 2: Well even in New York City I mean I had already played in New York City for like five years before I came here, five or six years and I had--I never--yeah, it was like, it was an opportunity to start all over again you know what I mean and you--whenever you get an opportunity to start all over again you know you're supposed to take it, run with it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And how do you think the Chicago experience influenced you in even going back to New York 'cause that's where you were headed?
Speaker 2: It helped a lot.  I didn't realize how much.  I didn't realize how much because it was like by the time I got back to New York City, it's like New York City and the rest of the world was busy trying to catch up to Chicago which made me stop and shake my head I was like, "Wait a minute."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well there were I mean, there were things that this scene had created and had, had done that had not been experienced in places like New York.
Story_ID: 646562
Speaker 1: You know 9/11 [September 11, 2001]--
Speaker 2: That's a lot of friends.  That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I didn't know it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I was saying you know if they had to be compared to the magnitude, the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]  epidemic it probably was more severe I think when you look at the amount of creative people that just completely disappeared you know, and nobody was exempt is what you know.
Speaker 2: Also the tragedy was nobody cared.  A lot of folks didn't care.
Speaker 1: Well a lot of people did care.  That's the whole thing.
Speaker 2: Outside of certain communities, no one cared.
Speaker 1: Well I think a lot of people did care.  It's just that people were so afraid and everyone was running scared.
Speaker 2: Well let's talk about that because really the thing, the issue was that you didn't know how people were talking about how you caught it and you didn't know and you didn't know if you touched someone or the saliva I mean it was just--
Speaker 1: Yeah it was--
Speaker 2: --it was just Rock Hudson and it went.
Speaker 1: That's what brought it home for everybody is when Rock Hudson got it you know what I mean because they realize you know, "Well wait a minute, if he's got it, anybody can get it." And stuff you know what I mean.  But--
Speaker 2: And outside the larger community people didn't know Rock Hudson was gay.  That was the other thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.  But you know it's so many creative people you know when I just think about people like Sylvester you know another big, another big singer or musician from Chicago [Illinois] Keith Farrow [ph.], you know just gone.  You know that's you know this is--these are people that are in your life on a daily basis and so all of a sudden you wake up one day and they're not around.  You know for me to go back to New York City [New York, New York] in 1987 to move back to New York in '87 [1987] one of the first things I did when I got back there is I went looking for people.  People that I grew up with and so many of them were gone.  So many of them were just gone you know.  And the ones that were still around were either vegetables or strung out you know because crack [crack cocaine] had taken over New York City in a way that you know it, it's like AIDS came through and just took a whole generation of folks and stuff like that what it left behind were a bunch of crack addicts and crack heads and stuff you know.  I mean to see the condition Larry [Larry Levan] was in when I first got back to New York City in '87 [1987]. Paradise Garage [New York, New York] is closed now so he's homeless.  You know he doesn't have a club of his own and he had Paradise Garage for ten years you know what I mean and he, he's strung out.  You know he's strung out on whatever drugs he was strung out on at the time you know.  So to watch him deteriorate you know and then ultimately die in like '93 [sic. 1992] you know it, it's, it was a harsh reality I had to, I had to taste you know but it's like what do you do?  You know what I mean.  There was nothing I can--there was nothing I could do you know.  There was no saving him you know.  There was no saving anybody that was already gone because they were gone you know.  The only person to save in any of this was me you know and you know at the same time I'm just trying to make sure that I keep you know a strong, a strong, what's the word I'm looking for?  I'm just trying to keep a strong face, a strong look you know and try to maintain you know the best possible image throughout all of it because you know the public is gonna look at it one particular way, the media is gonna turn it into something else by magnifying it and stuff like that you know and to be a part of you know this whole culture growing up in it and everything you know, you know again because of the media, the public was looking at it one particular way you know but those of us that are survivors of it and stuff like that had to, I just felt that you know had to put forth you know the right kind of image to make sure that you know it's not taken out of context.
Story_ID: 646563
Speaker 1: So tell me what that means?  You had to put forth the right kind of image to make sure it's not--
Speaker 2: Well I had to be strong in my own character, my own personal character; and I had to be strong about my own creativity and protecting it and being forthright with it and you know making sure that you know what I was trying to produce and present and stuff like that had some merit you know.  And that's you know, that's when things really changed for me when I started working with people like Luther [Luther Vandross] and Michael Jackson and all the rest of you know all these folks called me to work with them and stuff you know what I mean.  And it's, it pretty much taught me that you know it doesn't matter what the media is trying to make it look like and stuff like that you know it didn't have any effect on people as great as Michael Jackson or Luther or Janet [Janet Jackson] or any of the rest of them you know what I mean.  And so the best thing I could do is do the right thing, you know what I mean, and still hold it up you know hold it up properly so that it's not being held up to ridicule or anything like that, you know.
Story_ID: 646564
Speaker 1: So let me--I wanna understand, I want to understand more specifics.  When you're saying that are--you--because everybody who had been let's say living the life or whatever had friends, they start looking, you know, and trying to figure was it affecting them too--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay and the question is who got affected.  I mean who, who had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], who didn't have AIDS, who died, who survived.  All those things you know as, as the country, as you know the world is trying to look at, you know--
Speaker 2: All of us that lived through it survived it whether we had it or not.  All of us who lived through it and watched our loved ones and friends of loved ones and other people that we were familiar with died from it.  You know all of us that have survived all of that we're the survivors and stuff, you know what I mean and you know the only thing that I--at the time I remember thinking, the only thing I can do is try to make sure that anybody that's coming up behind me you know either learn from this you know, get educated from this and you know make sure that everyone else that survived you know is educated about it as well and stuff you know what I mean.  Don't be so quick to, to hold people up to ridicule you know or you know or  judgment and stuff like that because you know just like this happened to this whole particular generation that's disappeared, it could happen to you too.
Speaker 1: Well the thing is I mean there were family members, family who would not even go be with their, their--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --loved ones because they were either fearful or they were ashamed.
Speaker 2: Both and I think it was a little bit more one than the other.  I think it was probably more shame than it was you know fear.
Speaker 1: So who was the closest person to you that died that you knew?
Speaker 2: The closest person to me that died from AIDS at the time I would say wow, wow that's difficult.  I can't remember exactly.  It was a lot of people though.
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: It was a lot.
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: I mean yes, just the number.
Speaker 2: I can't give you a number.  I just know that it was a lot.
Speaker 1: A lot fifty, I mean twenty-five, I mean, I mean--
Speaker 2: More than twenty-five.
Speaker 1: More than twenty-five.
Speaker 2: More than twenty-five, more than fifty.
Speaker 1: And that's a lot of people to lose you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause death is final.
Speaker 2: Yeah because I mean it's one thing to have a handful of people that you know personally get infected and die from it and stuff like that.  But these are just people you know in a certain coterie of friends that you have or people that you've known.  You know and then when it reaches beyond that to celebrities and, and, and celebrated people that, that you know from interaction and working with and that kind of thing you know it turns it into something else you know.  And then just famous people you know it's a lot.  You know that's why I say it's a lot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can I ask a follow up question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There's always celebrities that you hear about but personally, but personally was there anyone that you grew up with or went to high school with [at the High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] that, someone that had so much potential that died?
Speaker 2: He's talking about people who were successful in their own right dying.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But folks that some of us might not know of.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah there were lots of people.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Like who?
Speaker 2: Well you don't know them. That's the point.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Back in New York [New York] they might know who they--
Speaker 2: No, I think that this is--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anyone that let me, let me explain it this way.  Anyone that knows me from New York City that will see this will know exactly who I'm talking about.  So it's, it's not necessary for me to start spewing names and stuff like that you know what I mean.  It's not (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) That's, that's fine. I understand.
Speaker 1: I mean out of respect.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you I--I understand.
Speaker 1: Out of respect (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. So, le-
Speaker 1: --to the people that they left behind.
Story_ID: 646565
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The other thing though I wanna ask, and then I really wanna move into the music and the care- you know the career, I wanna--but I wanna ask this question so you know you say you know when you came to Chicago [Illinois] the, the, the Warehouse was primarily targeted to young I mean whatever, gay black males and that you helped with your outreach to integrate it.  The question, I have a question is what was the gay community that you sort of came into you know here in, in Chicago you know and how 'cause you know I've had friends, I had a friend and you know I was asking, "Well where are the bathhouses?"  Were they on the north, downtown, whatever they--well the bathhouses were primarily on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know and I--
Speaker 2: Everything was primarily on the North Side.
Speaker 1: But was it and then I was asking were there segregated days you know so I was--
Speaker 2: At the bathhouses? No there weren't segregated days at the bathhouses I don't think but there were you know everything here was segregated when I moved here the same time that you moved here.  Everything was segregated.  You know what I look back on and all the commercial side of night life was all on the North Side, on the North Side you know what I mean.  They--I remember they used to limit how many--they would have a quota of how many black folks they would let in you know.  I mean the most popular clubs like the Bistro [Chicago, Illinois] and you these, these places by Chuck Renslow these clubs, they had a limited quota of how many black folks they would let in.  I mean and the way that they would control that was you get to the door and they'd ask you for three pieces of legal identification or five pieces you know something like that which is crazy because there's no such thing as five pieces.  There's your driver's license, there's the passport.  Those are, those are the only two that really matter.  Anything outside of that doesn't really matter you know.  But I mean that's what they would do.  And that was they way of controlling how many black folks they would let up in these clubs and stuff.  I remember distinctly.  And you know the reason why I was trying to integrate the Warehouse and and change the way it was is because I come from New York City [New York, New York] where all kinds of people live on top of one another have to live with each other, have to work together, go to school you know this is how I grew up in New York City.  You know people didn't grow up like that here.  You know what I mean.  I see it now.  It's much more prevalent now today you know what I mean than it was back then you know.  People didn't see, I mean the black kids in the city didn't see themselves hanging out with white kids you know what I mean.  I can't see--well the white gay kids didn't see themselves hanging out in black gay clubs it just no and you know the Warehouse being downtown in an abandoned warehouse neighborhood and stuff like that didn't appeal to them at all you know because I mean just the stories that people make up you know it's a black club and it's down in that area and it's you know it's dangerous and people just make up stories.  You know people that never been there and don't--had never been in the area don't know so would just make stories up just to keep people from coming you know and I used to try and tell people, "Listen, you know you getting your information from people that have never been there and never been in the neighborhood you know.  If you wanna go by that then you know your mind is just as closed and just as small as theirs."  I was like you know, "I'm inviting you you know to come dance on this dance floor because I think that you one, would enjoy it and two, I think you belong on this dance floor."  You know what I mean.  I was like, "How many people have ever invited you to a party or to a club because they think that you belong on their dance floor?"  That should say it right there. You know what I mean; and that's how I got so many--I got the crowd to turn around that way.
Story_ID: 646566
Speaker 1: And the thing that I don't think people realize, a lot of trends are happening you know on both in terms of dance and attire and I mean a lot of things were sort of happening for at least and for those people that are adventurous--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --enough to, to come.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I mean even the straight people that I would invite.  I would be like, "Listen you know you guys you know that think that you all have the same train of thought when it comes to gay people, you always think that if a man is gay the first thing he wants is in your pants."  I was like, "You're giving yourself just a little too much." You know what I mean because not everybody feels that way.  Not every man finds every other man attractive you know what I mean.  Yeah, there are some, there are some gay people in this world that sex is not the first thing that's on their mind, you know what I mean.  I would say, "You're judging them by your own standards" is what I used. I used to always tell people, "You know you're judging gay people by your own standards and because of that, you're shutting yourself off from possibly meeting someone that could be really nice.  They could be very," you know, "could be a very good friend to you one day when you really need one."
Speaker 1: So who were the friendships you developed here?  We know that you knew Cal Ashford [ph.]. Who else were some of the people you brought here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh wow a lot of different people.  I can't--I don't know if I can pull names out of thin air.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm trying to think on the black side.  People like would you have known [HistoryMaker] Leigh Jones?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah Leigh Jones is a friend.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay.  Those are good friends of mine.  Let's see, oh god, why am I drawing a blank, I'm drawing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leigh Jones, Ernest Collins.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Leigh Jones, Ernest Collins, who else?
Story_ID: 646567
Speaker 1: So you find the Chicago [Illinois] community though because the black community is a very powerful community--I mean you know it's not as dispersed as in New York [New York] you know and a lot of times okay so you--so what else about the Power Plant [Chicago, Illinois] would you like to say?  I mean were you happy with that venture, not happy and?
Speaker 2: I was and I wasn't. I was--I wasn't because I think I made a huge mistake trying to own a nightclub of my own, on my own and then deejay in it as well.  It's a big mistake.  No deejay should own his own club and play in it too because it is a business and it has to be ran as such you know.  But it, the Power Plant did fuel my production career.  It helped me to get the education I needed in production you know and then learn how to do it and do it well you know.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about what that meant?
Speaker 2: Yeah working with Jamie Principle and producing Jamie Principle back during that period that's how I got my that's how I honed my production skills learning how to produce you know on a professional level.  You know the songwriting end of it as well as you know the production and post production learning all those skills you know.  It wasn't enough for me to just play the music, I needed to learn how to make it as well.  And to me it just made more sense logically you know to go from deejaying into production.
Speaker 1: And you call production meaning that you were actually producing acts.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.  So, so you go back to New York and I mean you know you look up old friends, you sort of seeing that but what do you?  What is your first project when you get back to New York?
Speaker 2: My first project when I get back to New York City is I become the third member of Def Mix Productions which is my company in New York City now and we've done post-production, production work working with everyone, Michael Jackson, Janet [Janet Jackson], Michael Bolton, Elton John, every I mean every major act, Diana Ross--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, who are your partners?
Speaker 2: My partners at Def Mix is David Morales and Judy Weinstein and with them you know we built this small company and we've, we've become a major force within the industry.
Speaker 1: So how did you--when did they come--where did you meet them along the way?
Speaker 2: Well Judy and I have known each other since the early days of the Loft hanging out in Dave Mancuso's Loft because she used to be David's [David Mancuso] secretary, Dave Mancuso's secretary so that's how far she and I go back.  David Morales I met when I first moved back to New York City and we were getting the production company off the ground.
Speaker 1: So you had been back how long before you started working?
Speaker 2: I been back in New York City maybe just a couple of months.
Speaker 1: And then you all come together and you decide?
Speaker 2: Well what happens is that you know I've got A and R [artists and repertoire], A and R and promotion people from all the different record labels in New York City as well as in England throwing remixes at me asking me to remix all these different projects and stuff and I need someone to put these budgets together and you know I couldn't do it on my own.  I couldn't do it myself.  I needed a management somebody to help me with it you know and I speak with Judy about it, Judy Weinstein and at the same time you know they're building Def Mix and they're trying to get it off the ground so I come through the front door with a pocket full of remixes you know what I mean so I brought something to the table coming through the door and that's how it started.
Story_ID: 646568
Speaker 1: So you had--had you been doing a lot of that remixing while you were running your club [Power Plant, Chicago, Illinois] and doing--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --so that never stopped?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's what we have to understand that--
Speaker 2: No that never stopped.
Speaker 1: You're doing--
Speaker 2: I was just doing it on my own on my own level and stuff when I moved back to New York City [New York, New York] you know it immediately went into professional level because one of the first remixes I got biggest remixes I got when I first moved back to New York was "Ain't Nobody" by Chaka Khan.
Speaker 1: So how does that work though?  You--I'm just 'cause you, is it that's wait a minute that's not Ashford and Simpson [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] so how does the, how does the business work?  That's what I'm trying to understand.  Are you brought in by the record company or you brought in by the artist?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was brought in by the--well sometimes it's the artist, sometimes it's the record label.  Where Chaka was concerned there was a retrospective being put together on Chaka Khan and Rufus and the A and R [artists and repertoire] person that was putting the project together had heard this edit, this special edit remix I had did on "Ain't Nobody" and asked me if I would reproduce it for the album.  That's how I got that particular project.  Michael Jackson doing the stuff for Michael Jackson, he got the A and R person from the label to reach out to me about doing a remix "Rock with You" for him.
Speaker 1: That's pretty heady stuff right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was because he was putting together that retrospective and this was all happening at the same time he was going to a little trouble with that that kid.  And so he was trying to make that album happen and he asked me if I would do "Rock with You" and "Thriller" you know and from that came like three or four other projects after that.  I also did "You're Not Alone" ["You Are Not Alone"] and what else "In the Closet" and something else.  I forget what it was.  Anyways there was a number of different projects that he had asked me to himself.
Speaker 1: So who are the A and R people that you're dealing with also at the time?  Who's in the business that you're sort of interacting with?  I was wondering like do you ever come across--oh let's see I don't know--I don't think Vivian was A and R.
Speaker 2: Vivian?
Speaker 1: Chew [HistoryMaker Vivian Scott Chew].  She wasn't, no she wasn't--
Speaker 2: I knew Vivian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know Vivian.
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering who, who are some of the names that the people?
Speaker 2: Well let's see on the Chaka project it was David Shaw who was working at Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Records, Inc.].  He was working A and R.  He was the one who pulled me in on that project.  Michael Jackson probably Michael pulled me in on that.  You know as well as Janet [Janet Jackson].  You know they pulled me in themselves.  Toni Braxton, Toni Braxton pulled me in for "Un-Break My Heart" and "I Don't Want To," those two particular songs that was her biggest songs on that album ['Secrets'] and that's for the most part how a lot of that works back then you know.  They know, they know your work from whatever you've done for anyone else; and they reach out and you know then pull you in that way.
Story_ID: 646569
Speaker 1: And then how, well I wanna ask how it was to work with Michael Jackson.  I'd like to sort of know that you know or his camp.  Because you know when I saw his you know the docu- the movie ['Michael Jackson's This Is It'] that was done in light of you know his death, I was sort of struck by I mean he was a real musician musician.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah the man he knows his instrument you know what I mean and that's that's the thing about all of them and people like that.  I mean Diana Ross knows her instrument you know and when you, when they turn over their product to you because basically they, they turned over their masters to me and it was like, "Here do your thing" so to speak, and you know you're going through these masters, these twenty-four track masters you know sometimes it can be a dozen of them, two inch tapes that you have to go through to put together one vocal performance because you know they like you know certain inflection on this particular track on this particular reel you know and you have to kind of sort it's like a puzzle putting the whole puzzle together.  Taking bits and pieces from each one to make one solid killer performance you know which is what--why it always sounds like they went back in it and sang it all over again you know what I mean because you're dissecting and you're pulling all these other different parts and putting them together to make it a whole new performance.  It would be easier if they came in and sang it back over or so you would think but actually a lot of them can't you know reproduce that sound you know.  They sang it the first time and that's it.  They're older now and their voice is gonna settle different so they don't even sound the same singing.  You know we know the different approach to it, won't be the same, you know, especially and you know because you know in the remix process we're completely rewriting the music as well you know so they might be inspired to sing it differently, sometimes they might be afraid to sing it differently, it's a lot of different things that you're up against.
Speaker 1: So when you're talking about the remixing process and you're saying you're rewriting music as well, are you bringing in other, other instruments--okay I'm just trying to understand like--
Speaker 2: What it is, is that we're not just working with with the original tracks that come alone with it.  The--usually the only original track that's being worked with is the vocal performance.  The whole bed of music that they're singing to is completely changed.  You know we completely rewrite it.
Speaker 1: So you're deciding whether you're gonna add a little more bass here or drums here or that?
Speaker 2: Well just the whole, the whole composition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That they're singing to.  Like when I worked on 'Rock with You,' there's a--there was a piano performance that was on there that I thought was really, really sweet and beautiful and when I first heard it my whole train of thought went to that it's like, "Let's make this more like a lullaby when he sings it versus you know the poppy thing that he does.  It's going to give the song a whole 'nother approach when people hear it."  Because it's gonna come across more like it's--he's singing a lullaby to, to this girl versus it being the pop tune that it was.  You know and so I built everything around this particular piano part you know that we replayed you know and then we stole some other orchestra parts that were never used and stuff you know what I mean and certain vocal parts that were never used as well and just to reshaped it made a whole new song out of it which is what they expect you to do in the remix process is to completely turn it around but not so far to the point where people won't recognize it, you know.  Keep- keeping it in the same vein, but just giving it something fresh and new.
Story_ID: 646570
Speaker 1: So with the remix process then that's all part of a new album being released? Is that--I mean I'm just trying to have you take me through this so.  Is that you know if I'm, if I'm an artists or if I'm and A and R [artists and repertoire] person--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you know I'm coming out with a new album, am I getting--hiring someone like you to take these things and sort of put a different version of this song together.  Am I right or wrong?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly, you're looking to reach a different audience as well a wider audience and apart I mean apart from that you know that there's a certain--there are certain remix producers that, that have a style all their own you know and stands alone you know what I mean and when you pass the project on to them and stuff like that they'll take it, they'll take it someplace different because you want it to go someplace different as well but at the same time something that's going to really be happening you know and that's usually why I get called on to do it the way I do it is because they know that one I respect the singer and the performance you know what I mean.  So what basically I'm doing is I'm rebuilding the foundation that they have to stand on and sing to the song you know what I mean.  There's a lot of guys that--bedroom producers that won't because to them their track is more important than the artist who is singing you know.  I always take the singing into consideration first you know because they have to sing to this track and the set track has got to be able to complement them as well.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: What is the creative process though?  Do you sit down with the artist?  Do you sit down with the artist and do you talk to them and say, "What are you trying to do here," or?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You don't.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  They know, they pretty much know what it is that I do and so they'll you know they'll approach me about remixing it because one, they know that I'm going to respect the song to begin with so the song is gonna come out sounding as beautiful as what they imagined it you know to sound like originally or better you know.  They know that I'm going to respect, you know, their vocal parts and stuff like that and make them sound even better than the original performance you know those things you know I mean that's the reason why they'll call somebody like myself you know although Lou Vega [Little Louie Vega] or somebody like that because they know that the approach that we'll take towards the project is gonna be a serious one.  You know and that we're gonna, always gonna have--you know, their, their artistry you know will be front and center.
Story_ID: 646571
Speaker 1: So which of those projects are you most, most proud of that you've worked on, or which?
Speaker 2: I would have to say everything I've done with Michael [Michael Jackson] I'm definitely proud of.  Working with Luther [Luther Vandross] I mean we grew up across the street from one another in South Bronx [Bronx, New York] so to--
Speaker 1: I don't remember that coming up before?  Did you talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Luther and I grew up across the street from each other in South Bronx and we used to ride the train together going to school.  He was a couple years older than me so he was and he was going to school at Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  He was going to Music and Art and I was going to Art and Design [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] and we used to ride the train to school together so when he called on me to do 'Power of Love' for him, you know after you know I mean after all the years of growing up living across the street from one another and knowing each other you know and to get that opportunity to actually work with him like that it was great.  It was perfect because he was, he was so professional about it.  He came in the studio without an entourage.  He was all by himself you know and he was a big fan of 'Melrose Place' back then and so you know we sat on the sofa in the back of the studio and we talked about 'Melrose Place' for the longest time and his diamonds, because he used to have these diamond rings that he used to wear, he used to have day time diamonds and nighttime diamonds and he had his daytime diamonds on at night.  We were in the studio when he came in so we sat around and joked about stuff like that and I remember saying to him that you know, "After all these years look at where the both of us end up at on the sofa in the back of Quad's recording studio [Quad Recording Studios, New York, New York]."  You know and I was like, "And I'm actually about to really work on something that's yours."  He was like and you know he was like, "And I never knew that you did this kind of work."
Speaker 1: Right. But you know I--this is what I was just struck with.  Now was Nat Adderley [HistoryMaker Nat Adderley, Jr.] still working with him at that time, or was it?
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: Because he was his you know music producer before--well then he left I think?
Speaker 2: I don't think he was working with him at this particular time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that time, okay that was--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 646572
Speaker 1: No, I can't see how it easily faded (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 1: --because I haven't seen many people that have easily faded either. They're either you know, they're either visual or I mean I'm not saying you can't have it all going on, no I don't--what do you mean, I could see how it easily faded out?
Speaker 2: Well I mean just how it, it, it's just faded into this whole conversation we've had for the past few hours you know.  I guess I've done a lot you know that's made it possible for it to fade.
Speaker 1: But that doesn't mean you would have the ear of someone who could be a producer that's what I'm saying when all is said and done.  But I think you know--
Speaker 2: I think there's, there's a certain discipline you know in art period that crosses all boundaries whether it's creating musical art you know or textural art you know there's a certain discipline that's involved you know.  I've had to learn how to listen to the human voice you know at its, at its best you know what I mean and when you're working with somebody like Luther Vandross you know who knows his instruments you know somebody like Michael Jackson who knows their instrument.  You know the, the job is easy.  They laid it all out for you; you know what I mean? Their voice says it all, you know what I mean, and the only thing you have to do is create the best possible picture around it, musically.
Story_ID: 646573
Speaker 1: So now you--I may be going back.  I was gonna--is there anything you wanna talk about in terms of 'Beyond the Mix' when that was released with Virgin Records [Virgin Records America, Inc.]; and who was, who worked with you on that deal at Virgin?
Speaker 2: Who was the A and R [artists and repertoire] person?
Speaker 1: Who was the A and R person?
Speaker 2: John Brown.
Speaker 1: John Brown okay.
Speaker 2: John Brown.
Speaker 1: So you, so who are the main A and R people around the time you're starting or you know you that you work with because the industry has totally changed now.  I mean and it's not even recognizable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Has it though? It's like how so how do you call it industry, you know it's--?
Speaker 1: I think it's gonna be one you know 'cause it's, it's Universal Music Group and what else?  Sony [Sony Music Entertainment].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think those are the two now.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I mean I just finished redoing 'Hot Stuff' for Donna Summer for Universal.  They've got that retrospective is coming out in October.  I always wanted to work with her you know and I get an opportunity you know after she died so.
Speaker 1: She, she represented disco in, in the way that no one else did.
Speaker 2: Yeah she did.
Speaker 1: But she just died last year, right?
Speaker 2: Last year.
Story_ID: 646574
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I was thinking somewhere in the late '80s [1980s], '86 [1986], '87 [1987] over in the UK [United Kingdom], I think Manchester in particular they start picking up on house music.  Did you have any thoughts about how that happened?
Speaker 2: Do I have any thoughts about how it happened?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  I mean I was there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Because I think the movie 'Pump up the Volume' seems to say at least if you're over in Europe that you went to Europe and house music became very (unclear) but still I guess my question is--
Speaker 2: I know you're gonna edit me yawning out yes?  Please do.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --that's still a Chicago [Illinois] based, U.S. type of music but somehow it got over to Europe, does that trouble you that someone might think it's European or UK--
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't trouble me at all you know.  It can't bother you when you know what the truth is you know.  I mean and there are a lot of people that are bothered and you know in the house community when they hear you know people tell you know stories they came from England you know this, that and the other or it originated somewhere in Europe versus right here in Chicago.  You know and I always said, "Well why do you get so upset over it when you know what the truth is?  You know the truth."  You know you can't get upset by someone else's ignorance especially when you know the truth, doesn't make any sense.  I mean you know in, in Manchester, you know, the club in Manchester was the Hacienda, the house basically and I mean I played there.  I played there for a whole year you know.  I had a residency there for like a whole year.  You know and I played there up until when they closed but I mean it's you know the music that was coming from there was some post punk music like Happy Mondays and stuff like that you know which the stuff that I played you know towards the end of my tenure at the Warehouse [Chicago, Illinois] and at the Power Plant [Chicago, Illinois] and stuff you know but it's you know again all those journalists that followed me back here in 1985 I took them around and introduced them to everybody, showed them where everything was you know what I mean they covered and profiled Chicago and house music at the time in a way that no one else was interested in doing, you know what I mean, and because of that you know there's all that--all those early stories that were done that were profiled and all those different magazines that people use as--
Speaker 1: As reference?
Speaker 2: --as references.  I was gonna say as go tos, yeah as references.  Yeah to feed off from back then you know what I mean and you know all the time people will go back and read some of the stuff and they come and say, "Is it true?  Is it true?" (Scoffs), "Well if I said it back then what would make it not true now?"
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, so.
Story_ID: 646575
Speaker 1: I mean when you're real coming into your own, that's your background but you're real coming into your own when is when you gone into production, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The thing that so this you said Dave, I think it was David Brown [sic.], did he also work with 'Welcome to the Real World' with you when at Virgin [Virgin Records America, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: John Brown?
Speaker 1: John Brown, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So were you at that point in time you know were you looking to do your own production, I mean, you know, to produce your own albums? Is that how those came about?  How did those--did he approach you or you approached him?
Speaker 2: No, what happened was I had been doing a lot of remix work you know through Def Mix [Def Mix Productions] for a number of different artists out of the UK [United Kingdom] and the biggest crossover was the group Inner City they were from Detroit [Michigan].  They were signed to Virgin and they did a cover version of Stephanie Mills 'What Cha' Gonna Do with My Lovin' and they had me produce the remix on it with my partner Dave Morales [David Morales] and when it came out it crossed over.  It crossed them over.  It was their first crossover hit and it was the number one, it was the number one crossover hit for them in the UK and Europe and so yeah, it was a big, big record.  This was just before, this was just before Soul II Soul came along with 'Keep on Moving' ['Keep on Movin'] and it was such a great sound that Virgin offered me a record deal.  Offered me an album deal you know and what happened was John was working at Virgin in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  They offered it to me in the UK.  My manager Judy Weinstein thought it would be best if I signed here at home here in the United States versus signing in the UK.  Which turned out to be a bad situation because right after they signed me in L.A. and stuff, who didn't have a clue as to who I was or what it is I do, Judy just thought it would be a great idea for me to be signed in L.A. because at least we had an ally on the other side which was John Brown because I grew up with John Brown as well.
Speaker 1: In New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  John used to A and R [artists and repertoire] and different promotions work for every major label.  I met John in '72 [1972], '73 [1973].  Anyway what ended up happening was you know I ended up signing in L.A. and it was a big mistake 'cause they didn't know what to do with it.  They didn't know where my audience was or didn't have the presence of mind to ask you know what I mean so it just turns out to be a bad situation.
Speaker 1: Yeah because you don't want to be with a record label and no one has a clue 'cause they're not promoting you, they're not doing anything.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  They're, they're not even throwing your thing against the wall to see if it sticks.  They just sitting there saying, "Okay so what?" And that's literally what they were doing.
Speaker 1: So, so were you living in L.A. or New York at the time?
Speaker 2: I was living in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if you had had to do it over again, you would have signed in the UK?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least, at least they would know who they're dealing with and I mean they would know how to deal with me.
Speaker 1: Well that's sort of interesting though.  Would there have been other people like remixers that would have--I mean I know you won a Grammy Award [Grammy Award for Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical] but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were there other remixers that were actually producing I mean being you know--producing albums I guess that's what I'm saying?  I mean where they were the talent, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Not at the time.
Story_ID: 646576
Speaker 1: So let's take you to 1997 when you won the Grammy Award for remixer of the year [Grammy Award for Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical].
Speaker 2: How about that (laughter), okay?
Speaker 1: Can we talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Or even how the Grammys worked. Do you get a call or?
Speaker 2: No, I was there.  I was at the Grammys that night.  I actually I got, I got pulled in to sit on the board of governors when they were, when they were trying to get the dance category.  We were trying to get the dance category launched and so I sat on the board of governors and we got the category, the dance category plus a bonus and the bonus was a remix category.  So like, "Wow okay well that can work."  So there was a lot of backlash about it and stuff like that you know and you know I'm trying to be diplomatic because I'm sitting on the board of governors and I gotta be careful what I say and who I say it to because that could, you know, that could be the wrong thing and so the night at the Grammys, I mean when the ballots go out to vote for remix of the year, I saw my name on the ballot and I didn't think I was gonna get it.  You know if anyone was gonna get it, David would have gotten it, Morales, 'cause David had a killer year that year as well.  And that's what you were judged on, you were judged on your body of work that particular year and David had, David had a killer body of work that year.  So I thought if anything he was gonna take it.  And so then I ended up getting it and yeah, it blew my mind for sure.  But I think, I think it had a more profound effect on everybody that knows me and knows me personally because I think all my friends and my family felt like they're the ones that won which is, which is what you want I mean.  I think anytime you win you know an accolade like that you know I mean getting the respect from my peers in the music industry that was, that was the best part of it for me.  Because that basically told me that everybody in this industry recognizes who I am and that was enough you know but for family or friends, to say you know, "Frankie [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles] took it." You know that kind of thing you know it's, it's like them saying, "I just won the Grammy." You know what I mean and they all acted just like that too, it was great.
Speaker 1: So that night who were your guests that night?  Because you get--was someone sitting with you, next to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah Judy Weinstein was sitting with me.  She went with me.  David Morales was there because he was nominated as well and who else?  This other friend of mine that I was seeing at the time.  It was just a few of us that went.
Speaker 1: And then your name gets called and you're surprised and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.  It's--I haven't thought about it since it happened.  It's like your whole world speeds up and slows down so quickly.  It's like that depth of field thing where the whole background just goes (makes sound) and snaps back, it was like that.
Speaker 1: So what happens when you win a Grammy Award like that, do other things start coming your way, is that what happened?
Speaker 2: Well you would think that you know it's like you would think that it's like in Hollywood when a person wins the Oscar.  Immediately you know the work starts coming in.  No, what ends up happening is that the industry basically looks and says, "Well his rates just went through the roof." And so basically things will slow up.  You have to, basically looking back on it now, you have to basically force your creativity to come to the surface.  You have to really get creative and remain creative and stay that way and make sure the people look at what you're doing and listen to what you're doing and take it serious.  You know what I mean otherwise you have--businesses will dry up because it--because so many people in the industry you know that would normally call me for remixes and stuff didn't, they just you know they took the attitude, "His rates just went through the roof so we're not gonna be able afford him now. He just got a Grammy."
Speaker 1: So how did you counteract that?  'Cause you know I--
Speaker 2: There's no counteracting it.
Speaker 1: So you just had to keep on working?  'Cause I mean that I'm telling you even on--Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] told a story about you know after his Academy Award the phones weren't ringing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it stops ringing.
Speaker 1: He said it was--they were not ringing.
Speaker 2: Yeah same thing.
Speaker 1: And he was living the lifestyle and went through a lot of money and next thing you know he had less friends and--
Speaker 2: Yeah it stops, yeah, it stops ringing.
Story_ID: 646577
Speaker 1: So, so let's talk about your partnership because really you know when you were saying your partner's Judy [Judy Weinstein] is really, she's been more of a business person with two creatives, is that, is that what the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. She's, she's the one who provided the structure there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's the one that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she's negotiating the deals and everything like that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what do you think has made your partnership sort of work and I would like to--okay what has made your partnership work?
Speaker 2: I think the respect level it starts there.  She's, she's an amazing business woman you know.  She's an amazing woman to begin with but she's an amazing business woman and you know she's always had you know my best interest as well as David's [David Morales].  That's always been her main priority.  You know she's taught me how to work the way I do you know.  She's taught me how to produce music on the level that I do you know.  Her thing is very Zenith [Zenith Electronics LLC], you know, the quality goes in before the name goes on you know that's always been pretty much you know her mantra with us and stuff you know and that's what I've always lived by, you know.  I've always had dreams of doing things in a really big way and on a lush and grand scale you know and so I try to produce my music so it has that sound you know what I mean 'cause if I had to actually do it on a real lush scale and stuff like that where I'm using you know a lot orchestra parts and stuff like that.  I'd be pricing myself out of the ballpark.  It just would have happened.  So I learned a way around it.
Speaker 1: So when you say she taught you what, what things did she say?  How did she teach you? That's what I'm sort of wondering?
Speaker 2: She taught me how to stay focused and to, and to go for the best of everything and make it the best you know.  It's, you know, it's like any culture or any mother that would just tell the child, "Listen you can do this even when you think that you can't.  You can do this.  I know you can do this, you know you can do this."  You know what I mean and you know if there're certain projects that I'm interested in you know and I wanna go after--the first thing she says is, "Go for it.  Go get it you know.  Go get it.  Do it.  Make it happen."
Story_ID: 646578
Speaker 1: So within Def Mix [Def Mix Productions] because you had your fifteenth anniversary in 2003, what, what are you, what is the structure and what projects do you take on; and how much of it is--well let's talk about your fifteenth anniversary because you did a tour right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the twenty-fifth anniversary.
Speaker 1: Oh it's twenty-fifth?
Speaker 2: We did, we did a fifteenth anniversary.  We did a twenty-fifth anniversary tour as well.
Speaker 1: Oh you have okay?
Speaker 2: That was the twenty-fifth anniversary tour was last year, year before last.
Speaker 1: It would have been?
Speaker 2: Last year.
Speaker 1: Okay I thought it would have been this year because two thousand--okay but anyway okay.  So, so when you do these anniversary tours whose idea was it and you know how much planning did it take?
Speaker 2: Well it probably took a lot of planning but it's not my decision, you know, to make it, to do it.  My decision, the only say I have is to get up and go and do it, you know.  And I don't mean that to sound as harsh as it is, it's just that when it comes to the business end of things with Def Mix, you know, I'm not, I'm not behind any of that.  I just make sure that I'm available where I need to be available and I do, you know, I put my best face forward when it comes to everything that we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because so much of that name is attached to me.
Speaker 1: Because right.
Speaker 2: When people, when people say Def Mix, I'm one of the first people they think of.
Speaker 1: Think of that's right.  Okay.  'Cause I know when we were trying to interview you before, you were you may have been on tour then I don't know 'cause it was a couple years ago.
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: We had tried.
Story_ID: 646579
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your induction into the dance hall, music hall of fame [Dance Music Hall of Fame], okay.
Speaker 2: That was fun.  That was fun to be inducted with Nile Rodgers and Chic and who else?  Just a lot of dance giants that was inducted, Two Tons O' Fun [The Weather Girls], Sylvester.  There was a number of different people that you know that are heroes of mine that were also inducted you know.
Story_ID: 646580
Speaker 1: So where are you now in your life?
Speaker 2: Where am I now in my life?  I'm still, I guess some people say that he's still hungry.
Speaker 1: So you're still working?
Speaker 2: I'm still working.  Absolutely.  But I'm working in a capacity that best suits me, you know.  I'm, I'm producing the kind of music that I would want to produce you know.  I'm--I like to think that what I'm doing with the house music that I'm making these days is really bringing it full circle.  It's bringing it into, bringing it to center court if you will.  There's been--it's grown a lot in the past twenty some odd years, thirty years.  House music has grown a lot and to see it grow you know and to help bring it to this day you know is really, really important to me you know.  I don't live, eat, drink and sleep it like a lot of people might think that I do but you know I still try to put the best possible face on it that I can with every production that I do and I'm still doing a lot of production work you know remix work.  I have a, I have a number one song on Billboard right now.  This guy Duke Dumont working with some of everybody you know.
Speaker 1: Like who? Like who?  Some of everybody like?
Speaker 2: Some of everybody.  I'm working with wow (gesture), some of everybody and my own current single that's out right now young lady by the name of Inaya Day who is, you might know who she is, people that really know her personally called her Jiffy.  She has an incredible voice.  We have a song out right now called 'Let's Stay Home,' which is a throwback to the '70s [1970s] concept tune.  Who else?  I just finished this remix with a Donna Summers retrospective of a rare remix 'Hot Stuff' for that project, which turned out really, really well, very proud of that project.  Who else?  I developed this partnership with a friend of mine, Eric Kupper we do this thing called Director's Cut, and we've been producing remixes for the likes of some of everybody you know; and it's doing really, really well so.
Story_ID: 646581
Speaker 1: So when you say you're proud of where, you know house music has come a long way, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well there was, there was a period up until like about I would say a year ago, two years ago maybe there was a period from I would have to say from 1997 up until about two years ago, where most of the music that was coming out that was supposed to be house music, the great majority of it was disposable, disposable music.  There's so much disposable music that's been produced and that's been put out in the marketplace.
Speaker 1: When you talk about disposable, it has no meaning as the lasting value.
Speaker 2: It has no, it has no shelf life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  It, it would have the shelf life of maybe one night maybe one night you know on somebody's dance floor somewhere off in the sticks somewhere.  But for the most part it's just disposable music.  It doesn't really have any validity; you know, it's garbage.
Story_ID: 646582
Speaker 1: And then what made that change then?  What is the two years from 1991--what is, what is--
Speaker 2: I think my--this new concept project that I've been doing Director's Cut has changed a lot of it.
Speaker 1: Because you took the best of things and put it together?
Speaker 2: Well what I did was with Director's Cut we made ourselves available to any and everybody that's trying to get their foot in the door or trying to get their tracks out and you know what I mean.  We're only working with you know for the most part singers you know that are--some that are already established and some that aren't.  You know that really have some special projects that you know that they're trying to get to the marketplace.  But you know we understand, we know that for the most part their industry won't necessarily hear their material or understand their material in its own natural form for the way they--for what they do with it.  So what we do is we take it and we completely reproduce the whole track itself, you know what I mean, and it's completely--it's, it's all remix work but it--we use--we just put a fresh coat of paint on it you know and sign our names to it and stuff like that you know and then you know the minute the industry sees that my name is attached to it you know and my partner Eric [Eric Kupper] and Director's Cut immediately they'll take--they'll stop and listen to it versus saying, "Oh Jiffy [Inaya Day] whatever." You know what I mean.
Speaker 1: But that means you're also finding the talent you wanna work with.  You're--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --okay so that's--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --that's all Director's Cut?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean we done a lot of pro bono work you know when it comes to other people's projects and stuff, you know, there's been no money, you know, exchanged in it because don't nobody have any, you know what I mean, but what is done is that it's helped us to continue to sharpen our skills at what it is that we do you know and we help bring these people's projects into the arena where it needs to be showcased.  You know what I mean, and if they get a deal out of the project you know then you know they remember us on the back end.
Story_ID: 646583
Speaker 1: What about the music industry?  Can you talk about it, and what you think its future is or not is, 'cause it's--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what is gonna happen here in the United States, I swear.  It's just you know it's, it's like an--it's like the crazy folks are running the asylum. I mean people that have no clue as to what it is to what they're doing you know what I mean.  They have their taste in music, there is none?  You know there's no sensibility you know it's--we could go on for hours with this, this particular subject.  It's horrible you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Well record companies don't even--I don't know how much relevance they have any more.
Speaker 2: I don't think they have much relevance at all, you know what I mean?  I'm glad that it's become a every man for himself kind of situation, you know what I mean because it's--the responsibility of everything is left in the artist's hands, you know what I mean, and so you have to package yourself well enough you know and make sure that you're presenting it properly and if it doesn't happen then, "Hey listen you got nobody to blame but yourself." You know what I mean?  Some people would rather, you know, rather have, have it the opposite so that they'd be able to ream somebody else for not getting it right the first time.  You know it's just the way the industry works now.
Speaker 1: So when you say, that's when--it's in the United States, you're talking about the UK [United Kingdom] is maybe the hot place now to do music, is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Well I found that the UK especially, especially most places outside the United States you know the United States is still hooked on hip hop you know.  Hip hop is not, is not the rest of the world.  The rest of the world is hooked on house.  It is.  And I'm not just, you know, gloating about that because it's where, it's where I come from or it's where I work.  It's just that the rest of the world this is where the rest of the world is you know what I mean and the United States is still stuck on hip hop.  Hip hop is still everything here you know what I mean; and it's not working in the rest of the world that way.
Story_ID: 646584
Speaker 1: So how would you define, since you're, you're the godfather or the father of house, how would you define house?  Can you define it for us?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I can.  I don't know I've ever been able to.  It's for me personally, it's, it's everything that's--it's everything that's real about music you know, the kind of music that I live for anyway.  There're great stories being told and there're great songs that are being sang, you know, against great soundtracks, you know, especially if they're produced well.  You know great soundtracks and music and stuff like that.  The spirituality that's involved, you know, all these things that make up for great entertainment, you know, to me that's what house music is.  You know, there's gospel side of things, there's the soulful side of it all you know the jazzy side of it, you know.  There's, there's so much sustenance, so much that you can sink your teeth in, you know what I mean? Like I was saying before, you know all that disposable music that came along you know for the past twelve years or whatever the case was so much of it, the reason why it's disposable is because there's nothing there for you to sink your teeth into, you know what I mean?  How many--I mean there are no songs that you find yourself singing you know and, and that's what I'm trying to do now is trying to bring that back into the main you know into the main arena is, you know songs that are memorable, you know, that you find bouncing around in your head all week because you know, you heard it on Saturday night and it stuck with you, you know, until you can find it and you find yourself singing it and so, you know what I mean.  That's gone away for so long, you know what I mean, and that's not good.  I don't think that's good at all.
Speaker 1: That's right. No in fact I was at a wedding and all of you know the kids they don't have--I mean not the kids but that generation with rap, they can't play rap music at a wedding--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --so there's no music in it.  So they're playing older tunes.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so much older stuff is being sampled to make new stuff.
Story_ID: 646585
Speaker 1: You know your journey is, is somewhat amazing.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: I think so.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the thing is you know you talk about--first of all I wanna go back to a child who lived in his head and you know and you spoke so potently about that that it was--it caused, 'cause you were--you would always talk about seeing things you know and envisioning things in a lot of respects--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so that's why I think I was surprised about the auditory part you know sort of being there because everything had been so visual.
Speaker 2: You know thank you for this day and being able to be here to do this.  Because it, it's helped me out a lot, a lot more than you guys can know.  You know, I spend a lot, you know when I'm home, I spend a lot of time alone and spending a lot of time alone, I'm caught up in, you know I'm caught up in all of this that we're talking about today, you know.  You know it's, you know it's constantly streaming through my conscious, you know, twenty-four hours a day and stuff like that and I can't talk to family members about it because I get that look from them like you know, "Do we have to really talk about this.  I don't wanna talk about it."  That kind of thing, you know what I mean, so I'm left, I'm left on my own, you know what I mean, and there are not very many friends I have that I can really talk with about it and stuff like that before they think I'm about, you know, I'm about to go somewhere with it, you know, which is some place that they might not wanna go to.  So this is, this is very freeing.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Yeah I know a lot of times we find that you know there are a lot of tears in our interviews or people haven't had a chance to sit down and sort of talk through things, but you know we're all an amalgam of sort of shared experiences and frankly as I was telling everyone, you know, here that what I've come to learn is that the early part of a person's life is such an important part of their relationship with the rest of their life in the world.  I mean--
Speaker 2: I never thought about it.  You know, I--believe me a lot of what we talked about today, I mean of course you know it's like I said you know it streams through my consciousness and everything but there's sometimes when I sit at home and it can be a fleeting thought and then it'll sting, it'll sting to the point where it makes me cry right on the spot and you know I find myself doing that you know when I'm in the house alone by myself, you know, and I'll tell Judy [Judy Weinstein] about it or I'll tell Frederick [Frederick Dunson] about it and stuff like that, you know, and usually their response is, "Oh, hm." You know what I mean and I know that they don't quite get it.
Speaker 1: Well they didn't live that world so that's the thing.
Speaker 2: No, no that I understand, you know what I mean, but it's just, you know, sometimes it, you know you have to share it with someone, you know Freddy being my best friend and stuff, you know, and Judy as well, you know I try to share it with them and you know, Judy's been pushing me to try and write this book and I wanna write the book but I feel like I'm still living it so it's kind of difficult to write it now. (Cough) Frederick thinks the same thing that I should be writing it.  But you know, I get, you know, I get caught up in moments sometimes you know.
Speaker 1: But you might find even--'cause sometimes writing can be daunting and it just depends but you do have a powerful story.  I think that it could be helpful to a lot of the people you know in that way because I do believe that, so maybe if you could get to the point of talking about it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 646586
Speaker 1: I can't hear and see at the same time.
Speaker 2: Well see I don't, I don't know thi- I don't know any different.
Speaker 1: You--see?
Speaker 2: That's the whole thing.  I, I don't know, I, I don't know my life any different you know.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that, you don't know?
Speaker 2: Well I mean it's--everything has always, you know, my life has always been this way you know even as a kid you know the music and the, and the art you know.  They're one in the same, you know, they're like peanut butter and jelly, you know, they go together.
Speaker 1: To be talented though in both.  So what do you do on the visual side?  You said you still draw.  That's right, you said you still draw.  That's right you did say that earlier.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: You still draw.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What are you drawing now though?
Speaker 2: You know nothing in particular you know.  I can be sitting and I can just, I can draw my hand or sketch my hand or sketch something that's, you know, something that's still life or whatever the case is.  Depending on, yeah, depending on the moment where I'm at.
Speaker 1: So talk to me about a little bit about music and the power of music?  Can you do that for me?
Speaker 2: Sure.  One of the great things about music is how it is--I think how it evokes emotions.  There are some songs that I have worked on, some stuff that I produced where there are certain notes that the chords can hit, you know, or the strings can hit that that would immediately evoke a tear you know.  I think any, you know anything, especially music, when it can, when it can grab you where you live you know and squeeze a tear out of you and stuff to me that's power.  You know one piece of music that's, that's my favorite to listen to is 'Nessun Dorma' by Pavarotti [Luciano Pavarotti] when he hits that note and he hits that high note at the end immediately it sends a chill up my spine; and, and it's like somebody with a hammer hits me in the back of the head and I'd start crying just because the tone of his voice when he sings it.
Story_ID: 646587
Speaker 1: So with the mix, you know, 'cause that--I wanna go back to mixing of music because you know there are a lot of times if you are the consumer and you're on that dance floor and you know a lot of times people would say, "The music just made me crazy." You know I mean not that it made you crazy but it was--
Speaker 2: I know, I know what it means.
Speaker 1: --you know it would almost like, you know, one song would lead into the other and it's better and before you know people are dancing--
Speaker 2: Get caught up in it.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but are there, when you're mixing, are you mixing for yourself or are you mixing and you know, okay if I put this with this, you know, or if I put this sound with this sound, you know, it's gonna evoke, I know that this is gonna evoke a certain response (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Response, sure.  Sometimes.  I usually--normally when I'm playing, I put myself in the same place as everyone else on the dance floor.  I immediately project myself to the center of the dance floor and I make sure that while I'm playing that my head is in the same place as everybody else's on the dance floor or everybody else on the dance floor.  Their head should be at which is basically on the music and what it's doing you know.  I have to put myself in the same place to have a better understanding of what it is that I'm doing, I mean to make sure that it flows properly and the right songs are following each other, you know, and that they're in time and they're on beat when they do so that it doesn't throw the dancer off, you know, so I have to basically project myself to the same place on the dance floor.
Speaker 1: And you're doing that visually then?  You're doing that--
Speaker 2: I'm doing that mentally.  I'm doing it mentally.
Speaker 1: You're doing it vis- I mean mentally, you're doing it mentally but with a visual image on that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the dance floor.  And then, but then what are some tried and true methods and what are some like no nos besides, you know, making sure that the beat is, you know, not, you know, it's not abrupt.  Like if you make an abrupt, you know, people are like, you know, wait--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but, you know, if it keeps moving then people can dance literally for hours.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Well I mean you hit it right there on the head, you know, providing that, you know, you're staying connected to--rhythmically to what's going on and you keeping them locked together such like that when you change it from one to the next, you know it's essential.  What's, what's even more paramount over that is making sure you're playing the right tune at the right time, you know, because you could have the whole room together on one song and then you can switch to something else, you know that doesn't necessarily fit but you forced them to fit, you know what I mean? You lose the whole room.  The whole room will stop dancing and everybody will go their own separate ways.
Story_ID: 646588
Speaker 1: So I only have, I have a few more questions and that is--
Speaker 2: Only a few.
Speaker 1: --just a few.
Speaker 2: Just a few.
Speaker 1: Seriously it is I'm down, I'm going down.  I wanna--I'm trying to think how I--well okay yeah, okay.  I'd like to take you, I hate to do this but I wanna take you back to--'cause you know when you were talking about your sister hanging you outside the--
Speaker 2: Window.
Speaker 1: --the window, you know I, I mean the little boy that was there because you were like, you know, what are you nine, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve?
Speaker 2: I'm like eleven, twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve.  So the little boy that was there and the man that I see in front of me today, when you think of that journey, what do you think and what even brought you along the way?
Speaker 2: When I think about it, it, it--I'm always surprised that I survived it.  It could, it could have been really ugly.  It could have been really ugly had I, had I actually fell out of that window.  The world would be a different place you know.  But you know I used to think about her in the process of it all you know.  I used to think, wow, what did I do to make you so crazy that you know you'd wanna kill, you wanna kill me? You know.  You know when, when people are pushed to the point of that they're right along the edge of crazy and, and insanity you know and if you're the person that's responsible for it you know, it's like, what did I do? You know?  'Cause I swear to this day I can't remember what it was, you know.  She just came home one day in one of those moods and she needed a punching bag and I guess I was the first available bag to be punched you know but kids never you know, kids never understand what stuff like that is.  That's the stuff that makes kids crazy.
Story_ID: 646589
Speaker 1: So what do people say about you?  I mean how do, how do they describe you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: How do they describe you?  How do your friends describe you?  What would they say is uniquely [HistoryMaker] Frankie Knuckles?
Speaker 2: Generosity.  (Pause) I mean they know my music when they hear it, you know that's the thing I'm most proud of is that I created a sound of my own that people recognize the minute they hear it.  Some people live through their lives, some musicians, some artists go through their whole life trying to, trying to find out and never do.
Speaker 1: So what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I think I want to be remembered for my music more than anything because I think when people listen to it they can learn a lot more about me just by listening to it.  You know I don't mean just the songs that I've written and produced, I just say the overall sound period, you know when they listen to the sound, they'll, they'll definitely have a better understanding of who I am and what I'm about.
Story_ID: 646590
Speaker 1: Frankie [HistoryMaker Frankie Knuckles], if you had anything that you could have done over again in your life, what would you do?  What would that be?
Speaker 2: Probably take better care of myself.
Speaker 1: Club life is hard.
Speaker 2: Night life is hard.  It's very hard on the body, it's hard on life period.  You know, I would have definitely taken better care of myself.  But there's a lot of things that I didn't learn that most kids learned as children growing up.  I had no one there to teach me so, some of it I had to learn the hard way.
Speaker 1: And what do you mean by that though?  I mean you're just talking about diet or what?
Speaker 2: Well I mean diet, some of everything, you know that children are normally taught at home because there's someone there to teach them, simple things, ordinary things.
Speaker 1: And okay. (Pause) I don't have anything else to ask I don't think.  I'm trying to think.  I was--I could go lots of different--well I wanna ask you is there anything else that we haven't covered that you would like to say?
Speaker 2: No, we covered a lot.  Not that I can think of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
