Story_ID: 588294
Speaker 1: Hi, my name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer today. The videographer is Matthew Hickey and the observer is--let's cut so I can get your name properly.
Speaker 2: (EILEEN OSER): Eileen Oser.
Speaker 1: Eileen Oser is an observer today. We are here to interview Miss Alice Key [HistoryMaker Alice Key]. Ma'am, would you please spell your name including your middle name for us and state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Alice Marie Key, A-L-I-C-E, M-A-R-I-E, K-E-Y, like a door key, no S on it.
Speaker 1: Could you please give us your date of birth and your location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March the 18th in 1911 in Henderson, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: And the all-important question is today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: This is October the 31st 2007. It's Admission Day [Nevada Day] for the State of Nevada. We celebrate it because it's Halloween.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently? What is the location that we're at currently?
Speaker 2: I didn't hear that question.
Speaker 1: Our location where we are right now?
Speaker 2: We're at my apartment at 3201 South Mojave Road and the apartment number is 209, Las Vegas, Nevada, 89121.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm retired.
Story_ID: 588295
Speaker 1: Now, I have a few question I'd like to ask you that we call our People magazine type questions. They're just--they're just very easy questions to answer. And I'd like to know, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chitlins.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Used to be green. I don't have a favorite now. You lose--old age is a series of losses (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Let's see, where are my favorite? I don't really know. I like everywhere I go. I like the people and that's what makes the place for me is people.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or a saying that, that you like to go by, an adage that you use?
Speaker 2: Born to serve.
Story_ID: 588296
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to get into some of your family background and we're gonna go a little bit in depth here. Could you please tell me about your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother was a wonderful woman. Everybody that has a baby is not a mother. My mother was a mother.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Louise Beverly [Louise Beverly Key] and then she married my father, Malcolm Key [Malcolm Key, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Henderson, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Henderson, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Yes, but, you know, my grandfather was a white man, Alexander Beverly, and I don't know what happened there, but my mother's brother, Stanley [Stanley Beverly], married into the Alves family, and I didn't know until I was in high school that Grandpa Alves [John Alves] was not my grand--real grandfather. He ran on the road from Chicago [Illinois] to, to Los Angeles [California]. And the train went through Riverside [California] and he fell in love with the street lamps and the orange groves and he said I'm gonna move my family out here. And whatever happened in Kentucky with my grand--my real grandfather that I never knew about, he moved all his family and my family to, to California. And it took him a couple of years, but by 1914, we were all living in Riverside, California.
Speaker 1: We'll go further into that, but let's stop with, with your mother and go back. What do you know about her background growing up? Did she share anything with you?
Speaker 2: My mother was very, very quiet about her background. She was the oldest of four children and she didn't have the same mother as her three siblings, so I don't know who her mother was, but I knew who her father was because he was the father of all four of them.
Speaker 1: Do you know the--her siblings' names?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Her siblings' names? Her siblings?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Her sister's name was LaGulia [LaGulia Beverly Shaw] and her brother's name was Stanley and Starling [Starling Beverly]. Starling was the youngest. Mama was the oldest, of course, then the three others were younger than her. In fact, she practically raised my youngest uncle, Starling, who was killed in a automobile accident on Cajon Pass.
Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very attentive. Anybody that--was a friend of mine was a friend of hers and were welcome to come and have dinner and eat everything. She was a cashier in Los Angeles at the Club Memo [Memo Club] when Central Avenue was where we all hung out. And before she went to work in the morning, she would cook a pot of greens or beans or something or stew and leave the back door open so anybody in show business could come in there and eat if they--if they were hungry and couldn't afford a meal.
Story_ID: 588297
Speaker 1: How about your father? What was his name?
Speaker 2: I didn't know him too well. My father left my mother [Louise Beverly Key]. He was a wonderful man apparently but a lousy father. And I was three years old and she was pregnant with my brother [Malcolm Key, Jr.] when he disappeared, and I didn't meet him until he was--until I was grown.
Speaker 1: Do you know his--what was his name?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Malcolm.
Speaker 1: Malcolm Key [Malcolm Key, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: And is that where he grew up?
Speaker 2: As far as I know.
Speaker 1: How would you describe him from when you met him? You know, how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Well, the first time I met him, I, I was working at Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club in Culver City [California]. I was a chorus girl. And I got a call that he was in the general hospital there. He had been shot and he had asked them to get in touch with me and I went to see him and that's when I first met him. Then, I got to know him. I used to visit him and we became--he was a chef and he was a chef at Murray's Dude Ranch [Murray's Ranch] up in Victorville [California], right out--Apple Valley [California], right out of Victorville. And when I adopted my daughter [Alice McAbee], I took her up there to meet him. I used to go visit him.
Speaker 1: And did he share any stories with you about his childhood or the reasons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --the reason? Did he give--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --any other information?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Story_ID: 588298
Speaker 1: Now, we kind of alluded to your grandparents. How far back can you go as far as your ancestry? Can you go back--can you go back as far as your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, I always considered Grandpa and Grandma Alves as my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I learned my values from them. I learned that we were born to serve. I hated the discrimination and segregation that was--accorded black people so much. I wanted to kill. And grandpa was the one that told me that the ballot was the way to go, not bullets. And as soon as I was old enough, I registered people to vote and became a registrar, of course, and I registered everybody in my family from Republicans, naturally, they were Republicans because [President] Abraham Lincoln was, too Democratic because I thought the Democrat Party was the vehicle that did the most for us, that we got the furthest with, not that I have any illusions about the Democratic Party, but it was the best we had.
Speaker 1: Could you give us a little more insight including their names again of your [maternal foster] grandparents, your, your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: John Alves and Mary Alves, A-L-V-E-S.
Speaker 1: Did they share any stories about their childhood with you or life?
Speaker 2: No. Grandma Alves' mother was still living, but I was in high school [Riverside Polytechnic High School, Riverside, California] before I found out that she had been a slave, and by that time, she was mute. She must've had many a story to tell. But I used to go from high school to--come from high school to Aunt Anna's [Anna Alves Beverly] house and read the Bible to her.
Speaker 1: Her name was Anna?
Speaker 2: No, Aunt Anna was married to my Uncle Stanley [Stanley Beverly].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mama's [Louise Beverly Key] brother.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so you would read the Bible to her?
Speaker 2: Patsy was her name, Patsy Butler [ph.].
Speaker 1: Patsy Butler.
Story_ID: 588299
Speaker 1: Now, what was your earliest memory that you can go back to growing up, that you have growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, Riverside [California] was like other places, I guess other, other cities. Schooling was separated by streets. We lived on 10th Street and one side of 10th Street went to Irving School [Abraham Lincoln High School, Riverside, California], which was where most of the people who lived in what was called the ghetto lived, but we lived on the opposite side of the street, so I went to Longfellow [Longfellow Elementary School, Riverside, California]. And I remember going to Longfellow. I remember Excelsior's Restaurant [ph.] where we used to eat lunch. We had mashed potatoes and chocolate pudding for dinner. And I think it was--they gave us ten cents or fifteen cents every morning to eat, eat lunch and we had plenty, and it was excellent. And when I go to Riverside, which I do often 'cause a lot of my family is still there, I'm going there for Thanksgiving, I go by there to--where I went to high school [Riverside Polytechnic High School, Riverside, California] and I graduated in 1928, I was just past seventeen years old, it's now a junior college [Riverside City College, Riverside, California]. They have a Polytechnic High School, but it's not the Polytechnic that I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Now, do you recall anything about Henderson at all in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have anything?
Speaker 2: I don't remember it 'cause I was so young when we moved.
Speaker 1: Do you know if your family was involved in, in tobacco? You know, it's known for tobacco around there. Was anybody involved in your family that you know of?
Speaker 2: Well, none of us ever went back because Grandpa Alves [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves] moved the whole family out and there was no one to visit, so we don't know anything about Henderson. And then, of course, my younger brother [Malcolm Key, Jr.] was, was born in Riverside.
Story_ID: 588300
Speaker 1: What was your family life like in Riverside [California] during--in your early years? What were the holidays like, the events? What was life like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, we were a churchgoing family. Grandpa and Grandma Alves [Key's maternal foster grandparents, John Alves and Mary Alves] were deacon and deaconess of, of the Baptist church. And I think they belonged to the Second Baptist Church [Riverside, California], but for some reason, they left--thirteen of them left the Second Baptist Church and founded the Park Avenue Baptist Church [Park Avenue Missionary Baptist Church, Riverside, California] in a storefront. And we bought--we built two churches. We got a beautiful church there now. We don't belong to it anymore 'cause I belong to a church here, but I had, had joined a church in Highland, California, which took us three freeways to get there but only twenty minutes 'cause Highland was just an orange grove when I grew up.
Speaker 1: What was life like, daily life for you all in your family? What, what did--what happened for you--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in those early years?
Speaker 2: --my, my mother [Louise Beverly Key] worked for a living. She was a, a, a maid, cleaned up houses and something and so I learned to cook very early. I had to have dinner ready for her. I guess I started cooking at eleven or twelve years old. I'm a good cook. I was until I got too old and just decided I ain't gonna cook anymore (laughter). That's why I'm going to California for Thanksgivings 'cause my family here expects me to have Thanksgiving dinner.
Speaker 1: Now, you have siblings. Could, could you--could you give us the names of your siblings and their birth order including yourself from the oldest to the youngest, your siblings?
Speaker 2: I only had one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Malcolm [Malcolm Key, Jr.], he was younger than, than I. He died in--I just got his death certificate because the insurance company--one of the insurance companies that my mother had, had ensured us has his name on it and I didn't know it. I've been paying premiums on him and he died in '84 [1984], I think, and I've been paying premiums on him ever since. They were supposed to send me some forms and they didn't, so when I go to California I'm going to Los--Golden State Life Insurance Company [Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company].
Story_ID: 588301
Speaker 1: What street did you live on in Riverside [California]? What street was your first street?
Speaker 2: 10th Street.
Speaker 1: And can you describe that block, like your block you lived on on 10th Street?
Speaker 2: Well, it was segregated. It was all-black, some Mexicans. The Mexicans outnumbered us, the, the blacks until after World War II [WWII] when blacks--there were three--March Air Force Base [March Air Reserve Base, Riverside, California] was already there, but they set up a [U.S.] Army camp and a separation camp. And then soldiers came there and they liked the weather and they liked the town and--although they had to work somewhere else because Riverside had no factories or no, nothing, but they worked in San Bernardino [California] and they lived there after World War II. But, we were outnumbered by Mexicans as long as I can remember.
Speaker 1: Do you have any special neighbors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mexican Americans and some of them were just Mexicans.
Speaker 1: Do you have any, any neighbors on that street that you can recall in particular? Any, any neighbors or friends that you can--on your street that you can recall the names of the neighbors or friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a Mexican American family named the Lathams [ph.] that lived two doors from my grandpa [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves] and we, we had a--kind of a complex. We all lived across the street, catty-corner across the street from each other. We, we were close family and still are.
Story_ID: 588302
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and the sounds and the smells of Riverside [California]? What--can you recall anything in particular about the climate or anything in general that, that rings a bell, strikes a chord with you?
Speaker 2: Let me tell you something. I went down to Riverside from--I left here and went to Riverside because the California brokers association [California Association of Real Estate Brokers], and you, you probably remember this, they wanted to get a law--in fact, they--it was successful in getting a law enacted that removed all civil rights legislation and I felt that was a--and I had bought a home for my mother [Louise Beverly Key] in Riverside. So, I went down there to protest it and then in Riverside, we didn't have a ward system, so I worked very hard to get it changed back to a ward system. Then, I registered everybody I could to vote. We tried to find someone to run for the city council who was independent of the white man, and we couldn't find a black man so we chose a Mexican who had--was a mechanic and had his own business, not the one we wanted. We wanted Carlos [ph.], but we--I got John Sotelo to, to run. And he wasn't the brightest person in the world, but at least--we told him we'd meet with him every night before the city council met and go over the agenda with him and tell him how to vote. First thing he did when he got elected was vote with the white man.
Story_ID: 588303
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any other memories growing up, of what it was like growing up in Riverside [California] for you? Going to school every day, do you have any memories that--you know, you mentioned the, the, the segregation and how you didn't like it.
Speaker 2: Well, the school wasn't segregated and there were very few schools. There's--there was only one high school and just several elementary schools. The schools--and I was a good student, so I was always kind of a teacher's pet. But, the students that I worked with were prejudice. I remember being on a--something on a playground one day and being called a nigger. That's why I hated white people so. But I got so that I learned that everybody isn't prejudice like my friend.
Speaker 1: So, what elementary school did you go to in Riverside (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Longfellow [Longfellow Elementary School, Riverside, California].
Speaker 1: Longfellow Elementary. And were there any teachers there that influenced you, any teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. We had a, a--I think her name was Magroilty [ph.] in elementary school that I was very impressed with. She used to--she taught me to enjoy reading and literature. And then in high school [Riverside Polytechnic High School, Riverside, California], I had a teacher whose name I can't remember, but her name--her, her--she taught history and she made it very, very interesting. I was not good at math.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you, you mentioned that you were a, a, a good student. You said you were teacher's pet. Could you tell us more about that? You were a teacher's pet?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to school, you didn't have but to have, have but one year of math to graduate and everybody told me that algebra would be the best thing for me to take because it was the easiest. In September, I learned that X equals unknown quantity in algebra and that's exactly what I knew in June.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I didn't know anything else.  We had--I had a wonderful math teacher. He said, "You know, you're on the dean's list and I hate to be--to be the one that causes you to be off, but you are not a mathematician (laughter) and you never will be." But, I enjoyed school and I used to go home and my grandpa, Grandpa Alves [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves], would ask me, what did I learn today and I'd tell him. He said, "You don't believe that, do you?" You know, like steam. He said, "You know, how would a white person know anything about steam? It was one of us who told him, master, look at that pot, it's boiling. That's steam, that's power, so you could build a steam boat or anything with that." And I'd go argue with the teachers about what they were teaching in school.
Speaker 1: So, you were challenging the curriculum at that point. You were challenging it at a young age.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you were a good student, but what kind of--what kind of child were you? Were, were you well-mannered? Were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You know, I came up--you know the book that Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] wrote about it, 'It Takes a Village.' Anybody could chastise you on the street if they caught you doing wrong, not doing man--mannerly. If they didn't chastise you, they'd call your parent and tell you what you did wrong. We were all well-behaved.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were young, a young child--
Speaker 2: We went to church every night of the week except Saturday and all day on Sunday. All our activities were church oriented. The church did a lot for us. They took us to sites to--where you--to Lake Arrowhead [California], to Big Bear [Big Bear Lake, California], to Waterman's Canyon [sic. Waterman Canyon], to Los--we used to go to Los Angeles [California] all the time from Riverside.
Speaker 1: So, with your schooling and your church experience, did you have any other dreams or aspirations as a young child?
Speaker 2: No. Things just happened.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: They had a separate junior high school, girls junior high and boys junior high. That is no longer true, but at that time, I went to the girls junior high.
Speaker 1: And did you have any special friends there that you can recall at the girls junior high?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: And what year would that have been when you went to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, if I graduated from high school in '28 [1928], it must've been in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: In the '20s [1920s], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 588304
Speaker 1: Now, as a young person, Miss Key [HistoryMaker Alice Key], what would you say influenced you the most as a young--as a young child?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was in the second grade, I had a severe burn that was--I was scalded with hot water and the doctors, they don't have--they didn't have all the things they have for burns now, and the doctors were at a loss as to how to get me well. And we had--Park Avenue Baptist Church [Park Avenue Missionary Baptist Church, Riverside, California] had been inaugurated then and we shared a pastor with the church in Los Angeles [California], Reverend William--W.H. Rozier was his name. Grandma [Key's maternal foster grandmother, Mary Alves] called him. He, he came down to Riverside [California] and he said I want no one in this room except those who believe that God can heal and only God, not the doctors. So, he put my mother [Louise Beverly Key] out. He put everybody out of my room but my grandmother who said for him. He said--he asked me, he said, "Do you believe that God can heal you?" And I said yes. He said, "Well, I know your grandmother does." And he prayed for me and he said--when he got through praying, he said, "If it's raining tomorrow I want you to stay in bed. Tomorrow is Sunday. If it's not raining, go to Sunday school. And whether it's raining or not, go to school Monday. You're all right." And exact--that's exactly what happened. It rained Sunday, I did not go to Sunday school, but I went to school on Monday. And my burn is just like it is today. It's--it was just healed up.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that burn occur? Was it a cooking--
Speaker 2: I scalded myself with hot water. My cousin who is my mother's sister's daughter was two--born two days before me. We grew up together like sisters.
Speaker 1: Her name is what now?
Speaker 2: She and I, we put on a tea kettle of hot--of water to boil to wash the dishes, then we played a game of jacks. And when the water got hot, I went to pick it off the stove and hit the end of the stove and it burnt me up. It burnt my breast and my left arm.
Speaker 1: What, what was your cousin's name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Your cousin's name?
Speaker 2: Viola [Viola Gibson], Viola. And she--LaGulia [LaGulia Beverly Shaw], her mother, married an Alves, too. He was no relation to the Alves but his name was Alves.
Speaker 1: So, that, that burn experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she married a Joseph Gibson.
Speaker 1: That burn experience influenced you through about healing and the--and the faith, and so it really helped you establish your--
Speaker 2: Absolutely. I still believe in it.
Story_ID: 588305
Speaker 1: Now, your high school, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Polytechnic.
Speaker 1: Polytechnic High School [Riverside Polytechnic High School].
Speaker 2: It was the only high school in Riverside [California]. My mother [Louise Beverly Key] had gone--left Riverside to go to Los Angeles [California] to become a cashier and I wouldn't go or my brother [Malcolm Key, Jr.] because we didn't want to lose our schooling or our schoolmates, and I was to graduate the following June, so I waited until I graduated. And that day--we graduated in the afternoon and I was in Los Angeles by six o'clock. That's when I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and became a, a usher at the Lincoln Theater [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your, your friends and your teachers who influenced you at Polytechnic?
Speaker 2: Well, there were only four of us. When I say us, I mean blacks going to high school when I went, at least in my class. One of the Strickling [ph.] girls, Audrey [ph.], she was now gone, and a young boy named Aaron [ph.], what was his last--I don't know. I don't know that I was particularly close to anybody but my family.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any teachers there? You mentioned one teacher earlier, but any more teachers you can think of who influenced you? Was there anybody else?
Speaker 2: The history teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, aside from your studies and church, how else did you spend your time during your high school years?
Speaker 2: Reading.
Speaker 1: Reading?
Speaker 2: My Uncle Starling [Starling Beverly] once gave--well, mom--mama [Louise Beverly Key] used to turn the light on me because I read so late and my Uncle Starling, her broth- her younger brother gave me a flashlight. He said, let her turn the light out and just use the flashlight and read when--as long as you want to read. He was proud of my passion for reading.
Speaker 1: Now, at this point, you're in high school. We're, we're getting up to--we're, let's say 1926, '27 [1927], were you thinking about what you wanted to be at this time in your life? Did you have any--
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have much option because like in high school when your counselor always wanted you to take domestic science and I said, well, I don't like sewing and I know how to cook already (laughter). But, they didn't--they did not tell you anything about scholarships and they--later, I learned that there were scholarships just for poor black children, but we didn't know it then because nobody told us. And they didn't train us for college. I just decided on my own that I--that education was the key and I wanted to go to UCLA.
Speaker 1: So, what were you doing to make preparation for that yourself? What did you do?
Speaker 2: I was just a good student. I had no trouble getting in UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from, from high school in 19--
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight [1928].
Speaker 1: And how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was seventeen in March. I graduated in--first week in June.
Story_ID: 588306
Speaker 1: Now, when you decided to go to U--you decided to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], did you know what you were going to major in at that point?
Speaker 2: Journalism.
Speaker 1: So you already knew.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what sparked that, that idea of journalism, why journalism (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was always talented for writing. I could write.
Speaker 1: So the reading and the writing kind of came together. And tell us about your, your experiences at UCLA.
Speaker 2: Well, I--the--for the first time, I formed some friendship, Mae Turner who was a Turner, then she married a couple of times. She's--died. I went--I left here and went to her funeral in Los Angeles [California]. She died a couple of years ago. She became a friend, but I was walking--my mother [Louise Beverly Key] had left the club [Memo Club, Los Angeles, California] where she was a cashier and gone to work for Curtis Mosby who operated the Club Alabam [Los Angeles, California] on Central Avenue. He had a restaurant and she managed the restaurant for him. So, I had left school one day and gone to see my mother and the producer of the Cotton Club [Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club, Culver City, California], I had red hair, and he and his partner, Aurora Greeley, saw me and they stopped--tried to stop me but I wouldn't stop, I went on into the restaurant to see mama, and he parked the car and they came in and they tried to talk me into coming to show business. I had never even thought about going into show business, couldn't dance and never had a dancing lesson. She said I'll teach you enough dancing at home. And there was a girl who had--from Kansas City [Missouri] who was working at the Cotton Club, same age as me, and mama had kind of adopted her because she could not believe this girl was on her own living in California with no parents and working in the Cotton Club as a chorus girl. So, she was in there eating her breakfast, although it was one or two o'clock in the afternoon, and she helped them try to talk my mama into letting me--I was intrigued, the idea that they wanted me in show business, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you recall her name?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: The young lady?
Speaker 2: Della, Della, Della Newsom, her name was then. She married a Miles [Marshall Miles]--what was his first name? He became Joe Louis' manager after Roxborough [John W. Roxborough] went to prison. He was from Buffalo [New York]. But she, she really was the one that made me enthusiastic. We--I went on their side and we tried to talk my mother--she was shocked. Mama called grandpa [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves], then she called dad [Malcolm Key, Sr.] and I called my grandpa in Riverside [California], and he said, if she wants to go in show business, let her go, you know. Here's from a deacon in the church. So, that's when I went to--I, I left UCLA and became a chorus girl. I think I'm a chorus girl at heart.
Story_ID: 588307
Speaker 1: So, Miss Key [HistoryMaker Alice Key], now you're in college at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and you're also being somewhat recruited into the show business world at the same time. How did this affect your studies and your school experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, no I didn't--I went--when I went into show business, I quit going to U--UCLA. We, we changed shows every three weeks, so, you know, we were rehearsing for the next show when we--while we were doing our show.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you actually stay at UCLA would you say?
Speaker 2: Oh, about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now we're in--we've moved through--now we're into--I would say, I guess we're in the '30s [1930s] now, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first president I voted for was President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], FDR.
Speaker 1: And you're--and you're moving through now, so you're in your--how old? Would you say you're in your twenties now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was about nineteen to twenty, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your first show business job, could you tell us about that please, the first job that you had in show business?
Speaker 2: At Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club in Culver City [California]. It's on Washington--it was Washington Boulevard across the street and near MGM Studio [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios; Sony Pictures Studios, Culver City, California]. It's--what is it now? It's been a couple of things. It's no longer a nightclub. Sometimes when I go to the beach, I go out Washington Boulevard just to see where I went in show business. Everything was still segregated then. We could work, but you couldn't come in.
Speaker 1: So, so what was your first job doing? You say as a chorus girl, dancer, what, what exactly did you do? What was your part of the show?
Speaker 2: Whatever the producer directed us to do as a chorus girl. You know, I worked at a--in a nightclub and all the, the movie stars and movie producers and people came to see the show and, and we got a lot of motion picture work 'cause sometimes they'd get drunk and say I think I'll put a nightclub in (laughter)--in my picture and you girls get a job. We'd go and sleep--they'd put cots on the--on the set and we'd sleep until they called us to rehearse or to shoot the picture.
Speaker 1: So, in those days, a nightclub performance was more of a actual show. It wasn't just a band or a singer.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was a show--whole show, production show.
Speaker 1: And, and it was well rehearsed. Tell us more about the experience, the backstage and what--how a show was put together and what exactly--
Speaker 2: Well, what we, we usually did was about three numbers, the chorus girls. We did a opening number, a middle number, and a finale. Then, the entertainers would entertain in between those shows. But--where's the letter I wrote for (unclear) about chorus girls? I have a friend whose picture is in, in the other room who was a show girl and she told me one day a few years ago that she was gonna--that everybody knew what Josephine Baker and they knew about Lena Horne, but they didn't know the chorus girls who achieved something or, or performed, so after they left the business, so she was gonna write a book about chorus girls. And I said there's just one thing wrong with that. And she said, what, what is it? And I said, you can't write so how can you write a book? So, it was my suggestion that she do a documentary, that she write to all the girls that she knew and those she didn't know that she had heard of and ask them to send a picture and tell them what she was doing and then do a documentary, and I said I'll write the foreword for you. And I called her the other day 'cause I was looking for this stuff for you and I, I ran across a letter that I wrote for her, too, the chorus girls and the foreword that I wrote. So, the--she, she said--I think this tells, "Although it has gone through many transitions--transitions, dance in the 1990s is as big or bigger than ever. As a former hoofer myself, I am often asked about my life as a chorus girl followed by the inevitable whatever became of question about ladies with whom I danced. To address these intriguing queries including that--," I'm reading without my glasses--, "of who and what is a chorus girl, I am in the process of compiling information for a pictorial documentary to be published in the near future. Not only do I hope to present the who and where and now girls with whom I shared the stage but of those who danced before and after my golden era. Our history as chorus girls is a meaningful, vibrant, and proud legacy which should be told. The world knows of the rise of chorus ranks, the international fame and stardom of Josephine Baker, Lena Horne, and Juanita Moore. Few know of the accomplishments of many former chorus girls whose successful careers and contributions to the communities have been not only significant but influential in many cases. I can't answer these questions alone. I need the combination of your memories and photos which will be--which will be returned to make the project a reality. The book will be a tribute to our spontaneity, flexibility, endurance, hardships undergone, and joyful experiences as women in entertainment when the world was friendly. I urge you ladies of the ensemble to please make a contribution to what I believe will be an exciting venture for all participants. So, please start gathering your photographs now and let me hear from you at your earliest convenience."
Story_ID: 588308
Speaker 1: Now, you were a chorus girl but also you were a writer at this time. So, here you are with two kind of careers. You (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well while I was a chorus girl, I started--the biggest thing that happened to me was the advent of, of Leon Washington [Leon H. Washington, Jr.], when he came from Kansas City [Missouri] to Los Angeles [California]. I was at the Cotton Club and he started going with one of the girls and we became friends. He started the Los Angeles Sentinel newspaper. And he was a strong believer in fighting discrimination against blacks. His slogan was don't spend where you can't work. Because we had people who had businesses on Central Avenue who we patron- patronized but who wouldn't hire us to work in their store. And he started this slogan, don't spend where you can't work. So, he enlisted the, the help of the chorus girls to picket these places. So, we'd work all night and picket all day, sleep in between.
Speaker 1: So, now you were--you were at Frank Sebastian's club.
Speaker 2: And I wrote a theatrical column for him.
Speaker 1: You were at Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club in Culver City [California]. Now, what--something happened there regarding the money and the--and, and discrimination. What happened and tell us about that. You got involved in it.
Speaker 2: Oh, AGVA became a reality, the American Guild of Variety Artists. So, they started rating the nightclubs in Los Angeles. And Earl Carroll and whoever else was--and employed white chorus girls and show girls, they rated A, but if they employed colored, black chorus girls, they rated them B and the salary made the difference. Well, we fought that. We--I lead the fight for that. We were doing just as much work, attracted more people, did more for the house that we were working in than anybody else, so why should we be paid less money? We, we, we started arguing with AGVA about this and we got equity.
Speaker 1: What was the average salary for a chorus girl back in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, something like twenty dollars a week.
Speaker 1: And that was a lot of money then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah 'cause you could buy a lot with twenty, but you could do nothing with it--with twenty dollars now. What can you do with twenty? Maybe go to lunch and pay half the check.
Speaker 1: So, back in those days, twenty dollars a week. And was, was that the average--chorus girls and the band, people like that.
Speaker 2: And then we all lived at home with our parents. We didn't live alone. That was the difference that I felt when I went to New York [New York] to work, that the chorus girls there were from other places and they were living alone. That's the first time I lived without my parents.
Speaker 1: Well, prior to going to New York--
Speaker 2: Or parent [Key's mother, Louise Beverly Key].
Speaker 1: Prior to going to New York, what was the life like with, with the other musicians and the--and the relationships between the musicians and chorus girls?
Speaker 2: Well, because of segregation, we hung out together. There was no difference between the principals of the show, the stars. We became friends with everybody. Louis Armstrong was a best friend I had ever in life. He came to the Cotton Club to work. Duke Ellington came to work. I met all those people and worked with them. And we hung out in afterhours spots after work. We slept all day when we finally went to bed when we weren't picketing somebody.
Speaker 1: What were some of (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Because we had restrictive covenants then and we were fighting the fact that you couldn't buy or live in a house except near Central Avenue, McKinley [Avenue] or Wadsworth [Avenue] or somewhere like that. You couldn't live where we lived. We moved to where it--and Western Avenue became the hub instead of Central Avenue and then we--I said we're gonna fight--keep on 'til we move these people into the Pacific Ocean (laughter). But we got the restrictive cov- Stanley Mosk, when he became attorney general of California, he's the one who struck down that law. They did pass that law, the brokers did where--that, that took away all the legal--legalities of discrimination.
Speaker 1: So, so a restrictive covenant was a legal--a legal law at that time where they could actually have these covenants to keep people out.
Speaker 2: Stanley Mosk said it was unconstitutional.
Story_ID: 588309
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Louis Armstrong. People have their opinions from what they've seen on film and things of that nature, but can you tell us more about Louis Armstrong as a person?
Speaker 2: He was an extremely generous person. He was not only very, very talented and probably the greatest trumpet player that ever lived, when he would go to a town, he would write to his best friends in that town who were not in show business necessarily and say get all your bills together. I'll be in town, I'll take care of it. Joe Glaser was his manager and Louis Armstrong was a millionaire when he died. I guess somebody--it must be his wife's [Lucille Wilson Armstrong] family 'cause he didn't have any family after his aunt died, is getting money now because he's doing two commercials on TV for people. He's doing 'When the Saints Go Marching In' and brother--he talks about a brother wanting some things for his child. He's singing that song right now on comm- commercials on TV. I know somebody's getting paid for it. Joe Glaser was a millionaire, but he made Louis Armstrong a millionaire, too.
Speaker 1: What were the conversations like about discrimination? What was his opinion? 'Cause you had--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was mad at Ike Eisen- Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was the president at the time of the thing happening in the schools with Arkansas when Meredith [sic.] tried to go into Arkansas. Louis Arms- I went out to see him. He was working in Los Angeles [California] on, on the strip, on Sunset Boulevard at a place--whatever the name of it was, and I went to see him and I went in the dressing room and he was boiling mad because Ike was out playing golf instead of doing something about those, those kids.
Speaker 1: Little Rock Nine.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did he have any ideas--did he think that his--did he ever tell you about how this gift, his music would change the world? Did he know what--how--did he realize how big--
Speaker 2: He was lionized. People used to bring their children to see him because they wanted to play trumpet or something and he, he, he felt like Paul Robeson felt. You're only as strong as your weakest link. He didn't feel like because he could play the trumpet like he did and travel all over the world like he did as an ambassador of the United States that he was a personality. He felt like if it was you and it'd be happening to you, you know, no. He felt like it should happen to everybody. He was completely aware of who he was and what he was and what he was not so long as every black person wasn't that way.
Speaker 1: So do you think most of the entertainers back in that day were more aware of what was going on and, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were aware.
Speaker 1: --more--and more connected?
Speaker 2: Even though they worked places where they didn't allow blacks. [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte refused to work at the Desert Inn [Las Vegas, Nevada] unless they allowed blacks to come in. Josephine Baker came here from Paris [France] and she worked at the--I think it was the Frontier [Last Frontier Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]. It was before I, I came here to Las Vegas [Nevada] and I've been here since 1954 except for trips back to California whenever there's something to fight.
Story_ID: 588310
Speaker 1: Now, how about Duke Ellington? He was a friend of yours also?
Speaker 2: Duke Ellington was a enigma to me. I worked with him several times but I don't think anybody really knew Duke. He was wrapped up in mus- music was his mistress. That's the name of his book ['Music Is My Mistress,' Duke Ellington]. He was completely wrapped up. I was lucky enough to have been visiting him in his dressing room with other chorus girls in New York [New York] at the Apollo Theater when he and Billy Strayhorn met. A Puerto Rican who was the stage manager called him up and said, "Duke, there's a young man here that insists upon seeing you. He says he's a song writer." And Duke said, "Send him up." And Billy Strayhorn walked in and he handed Duke some music. And Duke looked at it and then he asked us girls, he said, "Would you excuse me and go to the Theresa [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] and have a drink and I'll call them and tell them it's on me. I want to talk to this young man." Duke told me later that he thought he had written what Billy had given him because he wrote just like him, and they never left each other after that day.
Story_ID: 588311
Speaker 1: Now, you're in California. You're in--at the Culver City [California] club, Cotton Club [Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club]. Now, you get a chance to go to New York [New York]. How did this--how was this facilitated? Could you tell us how this happened?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the Cotton Club in New York was closing up--uptown and they were gonna open the Cotton Club downtown at 48th [Street] and Broadway and they wanted new faces for the chorus girls. And Duke Ellington had worked out there and he told them about me, and they sent for me. They told me that I could come to work at the Cotton Club in New York, which I went and took two girls with me, the girl that married Harry Mills of The Mills Brothers, Ruth [Ruth Mills], and Derb, her name was really Gladys Clayton, she married Buck Clayton, the band leader, and the Cotton Club didn't open up (laughter) downtown immediately. They kept running into deferments as some reason for not opening. So, we went to work at what had been Connie's Inn [New York, New York], what's the Ubangi Club [Club Ubangi, New York, New York] now, waiting for the Cotton Club to open. That's how I got to New York. That was 1936. And then we took the Cotton Club show to New--to Europe in '37 [1937]. And they wouldn't let the chorus girls--so, I appealed to Duke Ellington, I said how often do we get to go to Europe, you know? So, Duke interceded for me and they let me go.
Speaker 1: So, you were still a fighter then. So, let's go back--
Speaker 2: Oh, I wasn't gonna miss that opportunity (laughter).
Speaker 1: Let's go back to, to you going to New York for the first time, leaving, leaving this part of the country. What did your mother [Louise Beverly Key] and family think when you said I'm going to New York now?
Speaker 2: Grandpa [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves] again. They met me at the station in Riverside [California]. We stopped in Riverside. They had fried chicken and a whole big lunch for me. Every--everybody in the family from Riverside was at the station. Boy, did the other passengers on that train envy us and partake--ask us could they partake of this--some of the food we had. We had a good time.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about leaving? How did you feel going to this unchartered--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in a very bad relationship with a man who was extremely jealous. I was glad to get away from him in, in Los Angeles [California]. I was happy. Although, I was very unhappy when I got to New York because it was so different and I wasn't with my family. And I used to go to Riverside from Los Angeles all the time. And I was very unhappy for two or three months, it took me to get used to New York.
Speaker 1: Now, did most of the chorus girls back in the day have boyfriends and things that were somewhat jealous because you all were chorus girls? Was, was that part of the problem?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I think jealousy is just a, a bad trait in anybody for any reason. You know, I, I gave him no reason for jealousy.
Speaker 1: I've heard stories of Miles Davis, he stopped his wife, his first wife, Frances [Frances Taylor Davis], from being in 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents] because he said a woman should be--
Speaker 2: No kidding. I didn't know him. He's too young.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But what a great trumpet player.
Speaker 1: The story was that his wife, Frances, was a dancer and got a lead in 'West Side Story' and I guess he told her that, that a man's wife should be at home with his--should be at home and made her not do it. You know, so I guess that, that was--
Speaker 2: I don't think it was the show business that he objected to. He was just jealous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He thought everybody--don't nobody want me but him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so you're--so you're in New York now, Club Ubangi is open, the Cotton Club is not open yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're not particularly happy because it's a--it's a little bit--
Speaker 2: No, I--by that time, I was rehearsing for the Ubangi. By the time I got to work, I was all right with New York. I had accepted it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the major differences?
Speaker 2: Well, the acceptance of my by other people. At first, they kind of resented us. In fact, they wrote--somebody in a newspaper, columnist wrote an article about us coming and taking jobs away from other chorus girls. But after they got to know us, they liked us and, and we were accepted. And Dicky Wells was open then and Dicky became a good friend of mine and Cab Calloway became a good friend of mine, Nyas Berry [Ananias "Nyas" Berry] of the Berry brothers brought him to see our show, and we got to--we, we just got accepted.
Speaker 1: Was there a--
Speaker 2: And New York, it--for what it represents, there's no city like New York just for what it represents. I wouldn't live there. I, I, I lived--loved living in Los Angeles. I wouldn't now. Las Vegas [Nevada] is getting too big for me. I'm a small town girl.
Speaker 1: Miss Key [HistoryMaker Alice Key], was there a, a color line among the entertainers, I mean as far as inter-race, inter-race, dark skin, light skin thing going on back in the day (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Were there dark skinned chorus girls and dark skinned--
Speaker 2: No. At Frank Sebastian's Cotton Club, there was--there weren't any brown-skinned girls. We got the first brown-skinned girl in there because Frank Sebastian's advertised his girls as Creole cuties and he only wanted fair-skinned girls. Well, we changed that. We got Rosalie Lincoln in there who was very pretty and very brown-skinned and dimpled, and she was the first brown-skinned girl to work there.
Speaker 1: So, were, were the owners the ones basically setting this color line kind of thing, was it the owners of the clubs who decided what they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. But I didn't find it anywhere else.
Story_ID: 588312
Speaker 1: So now, in New York [New York] you're there and the Cotton Club [New York, New York] finally opens up. Tell us about that, when it finally opens up.
Speaker 2: Well, the Cotton Club downtown was--it was a great show. It opened up with Cab Calloway and Mae Johnson. Mae Johnson--did you ever see the movie 'Stormy Weather'?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Remember the girl that walked down the stairs singing "I Lost My Sugar in Salt Lake City"? That was Mae. She and Cab were stars of the show. And Ed Sullivan was writing a column and then he later became a--but he was writing a column, a very, very popular columnist about New York and he said it was the best show he'd ever seen. It was a great show.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Cab.
Speaker 2: But Bill Rob--Bill Robinson [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] was in it.
Speaker 1: Bill--Bojangles Robinson?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Well, he was very Bojangles. He gave you lectures and told you how to act and when to come and what--who to go with and--he just got in your business, you know? He was sitting in the dressing room, sat at the dressing room door and see how you looked when you came in and were you all right. But, he was--he was a friend of mine. He always came in the dressing room and told me when he was going to California. He said, "You want to go see your mama [Louise Beverly Key]?" Or, "Do you want me to give her a message from you?" And I would say, "Well thank you, no, I'll go--I'll make it out there."
Speaker 1: Was he like a mentor to everybody kind of? Did, did he have like a role, he wanted to be everybody's mentor?
Speaker 2: Well, he left--he was still with his first wife [sic.] when I first went in show business and he finally left her and married again. He was--he--I guess he was--he was a good friend of mine despite his faults, but we all have faults.
Speaker 1: How about Cab Calloway? Tell us about Cab.
Speaker 2: Well, Cab was a, a star who--band leader but he knew nothing about music and didn't play any instrument and his musicians knew he didn't play, but he was a showman. He was a great showman and he could sing. He could really sing ballads, but everybody remembers him from "Hi-De-Ho," you know.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the musicians in that band, anybody, anybody of, of note who was in the band, the Cotton Club orchestra when you were there? Were there any famous musicians that played in that group?
Speaker 2: Well, I--Benny Payne was his piano player and I, I knew him quite well. I don't remember who was in it.
Speaker 1: Like Dizzy Gillespie or anybody else?
Speaker 2: I know Ben Webster was with Cab once because he, he told me--he was from Kentucky. He was born in Kentucky and we called each other homie, and he told me once at an afterhours spot that we were in that he wanted to work with Duke Ellington. His idea--his fantasy all his life had been to go up and be in Duke Ellington's band, but he said Duke won't hire me as long as I was with Cab. So I said, well, quit and maybe he'll hire you because you're a good enough musician. And as--he quit Cab Calloway and as soon as Duke had a opening for a sax man, he hired Ben Webster.
Speaker 1: What was black life like in New York [New York] around these years? What year was this--was this when you were there at the Cotton [Cotton Club]--
Speaker 2: Thirty-six [1936] through '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: And, and what was life like around--black life in--
Speaker 2: That's all we knew.
Speaker 1: --in Harlem [New York, New York]? Was it--
Speaker 2: It was--it was--they weren't as active in the community as, as we were in Los Angeles [California]. Show people, they worked and then they went to afterhours spots and they, they weren't active participants in what is later called the Civil Rights Movement of '59 [1959] and '60 [1960] or '58 [1958] and '60 [1960], whenever Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] era.
Story_ID: 588313
Speaker 1: Now, you're there in New York [New York] and all of a sudden you said an opportunity to go abroad comes about. Now, what happened with the European trip? How did that come about for you?
Speaker 2: Well, they sent the, the Cotton Club [New York, New York] show to Europe, the William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor] booked it. And they didn't want to let any of the chorus girls to go, but as I told you, Duke Ellington interceded for me and saw to it that I got a chance to go. And we worked the Ambassadors Theatre [London, England] and the Moulin Rouge in Paris [France], and we played the Palladium [London Palladium] in London [England], and some of them went on to do some--but I wanted to come home, so after we played the Palladium, I came home.
Speaker 1: So, now here you are in Europe now. You've gone there for your first time in your life. Explain that experience.
Speaker 2: I loved it. It's the first time I was treated like just any human being. I wasn't treated like a, a colored person. We were in a restaurant one night, a bar that we hung out in after we got off from work, we were working at the Moulin Rouge then, and some Americans were in there that objected to the preferential treatment that we were given, so the owners put them out, and I loved it. I loved it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I applauded them. They called me au petite rouge, the little red one (laughter) if they didn't call me le Communist (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, now, was, was the reception the same in London as it was in Paris?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think I liked London better. London had no middle class and they didn't know how to treat us and we were in show business, so they didn't--they treated us like the upper class, you know, instead of the poor class. We had really preferential treatment in London. And then some of the girls had come over to Paris to see the show and, and met us and they liked the girls from California, particularly, and so they had found a flat for us in London and they told us how to shop and how to queue up. We had experienced people to mentor us.
Speaker 1: And in Paris, how about that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, Paris is the city of lights. That's what it represents. I just liked London better. I felt at home in London. From the time I got off the boat train--you know, we got a, a, a boat to, to England, but we came into Par- to London on a boat train, I felt at home. I think my people must be from England because I always felt at home in London.
Speaker 1: So you had a, a, a sense of inner connection. You felt connected.
Speaker 2: Well, The Mills Brothers were in London and as I told you, one of the girls that--from California was engaged to him [Harry Mills]. They later married, Ruth [Ruth Mills], and they made it very, very--because they were stars and they were well treated and they made it very comfortable for us.
Speaker 1: Now, did Duke Ellington go with you on this trip? Did he--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He stayed in New York?
Speaker 2: Who was the band leader that went with--was--Duke didn't go. Duke didn't go--Duke didn't go with the--the first show was--Duke was at the Cotton Club then. Cab Calloway was the band leader in the first show that opened downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then he went to Europe with you all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, he--oh, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --didn't go.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now it's 1940 or so you're there and you're still there in, in--
Speaker 2: Thirty-seven [1937] we went to Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay. How long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Six months.
Speaker 1: Six months?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you returned in you say '38 [1938] or, or the middle of '37 [1937]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, I, I think we went in the spring of '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it was April in Paris. I remember (laughter)--I remember that song ['April in Paris'] had come out before. We came home in, in September or October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We came home on the North Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] because we got off the train in New York. We took a train down from Montreal [Canada].
Story_ID: 588314
Speaker 1: So you're returning in '37 [1937] from, from Europe and you come back to New York [New York], and what happens then? Now, you've been abroad now and you, you have more experience dancing and more experience--
Speaker 2: I was trying to remember whether I came back from Calif- if I came to California when I came back. I don't remember. I know when I came back to live in California from New York, it was '40 [1940].
Speaker 1: Okay. But, now for the next couple years, you were still in New York?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You were still dancing?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was going on--going on at that point?
Speaker 2: 'Jump for Joy' was my last show, Duke Ellington's show 'Jump for Joy' in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And were you becoming disenchanted with, with, with entertainment business and were--and were your political aspirations or your, your activism more important?
Speaker 2: Well, Joe Louis had become the heavyweight champion of the world while I was in Europe and he was a friend of mine. And I remember--I know that was later. I was on a visit to New York, so that wasn't then. I, I introduced Paul Robeson to, to Joe Louis. I was on a visit to New York after I had left there and I was staying at the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] and so was Joe, and I came downstairs to go hear Paul speak and Joe Louis asked me where I was going and I told him. He said I've never met Paul Robeson. I said, well, you come with me and I'll introduce you.
Speaker 1: Well, we're, we're gonna revisit that. What, what year would that have been?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What year would that have been when that occurred?
Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause I made two or three trips back to New York after just to visit.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to when the, the three years up 'til 1940 or so. So, you were just in the show 'Jump for Joy' then and you were--
Speaker 2: No, no, no. 'Jump for Joy' was in Los Angeles at the Mayan Theater--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Los Angeles. That wasn't until--that was my last show. That was forty--I got the program here somewhere. Somebody printed it for me and sent it to me. That was '44 [1944], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so between '37 [1937] and say '40 [1940]. When did you return to California? What year did you return?
Speaker 2: I think it was '40 [1940] 'cause I remember working at--on Hollywood Boulevard--not on Holly- right off Hollywood Boulevard in '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Do you know why you left, left New York and came to California? Did the whole just move?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just loved California then.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the show just moved to California?
Speaker 2: No, I just came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just came home.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any reason why or?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I just wanted to be home.
Story_ID: 588315
Speaker 1: So between '40 [1940] and according to our research '43 [1943], between 1943, is when you ended your career at around '43 [1943] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I became a mother. I adopted a daughter. My first cousin, Uncle Stanley's [Stanley Beverly] oldest son, was killed in World War II [WWII] and he was married to a Mexican American girl who didn't want any of his children; she had four. And we--the family didn't want them separated, but none of us could afford to take all four, so we split them up. And I--the youngest was named for me. She was two years old. And I didn't expect it. Now, you know how I became a mother? I went to--up to Elsinore [Lake Elsinore, California] with a friend to see her mother who was living in Elsinore and I said--told her I'd go if she came back or went through Riverside [California] 'cause you could go either way, and she said okay. So, we came back to Riverside and she was next door to her mother-in-law's house with this baby, this two year old child. And she said to me, "Oh, you came for Alice. I'm so glad. She's the only one I got left." I said, "What does she mean?" So, Aunt Anna [Anna Alves Beverly] says she means she wants you to take her and take her.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So, I just put her in the car and brought her home and I sat her down on the floor. I said, mama [Louise Beverly Key], look what we got. We got a baby (laughter). And she's been with me ever since.
Speaker 1: And her name is?
Speaker 2: Alice.
Speaker 1: Alice.
Speaker 2: Alice McAbee.
Speaker 1: Okay. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's been married twice.
Story_ID: 588316
Speaker 1: So, in '43 [1943], you, you ended your dancing career. You decided that was enough or?
Speaker 2: I can't remember when we did 'Jump for Joy' [Duke Ellington]. It was--Alice [Alice McAbee] was born in '42 [1942] and I didn't adopt her 'til '44 [1944], but I didn't have her--'Jump for Joy' must've been in '44 [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the last show. That's when I, I told the girls this is my last show and they said, "Well, why are you quitting? Have we done anything that made you mad or something?" I said, "The name of the thing is chorus girl not chorus women," so I can write--oh, I know what happened. Almena Lomax. You remember her? You know her?
Speaker 1: No, ma'am.
Speaker 2: She was Almena Davis then. She was a young girl and she could write her buns off. She was the protege of Charlotta Bass of the California Eagle. She came to see 'Jump for Joy' and she wrote a column about it and Ethel Waters was doing a show at the Biltmore [Los Angeles Biltmore Hotel; Millennium Biltmore Hotel, Los Angeles, California] and she compared the difference in the two, old time black people and young--modern black people. We had numbers in our show that said I got a passport from Georgia and I'm heading for the U.S.A. where the signs read out to lunch and not out to lynch. And we got protests from white people. We got letters threatening us about the numbers in the show. You know how the show opened? We're 'The Sun-Tanned Tenth of the Nation' and that was the name of the song that opened the show. And after that, Paul [Paul White] was a real dark-skinned black person and a dancer. He started walking across the stage and at the same time from the opp- on the opposite entrance came a ghost, and they met in the middle of the stage. And Paul said to the ghost, "Boo," and the ghost fled. So, he turned to the audience and says, "See, it's all propaganda." And then the curtain went up, opened, and the show started.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: It was a great show. It was too great for the times. It was just before World War II [WWII]. But, Almena came to the show and she wrote such a wonderful column. She came back stage and she came in the chorus girls' room, and we were all complimenting her on the column that she had written about the show. What I didn't know that Almena was very--what is the word for--she's different from anybody you know. She would write anything about anybody including herself. But at the time, she wanted to start her own newspaper and she didn't have the money, but she knew I was going with a guy who was pretty wealthy, so she wanted me to get him to invest some money in her newspaper, which I did. So when 'Jump for Joy' closed, I decided to watch his investment, so I went to work with her newspaper. I left doing a theatrical column, was for the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] and worked--went to work for the Los Angeles Tribune.
Speaker 1: And what year was that--would you say that was?
Speaker 2: Forty--'44 [1944].
Story_ID: 588317
Speaker 1: And, so you became a writer for the Tribune [Los Angeles Tribune] in '44 [1944]. And what, what were some of the things you wrote about?
Speaker 2: Well, I certainly couldn't write about murder because the first murder that happened after I started working at the newspaper was a block from where the newspaper office was on Central Avenue and I rushed down there and saw the dead body and gave up (laughter), said--I knew the fellow that had been shot and killed. I didn't know him well, but I, I did know who he was, so I said I will never cover murders. But, I stayed in the office and I took subscriptions and I wrote my column. And what I was attacking then was the motion picture industry. The motion picture industry at the time was the fifth biggest industry in the United States and they didn't employ blacks anywhere.
Speaker 1: In the forty--the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they didn't employ them as grip men, as--on any capacity except as actors and then you know what kind of acting, acting they did in the movies. So, I objected to it so strenuously and wrote so much about it, it became almost an obsession with me. So, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sent Walter White out from New York [New York] to attack the industry, but they settled with him by hiring Lena Horne. They said they--as the star and giving his daughter a job--his niece a job. So, that was the end of that. But, Lena and I became friends because my best friend, Maudine [Maudine Sykes], had worked at the Cotton Club [New York, New York] uptown with Lena. She had left California and gone uptown to work. And Lena said, I got to go to California. They're gonna make me a star, but I don't know anybody in Los Angeles [California]. And she said, well, you don't need to know anybody but Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key] (laughter), and she's my best friend. So, she called up and told me that Lena was gonna call me when she got there. So, I took--Lena didn't drive, so I got tired of not drinking to drive her home. She was living on a street called Horn Avenue right off the Boulevard, Hollywood Boulevard, across the street from Humphrey Bogart at the time. Humphrey Bogart was before Lauren Bacall. He and his wife [Mayo Methot] fought all the time. And, so, I, I told Lena, you either have to learn to drive or I'm gonna have to stop bringing you home. So, she started keeping a toothbrush and a--and a nightgown at my house so I could bring her home the next day and I could have a drink, you know. But, we, we hung out together and we worked on her pictures at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.], and that's when this picture was made of, of me.
Story_ID: 588318
Speaker 1: I want to come back to, to some of your associations with these people, but I want to talk about, did--we have some research that you did an article on the fact that they were separating blood plasma for the--for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I--during World War II [WWII], I went down to Fort Huachuca [Arizona] where they had activated the 93rd--how did you know about that?
Speaker 1: We did some research (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh. They activated the 93rd Division [93rd Infantry Division] which was the first all-black division. So, the doctor who was the chief of medical staff at the hospital, a dermatologist from Chicago [Illinois], Thatcher [Harold W. Thatcher] was his name, I had gone to him. I'd left New York [New York] to go to him for my foot. I had a rash on my foot that wouldn't go away and everybody thought it was athlete's foot, but it wasn't. So, he was chief of medical staff at Fort Huachuca. So, he took me to this room and he handed me a package of blood plasma and it said AA on it. And I said, "What is this?" And he said, "That's African American. They separate blood." I said, "You mean if there's a white soldier dying on the field of action, that he says let me see the blood plasma you're gonna give me 'cause I don't want any African blood?" He said, "Well I guess so 'cause they package it separately and they identify it." So I went back to Los Angeles [California] and wrote a column about it. The Red Cross [American Red Cross] called me, everybody called me. A Major Butler called me. He was doing public relations for the [U.S.] Army and they wanted to go to lunch and I said, I'm not hungry, you know. I can have lunch here at my office. But, I called the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] which at that time was the biggest black newspaper in the United States. I called the managing editor of that and told him about it and he said we'll break the story together. And we, we stopped the--we stopped them packaging blood separately. 'Cause the Pittsburgh Courier came out against it and the Tribune [Los Angeles Tribune] came out in headlines. Yeah, I'm very proud of that.
Speaker 1: That's a big story.
Story_ID: 588319
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about some of your--you've mentioned a few people here that I'm sure the listener will be intrigued to hear about. You mentioned Lena Horne, you were friends with her. What kind of person was Lena Horne?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, she married the right man when she married that white man because he knew music. And Lena wasn't a great singer, but he knew how to cheat it, and, and he--she, she was a visual artist. I loved to watch her work. You had to see her to believe her because he knew how to--when she--what she could sing and how she could sing it. And she, she could turn--she's the only artist I've ever seen turn her back on the audience and hold their attention, you know. She was a, a great mother. She is a great mother. But she seemed to be insecure to me about men. I don't know whether her marriage made her that way or not. I understand that she's not well at all. I know she's going blind or--Lena and I fell out. Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz] who was her, her dresser on, on the shows and I were great friends. Audrey kept in touch with her. But I went to see Lena's one woman show with a group of--in Los Angeles [California], a group of us went down to see it, and she came out of the dressing room and hugged me and acted like we hadn't fallen out, so she sat there and held my hand while--the whole time we talked to her. Audrey kept me up-to-date on her and she told me she was going blind. And I think her--she has two daughters [sic.], you know, and I think one of her daughters or both of them are taking care of her now.
Speaker 1: Off stage, what kind of person was she, off stage?
Speaker 2: She was real down to earth. She had been a chorus girl and she was down to earth.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you mentioned Paul Robeson and Joe Louis. Tell us--
Speaker 2: Oh, Paul Robeson was--
Speaker 1: Tell us about Paul Robeson.
Speaker 2: Paul Robeson is absolutely my mentor of all mentors. I remember one time I went to visit my friend, Maudine [Maudine Sykes], who married a Chicagoan, Nelson Sykes. He owned the Brass Rail in Chicago [Illinois]. That was way before your time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At 47th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue], I think it was. But she hated Chicago and she was in California and she lived in--had lived in New York [New York]. She never did like Chicago, but she married Nelson 'cause she loved him. And he like all Chicagoans loved Chicago, so she had to live there. And we were having breakfast and he said, "The Rams are coming. Los Angeles Rams are playing the Bears [Chicago Bears] today and I know you're a football fan, so I bought tickets." So I said, great. And I kept reading in the morning paper, the Chicago paper and I saw where Paul Robeson was speaking at a union hall. That was during the time that had taken his passport away from him because he had attacked the state department [U.S. Department of State], so--and they were labeling him a Communistic and all this. So, I said, "Oh, Sykes, you have to turn those tickets in. I can't go to the football game 'cause I've gotta go hear Paul." So, we went to hear Paul speak, and after the--he got through speaking, the people were lined up to shake his hand and speak to him, and we stood in line, and when we got to him, he was so surprised to see me and so I said, "Paul, why don't you let the world take care of itself for a little while and come with us and have a drink?" And he said, "That's a date." So, we took him to the Brass Rail and he had crab cakes and had a drink. Then, we went to Maudine and Sykes' apartment, we stayed there 'til daylight and heard him talk about how America could be if they could just separate the facts that we were black and some of them were white. Mexican Americans had not gotten a hold on, on America they've got now. Did you read the paper yesterday what--where they've started--they're going Republican because of the Republican pres- candidate for president. They're very big now. They got--they bought Vons market [The Vons Companies, Inc.]. They got four big markets here.
Speaker 1: Now, Paul Robeson, so he was very aware of--what, what, what was his, his remedy?
Speaker 2: Paul Robeson needed black people like he needed a hole in the head. He was a--he had a fire belly (unclear). He was a All-American football star. He was the star of stage, screen, and radio, but he thought discrimination was wrong.
Speaker 1: He was a lawyer, too, correct?
Speaker 2: And, and he fought it every time and he fought everybody that allowed discrimination that were in a position to do something about it. He was a threat to--and I never liked Jackie Robinson for this. Jackie Robinson took it upon himself to fly down to Washington, D.C., and testify that Paul Robeson does not speak for the black man.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I had a chance. I saw Paul--Jackie Robinson in a restaurant in Chicago, Southway Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], and I walked over to him when we were leaving, I said, "Paul Robeson spoke for me," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And kept on walking, you know, 'cause you're messing with Jackie Robinson. He's an icon, you know.
Story_ID: 588320
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How about Joe Louis? Tell us about Joe Louis.
Speaker 2: Oh, Joe Louis was, was, was my kind of people. Joe Louis was--you know, I never accepted Ali [Muhammad Ali] because of my admiration for Joe Louis.
Speaker 1: And what kind of person was Joe Louis (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then my time--you know, like I tell my grandsons, it's their world, thank you for letting me live in it. It's a different world than what I lived.
Speaker 1: Joe Louis, what was his personality like outside of the fighting ring, outside of the ring?
Speaker 2: Well, he admired people like Paul Robeson and people who were in the fight. He admired me because I was on a--he called up New York [New York] one time and said, "I'm going to California to fight somebody," I think it was Bob Pastor in Los Angeles [California], and he said, "You want to go?" And I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, meet us in Chicago [Illinois] and we'll send you--we'll get you a ticket and you go with us," and they got off the train in Victorville [California] but I went on into L.A. But, we got in a argument--I got in a argument with a man on the train who was drinking and I didn't get in a argument with the man who was drinking, I got in a argument with the passenger who objected to his drinking. And he said, "These people here are better--are better people than you are." And I said, "What do you mean by these people? Who are you talking about?" So, Joe Louis loved that. You know, he kept hunching me, hunching me to go on, on with the argument. He was aware that he got privileges as heavyweight champion of the world that other people didn't get. He could go places they couldn't go.
Speaker 1: What would you say the difference is between yesteryear's superstar, black superstar, and today's black superstar (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know today's superstars.
Speaker 1: You don't--
Speaker 2: I don't know them.
Speaker 1: Would, would you say that there seems to be a--there was a greater awareness or what do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we made it possible for some of them, the ones that went before them. I think that's not only true of stars, I think that's true of people. There are people who moved here to California that wouldn't have lived here when I came here in '54 [1954].
Story_ID: 588321
Speaker 1: So, the '40s [1940s] were spent pretty much--your '40s [1940s] were spent writing for the Tribune [Los Angeles Tribune] pretty much now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you were there--about how many years were at the Tribune?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Almena [Almena Lomax] got married after the--she--we met and she had one baby after another. She had six children altogether, so she stayed home most of the time and I ran the office for her, but I'd go by her house every morning and get her editorial and discuss with her what we were gonna put in the paper. So, I came up here because of Dr. West [Charles West].
Speaker 1: Explain that, that you moved to Las Vegas [Nevada]. What, what year would that have been that you moved to Vegas?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. West was from, from Washington, D.C., and his mother was the first black high school principal there. But I had met him during World War II [WWII] when he--Dr. West was married five times. I--he had been married to a friend of mine, this Mae Johnson I told you about? She--he had married--and the USO [United Service Organizations] wouldn't send any shows down to Fort Huachuca [Arizona]. I guess they thought the black soldiers were gonna rape the white girls or something. So, she talked Dr. West and his brother-in-law, Dr. Strickland [ph.], and his wife [Dottie Seaman West] to come and hear and she said we'll tell--go tell Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key] about--she'll get us some entertainment. So, I knew her from working with her in New York [New York]. So, they came up and met me, so I called Lena [Lena Horne] and called Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson], who is Eddie Anderson who was with Jack Benny then, and got a bus load of girls, beautiful girls to go down there at Huachuca and we went on Memorial [Memorial Day] weekend. And I went on a train, but Lena flew down, and we did shows all over the, the fort. Of course, it didn't hurt that my kid brother [Malcom Key, Jr.] was in that 93rd Division [93rd Infantry Division]. But, we did shows all over and they were very grateful for it and very happy about it. And so were the people who went. They were happy to do it. What were we talking about before I took you off (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) that's okay.
Story_ID: 588322
Speaker 1: We were gonna see how you got to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], coming to, you know, in--I guess that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, so Dr. West [Charles West] was married now to the wife he was married to that he came to Vegas with, Dottie. She was Dottie Seaman [Dottie Seaman West] and they--he was practicing medicine in Detroit [Michigan]. And they picked me up when--in Los Angeles [California], came to--on vacation and we went to Santa Monica [California] to the beach one day. And we were sitting there on the sand, he said, "Oh, by the way, I saw Count Basie. He was in Detroit just before I left, he said to tell you hello," and he said, "Do you know that sucker tried to talk me into going to Las Vegas? He said when he--when he comes here to play, he feels so sorry for the youngsters on the Westside [West Las Vegas] in Las Vegas because they didn't have a Negro professional. They only had the people--," the blacks that they had, looked up to that drove big cars like Cadillacs or foreign cars, were pimps or, or drug pushers, and he said, "You know, I'm not thinking about going to another state and taking the bar." I looked at Dottie and Dottie had dollar signs in her eyes, you know. She said, "You mean to tell me there is not a black doctor in the State of Nevada?" And he said, "That's what Basie said." So, on the way back to Los Angeles, she asked me, "What's the capital of Nevada?" I said, "I haven't the faintest notion but we'll call the newspaper when we get home and find out." And we called the--we had the Examiner [Los Angeles Examiner] then and the Times [Los Angeles Times]. We called one of them and found out that it was the--Carson City [Nevada]. So, Dottie called Carson City and they were giving the, the, the tests for doctors in two days. So, we put him on a plane and three months later she called me up and said we're packing for Las Vegas. After they got here, they started--they were lonesome for some of their old friends and people they knew, so they called me and they called Coretta [ph.] who was Dottie's best friend, and Coretta and I came up to visit them together and they talked us in--now, they must've really been some talkers. They--'cause you couldn't buy a cup of coffee nowhere in here. They, they deserve the term Mississippi of the West. That's what Las Vegas was known as. But, they talked to Coretta and I to going back home and packing our clothes and moving up here to fight the fight and we fought it.
Speaker 1: So, this was--this was just before Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. This was just before that, Brown versus--Brown versus Board of Education.
Speaker 2: What year was Brown versus Edu--
Speaker 1: I guess that was '56 [1956] or something like this, so, so '54 [1954]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was before--
Speaker 1: So, so '54 [1954], you were coming in around that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: In '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: And you get here and you meet Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey]. Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Bob wasn't here yet. The Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] was being built when I came. However, Bob and Anna [Anna Bailey], his wife, came out with the show for the Moulin Rouge, so I met him in '54 [1954] when they came out.
Speaker 1: They came to visit. And how about--how about Woodrow Wilson's--the, the--
Speaker 2: Woodrow Wilson was our first elected black professional, a Republican, but I supported him because he's--he was qualified and he was black.
Speaker 1: And Dr. James McMillan [James B. McMillan] and Sara, [HistoryMaker] Sarann Knight Preddy who were they?
Speaker 2: She's one of my best friends, Sara--I met--I met Eileen [Eileen Oser] through Sarann. She shared the program for me when the--they gave a tribute to me three years ago and Sarann knew I wouldn't go for it, so she didn't tell me. I didn't know they were doing it. But, she enlisted the aid of both United States senators in her committee and she got a committee together and they paid a tribute to me. It's there, a program is there.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I met Sarann because Sarann not only--well, she was at Hawthorne, really. She had a casino in Hawthorne, Nevada, then, but she would come to Los Angeles [California] all the time 'cause her mother and father and her children were here. Her children were grown, but they were here. But she was always active in the community, very active at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which was very effective then. And aside from that, she was a businesswoman and she probably employed more blacks than any individual on the west--on the Westside when she was in business here.
Story_ID: 588323
Speaker 1: How was life in Vegas? Now, you said you--the, the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were so busy fighting the--fighting white man, we didn't know where we were except Las Vegas, Nevada. But it was a challenge and we enjoyed it. We enjoyed it. What, what happened was, Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan] was a dentist and he and Dr. West [Charles West] had joint offices in Detroit [Michigan]. But, Dr. McMillan was a younger man than Dr. West and he had been sent to Korea by the [U.S.] Army. So, Dr. West sold the place where they were doing business and wrote to him and said you are no longer in Detroit. You're going to--be doing dental work in Las Vegas and I have bought a home for you across the street from me. So, when Dr. McMillan was discharged, he came to Las Vegas and he ran for president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Dr. West reorganized an old thing that everybody had let die here called the Voter's League [Nevada Voter's League], and he became president of it. He made all of us become deputy registrars and we registered people to vote. We also kept a list of the names of those we registered to vote before we turned in the registration to the registrar. And on Election Day, we took them physically to the polls to vote. That's how we got enlightened legislators and enlightened, enlightened legislation.
Speaker 1: Now, you're an activist. You're known for your fighting at this point and, and doing things, but at the same time, you have strong entertainment connections here in Vegas. You know people that are coming through, you know a lot of the entertainers. What was life like for them being on stage and then having to deal with Las Vegas?
Speaker 2: They had to live on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada]. They couldn't live in the hotels where they worked.
Speaker 1: Could you give us some names?
Speaker 2: But we was fortunate enough to--Sammy Davis, Jr., for one (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 588324
Speaker 1: We're in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] now, ma'am, and you're, you're on the front line with different--with different things that you're doing in regards to the new--the new professionals moving in, Dr. West [Charles West], Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan]. So, now we're--now we're starting to get some professionals on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada]. But now the entertainers that are coming in, they're still being discriminated against off stage, right? Could you explain how that was, like for Sammy Davis, Jr., you were mentioning before the break. He couldn't--he couldn't hang out in Las Vegas?
Speaker 2: No, he was limited like all black entertainers were to living on the Westside. He could work in the hotels--Louis Armstrong. Everybody that worked here had to live on the Westside until we, we were fortunate enough and active enough and successful enough to get a civil rights bill passed two years before the national civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] in this city, the Mississippi of the West.
Speaker 1: So, Dinah Washington--
Speaker 2: Public accommodations we didn't have.
Speaker 1: Wow. Dinah Washington and those people could not--they had to live on the west side.
Speaker 2: I don't care who they were. (Cough) They lived on the Westside. I went, visited Dinah where she was living. She had an apartment on the Westside.
Story_ID: 588325
Speaker 1: So, now you're here [Las Vegas, Nevada] and what is going on now? Are you writing for any papers here now? Are you doing anything during this time period?
Speaker 2: I started a TV show.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who did you do that with?
Speaker 2: Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey].
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Okay, well Bob and Anna [Anna Bailey], his wife, came here to do the first Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] show.
Speaker 1: Now, the Moulin Rouge was what now, so our listeners will know?
Speaker 2: It was the first integrated hotel casino in Nevada. It was in the west suburbs [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] in the heart of the, the, the black community and it had first class food, first class gaming, first class everything. It was a wonderful hotel casino and a great show. Clarence Robinson, the producer of the Cotton Club show in New York [New York] brought the show here. He produced the show.
Speaker 1: Who was the owner of this casino?
Speaker 2: There were six or seven of them. They were all white. And I think that a couple of them wanted to get into gaming because it is the only place in the world that I ever heard of a business that closed up doing standing room only business. The sheriff closed it up because they didn't pay their subcontractors. And they were building the Dunes then and a couple of them invested in the Dunes Hotel [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: So, at that point, they didn't have gaming in the--it, it was just the hotel, it wasn't a casino?
Speaker 2: No, it was just gaming.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It had a--it had a casino.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And everybody came over from the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] to the hotel to see their third show.
Speaker 1: What kind of shows were going on there? Who were some of the names that played the Moulin Rouge?
Speaker 2: Well, the show opened up with Stump and Stumpy [James "Stump" Cross and Harold J. Cromer]. Big Stump--Little Stump wasn't such a great performer, but Big Stumpy was one of the funniest men I ever saw. And Bob, Bob was a singer with the show, Bob Bailey, and who else? It was a good show, beautiful chorus girls. Clarence always liked beautiful chorus girls. And he always had someone--'cause he couldn't dance at all, but he always had someone in the show who could interpret what he wanted done for his chorus girls. He had great shows. One night after I met Bob and Ann, we were sitting over at Dr. West's [Charles West] talking and having a drink, and he happened to mention that he had just finished going to television school, learning production and direction, the whole bit.
Speaker 1: This is Bob Bailey?
Speaker 2: Bob Bailey. And he was unable to get work because he was black in the--in the TV business. It was--which was kind of new then. You know, TV was very new. But I had met Hank Greenspun who was the publisher of the Sun [Las Vegas Sun] who owned Channel 8 [KLAS-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] which is the CBS affiliate here and I had talked to him about doing a show. So I said, well--I told Bob and I said why don't you produce and direct the show? And at the time, I didn't know that it was the first show in the nation that was produced and directed and hosted by blacks. And we did a TV show there. I, I got a booklet here that has a picture of Bob and I on it and tells about, about the show.
Speaker 1: And what did you do on that show?
Speaker 2: I hosted it. Bob wasn't on camera. He just produced it and directed it. He went and--he stayed in show business, though. He started doing a radio show and then a television show and he got his dream. He did television show for thirteen years, I think.
Speaker 1: What was the name--what was the name of the talk show you all did?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Alice Key and the 'Talk of the Town.'
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what kind of format did you have? Was it an entertainment show?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was--we had--you'll see the--when you see the book, but I think Louis Armstrong was in town. Joe Adams came up from Los Angeles [California] to--for the show. He was on the picture in, in the book with me and Bob and somebody else. I don't remember who it is.
Speaker 1: So, this show was kind of like a, a variety show so to speak and you interviewed people.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, like they are now.
Speaker 1: And it was well before its time. And how long did that show last?
Speaker 2: Well, Bob's mother died in Cleveland [Ohio] and he had to go back to--naturally, and he asked me could I do the show by myself and I said no 'cause I don't know production and direction, so we, we quit. It was about four months later.
Speaker 1: So, so what year was this show on television, do you recall?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954] or '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 588326
Speaker 1: And what was the response of people because you said television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they loved it.
Speaker 1: --television was kind of new. Was, was there a widespread white audience view and black audience viewership?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And they loved the show ['Talk of the Town']. Did you get many letters and comments about keep it going?
Speaker 2: Jimmy Gay's wife was the--she had the dress show in the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]. She had the boutique there. Jimmy Gay is one of the pioneers here that we are--when I say we, I mean the Black Historical Society, Inc. [Las Vegas Black Historical Society, Inc.], which he--you are the only white person, a member of. I'm the president of it. We are honoring the blacks who pioneered here who helped developed the community. We're doing our first fundraiser for it in February, black history month, and Jimmy Gay, we're honor--is one of the--Woodrow Wilson is the other and a woman named Stella Fears, and David Hoggard [J. David Hoggard, Sr.]. I, I really wanted to do Clarence Ray for the first one. Next year, we'll do Dr. West [Charles West] and Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan] because they meant so much to the community because they were independent. They didn't need a white man's salary. They made their own living and they fought. There were--you know how we got public accommodations here?
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: Doctor--Dr. McMillan was the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as I mentioned and Dr. West was the president of the Voter's League [Nevada Voter's League]. Dr. McMillan called a march on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and everybody was gathered at--on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] at--in front of the Town Tavern at F Street and Jackson Avenue to march on the Strip. And the Western Union [Western Union Company] telegram boy drove up and asked for Dr. McMillan, had a telegram, and it said from the Nevada Resort Hotel Association [Nevada Resort Association], the doors are open. Everybody went home. That's--they, they, they didn't want--they just wanted the right to go in. They didn't want to go--which is not true now. The black people were happy about the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] opening because it employed a lot of people and it also brought the integration together and the white people came from the Strip to see the show and, and the other clubs didn't seem to mind the black clubs. There was the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and other clubs here and they didn't seem to mind.
Speaker 1: So, at this point, it's about '55 [1955] and you, you took on a position with the--with, with Moulin Rouge, right? The Moulin Rouge, you took on a position with them as, as a PR [public relations] director or something like--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Some--that's an assumption that everybody had that I was employed by the Moulin Rouge, but I wasn't.
Speaker 1: So, '55 [1955], the show--the show has ended, the, the CBS show (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, '55 [1955], what are you doing now as far as your career is concerned?
Speaker 2: I went back to California.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you went back to--
Speaker 2: There was always plenty to do when you're working for the community.
Speaker 1: So, between--so, so now--so now, things are really heated in civil rights now, the mid to late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about what's going on in California now. What are you doing?
Speaker 2: Well, well, my daughter [Alice McAbee] was to graduate from high school in 1960. My mother [Louise Beverly Key] was tired of Los Angeles [California], so I bought a home for--I couldn't afford rents in both places, so I bought a home in, in Riverside [California] so she could go back. She had quit driving. And my daughter didn't want to leave, so we stayed there until she graduated and then I moved her down there. And that's when I got active in California. And I came back because the need was still here and I'm--it--I went back and forth between Riverside and, and Las Vegas [Nevada] for a while.
Speaker 1: Now, when, when did the Moulin Rouge close its doors?
Speaker 2: That same year it opened. It was only open for six months.
Speaker 1: And do you know--do you have any feeling on why it closed so quickly? You said it was doing so well. Do you have any idea what really happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had--I told you, the sheriff closed it because they hadn't paid the subcontractors.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so they found some, some reason.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: But, you know, gaming runs the state and they resented the Moulin Rouge. They were all right--I--it was better, I think, under, under the gangsters then than it is now with Corporate America because Corporate America have a license to steal. You know, you can't afford a show now.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The show is around $100 unless it's the New Orleans [Louisiana] or the--or you go to Stateline [Nevada] where you could afford a show, but you can't--all the good shows are $100, $105, $110.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Which is a lot of money for a show.
Story_ID: 588327
Speaker 1: So, between the '50s [1950s], the late '50s [1950s], now, now, we're moving into the '60s [1960s]. Now, you moved out of--out of Las Vegas [Nevada] and you've done quite a bit. Let's look at here, now. You, you did some things with I guess Governor Grant Sawyer.
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved him. He was--he was the governor of Cal- of Nevada when I came here and I think--I'm pretty sure that Grant was from Idaho originally, but he didn't know anything about black people, but he did know--he was intelligent, so he knew right from wrong. He knew what was wrong in Nevada and we told him what was wrong and he believed us. He listened to us. He did everything he could. He went to the legislature. He asked--he, he asked for the Equal Rights Commission, which--he made Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] the chairman of the Equal Rights Commission. He, he wrote a column for me. I started editing the Tribune [sic. Las Vegas Voice] for--the only black newspaper in Las Vegas that Dr. West [Charles West] started and he asked me to edit it for him. Doctor--Governor Sawyer wrote a column for it every week in, in the--in the newspaper. He was really a great governor. I hated--he, he was--he could've run for United States senator. His wife [Bette Hoge Sawyer] didn't like politics.
Speaker 1: So, you moved through--I mean, you, you left a big indelible impression here in Las Vegas and you move back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Now, it's about--we'll say it's in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: I really moved back to Riverside [California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when my daughter [Alice McAbee] graduated from high school in '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay. So you moved back. So now you're back in California in Riverside. And what's going on there now for you in Riverside?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when I really got active. I started--changed the ward system so we could get a minority into the city council. Then, we got a minority elected. I don't think it was the right minority, but we did get a minority on the city council 'cause I remember the first council meeting that he was a participant in that after the council meeting, I went over to my cousin's house who had a swimming pool and I said I'm gonna jump in the pool and don't nobody come and get me (laughter). I was ready to drown myself. We had been actively working toward a new park on--where the--on the area where the black people lived because the old part was overrun by drugs and people who use drugs, and the city council wouldn't approve it. We finally got it, but that was--his first vote was with them not to--not to have the park.
Speaker 1: That was in 19--what would you say that was?
Speaker 2: It was '61 [1961] or '62 [1962]. It was the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And are you, you doing anything else in show business now as far as helping people in show business? Were you still doing that at the same when you were in Riverside? Were you still--
Speaker 2: Well, I kept my friends, but people started dying, you know. I don't think there's anybody living that's my age that I was close to except Coretta [ph.] who came up here with me and she's in--living in an assisted living place.
Speaker 1: So, you stayed back in--
Speaker 2: I don't know any of the people in show business now.
Speaker 1: Riverside, you stayed how long in Riverside? You stayed there through the--
Speaker 2: Well, I came up here all the time when--you know, whenever. I, I traveled back and forth, but I was very active in, in politics in Riverside. As a matter of fact, I went to bible class there a few Sundays ago, I went to church in Highland [California], and somebody asked me to write a book and she said 'cause you really did do a lot of work here. And I said, I'm not interested in writing a book. Everybody I know that was in the development of the community in any degree, a couple who weren't, have written books, and to read each one of them, you wouldn't know anybody else was working with--see, I was never a leader. I was just always--
Speaker 1: Active.
Speaker 2: --working with people, just active. I never wanted to be known as a leader and I wasn't a leader. But, everybody has written a--including my friend, Bob. He, he just wrote a book, I edited for him. And I said, Bob, this isn't true (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, as far as--is--everybody's book is just--(unclear) wrote a book, McMillan wrote a book. Jesse Scott [Jesse D. Scott] had a signing. I saw him the other night and I said, "I heard your book signing thing was successful." He said, "Oh, yeah, every book." I said, "What was the--what is the name of your book?" He said, "'Pioneer for Social Justice' ['Pioneer for Social Justice: An Autobiography,' Jesse D. Scott]." I said, "You didn't come here 'til the '70s [1970s] (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 588328
Speaker 1: So, you spent some years in Riverside [California]. You were active, definitely. And so about '66 [1966], you, you became a editor at the--at the Vegas Voice [Las Vegas Voice]. Now, how--tell us about that. How did that happen? The Las Vegas--had you moved back or were you still doing it from afar? How were you doing that?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know--I don't--really don't know. I, I divided my time between Riverside and--
Speaker 1: Las--
Speaker 2: --Nev- and Las Vegas [Nevada]. Dr. West [Charles West], though--Dr. West really when he started the paper, he wanted his son to edit it.
Speaker 1: So, he was the founder of the paper, Dr. West?
Speaker 2: Dr. West founded the paper. He thought we should have a black voice in, in Nevada, and I had started the newspaper in Riverside called The Voice [ph.] and he liked that name. And his son was the--graduated from clinical psychology. He didn't want to edit a newspaper. So, Dr. West asked me to edit it and I did. And then, I, I was glad to do it because I could say whatever I wanted to say and who was to challenge me. We had a governor then, Laxalt [Paul Laxalt], who became a United States senator who--when--in--the legislation when he was lieutenant governor, we had two or three women in the legislature, white women, who were very good civil right activists, and they kept me advised of everything that was going on in, in the legislature. And they said the person, our lieutenant governor who is presiding over us at the senate wants to not have a boys--what do they have at Boys Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] here? Because he said they have to dance with people and who they gonna dance with? You know, these kind of things. So, I stayed--every day--every week when the paper came out on Thursday, his brother [Robert Laxalt] was in front of the paper office to get a Tribune--a Voice to hear what I had to say about him 'cause I--the paper was on him the whole time he was governor. He got elected to the United States Senate and he never moved back. He was from northern Calif- Nevada, anyway. And he was--what is that in Spain, it's not--Basque. He was a Basque. So, I never did understand why he got so prejudice.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because, now, you had two papers. You had a Voice in Riverside and a Voice--
Speaker 2: Here in, in, in--
Speaker 1: And, so, so now--
Speaker 2: --Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Were these at the same time or did you stop one to do the other?
Speaker 2: I stopped one to do the other.
Speaker 1: How long did you have the one in Riverside?
Speaker 2: Well, it's still going on but somebody else is running it. I don't know, maybe a couple of years.
Speaker 1: So, you were the founder of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You started it.
Speaker 2: I started it.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: I started it just with offset printing.
Speaker 1: Oh, the old fashioned way of doing it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right. So, you--so, you just did that and you did it for about--
Speaker 2: I just wanted a, a place to express my thoughts and views, you know?
Speaker 1: How did you circulate it, through, through subscriptions or what did you do?
Speaker 2: It was free. It, it was free and, and we circulated it to everybody. We wanted everybody to read it.
Speaker 1: So, was the one in Vegas also free? Was that one free when you started it?
Speaker 2: Like partially. It had a subscription rate, but he, he had someone to distribute it to all the business places in town and he left them there, and whether they sold them or not, we don't know. They, they read them. It's still going on now but now it uses the name Voice Sentinel [sic. Las Vegas Sentinel Voice].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So, and that's about 1966 when you became the editor of the Las Vegas--the Las Vegas Voice.
Speaker 2: It was some time in the '60s [1960s], yeah.
Story_ID: 588329
Speaker 1: And the following year, you got a, a--our research says that you did a position--that you got a position for--you became the PR [public relations] manager for the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women.
Speaker 2: You know, I forgot that. You know, there's so many things I for--you know, Claytee says she wish I was here because she did--she's the director of oral--Claytee White [Claytee D. White] is a friend of ours and she's the director of oral history at UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] and she interviewed me a few years ago and sometimes things comes up and she said, you didn't tell me that.
Speaker 1: And her, her name is Claytee White?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And I said I forgot it. I was looking for a letter that I got from Harry Reid to give to him and I can't find it. So, it's probably at UNLV and I didn't even make a copy of it.
Speaker 1: Now, during this time period in '67 [1967], now you--chronological age-wise, you were in your mid-fifties now, where most people sit down and, and decide they aren't gonna do anything else.
Speaker 2: What is that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And you were still moving on, still being active. What was the--what was the function of the, the Committee for the Rights of Women? What did you all do?
Speaker 2: Well, Grant Sawyer, the governor--who was the governor then, he started the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women and he selected women that were active in the--in the--their field or community, whatever they were, and I was one of them. Leola Armstrong [Leola Hollingsworth Armstrong] who was the secretary of the state--senate became a very good friend of mine, probably my best friend in Nevada. She opened doors for me 'cause she was a native Nevadan, and she--her husband was the--was Bryn Armstrong and he was the executive editor of the Las Vegas Sun, the morning newspaper which no longer exists, it's part of the Review-Journal [Las Vegas Review-Journal] now, Hank Greenspun who published it was--is dead. But, Leo- Leola and Bryn became very good friends of mine and Leola opened doors for me. I owe a lot to Leola. I--she died last year with cancer. I, I mourn her. I really mourn her because she told me a lot and she opened doors for me. Every, every time she was involved in something, she saw to it that I was involved with it. She was the director of the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women and I was--handled the publicity for them. We decided to hire a man from Los Angeles [California]. We had him to come up and as Bryn said, when he got through talking, we could visualize us having signs up, let's stamp our babies, you know. So, we decided not to hire him and then the board of directors asked me to handle the publicity, and I did. But, as secretary of state, Leola had to give up her job as chairman of the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women when the--when the legislature went in session. So, they hired me as the director and I directed it from then on. And the man who funded us was a man from St. Louis [Missouri] who makes contraceptives and all the things that avoid--birth control. He believe--he and his wife believe strongly in birth control. He gave them away to cities where--to countries where it's just outlandish how many children people have and can't afford. But, he came here to Nevada 'cause it was a small state then, it was a small population, and he funded the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women. And he'd call up every week and ask me--he was wired for sound. He was deaf like I am now. Then, I wasn't. I'm too proud to wear a hearing aid.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Bob [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] wears a hearing aid, but he can't hear. That's what, what--I said, well ain't no need of me getting one, you know. He would call up every week with his secretary and she would interpret to me what he wanted to ask if it was necessary. And his final question was, could you use any money? And I was--my answer was always, it can't hurt. He gave us twenty thousand dollars a month. It's the only time we had--I've ever worked at anything where I had enough money to operate. Aside from the extra things I asked him for, he gave--automatically, we got twenty thousand dollars a month from him.
Speaker 1: Do you recall his name?
Speaker 2: I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, the function of the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women was basically for birth control and abortion laws for women?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he picked this state because he believed in it and he wanted an abortion law. We had the worst--one of the worst abortion law--legislations in the--in the nation and he wanted that changed, and we lost it by one vote. That's why the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women was set up, was to change--I don't believe in abortion myself, but I, I believe--I never had an abortion. I don't know whether I ever would or not because I've never had to, but then, I thought it's a woman's right to change--to decide whether she wants to be a mother and go through this and it is something 'cause I have an adopted daughter [Alice McAbee]. When they get in their teens, bringing up a daughter is something else, honey (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 588330
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you this question, now, the--you've come through--you've seen Las Vegas [Nevada] since the '40s [1940s] almost. You've seen it go through different kind of changes and the '50s [1950s] you saw it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's a different town.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now in the '60s [1960s] now, we're in the '60s [1960s], how's the climate now for the entertainers and for--and for the musicians and the people in--
Speaker 2: Very different. Very different.
Speaker 1: --in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: They can go anywhere they want to. They can live anywhere they want to. As a matter of fact, many people, many entertainers live here.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They made it their home. Robert Goulet just died in Los Angeles [California]. It's a headline in this morning's paper. It probably is not the headline in Los Angeles paper, but it's a headline here because he was a native--a Nevada resident.
Speaker 1: Nat King Cole was here some time. Was he here for a while also?
Speaker 2: Nat King Cole was a different person with his second wife than with his first. I knew him through his first wife. His second wife, Maria [Maria Cole], his widow, alienated everybody that Nat knew including me because I was a very good friend of, of Nadine [Nadine Robinson] and Nat's. As a matter of fact, Tommy Dorsey tried to get Nat to go with him and they came by to talk to me to ask me--he had been striving so hard for recognition and he had gotten--not gotten the kind of recognition he deserved, being the kind of artist he was. And he was tempted to go with Tommy Dorsey, and all I had to do was remind him what Frank Sinatra went through to get rid of, of Tommy Dorsey handling him, and he and Nadine decided not to. And it wasn't three months later when he got the opportunity that he had been waiting for all his life. But, when he and--he, he came by my place at--the night before he went to New York [New York] and he told me all my dreams have come true. My only regret is that Nadine can't come with me. She's--had just been released from the hospital. She had had surgery. He said, but as soon as she gets well, she'll be coming to New York to be with me. Between the time that Nadine could go to New York and then, he met Maria, his present wife, the widow of, of Nat's. He fell in love. Nadine didn't know anything about it. She got dressed and got on a plane and went to New York and they stopped her at the hotel lobby and told her she couldn't go up, and Nat came down and told her to go back home. He had fallen in love. She came by my house and told me. She was in--she was almost hysterical. She was so shocked and so hurt. A couple of years later after he married Maria, the first thing she did was break up his trio. You remember he had--Nat King Cole's trio. She fired two of the boys that worked with him.
Speaker 1: Was John Collins one of those musicians?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was John Collins the guitar player?
Speaker 2: And then she alienated all his friends that he had been a friend--including me. A couple of years later, he was playing the 331 Club in Los Angeles and Nadine called me and asked me to go down there with her to see him. I said, "Oh, Nadine, you don't want to go." She said, "Yeah, I think I'm over him and I want to see him to find out." So, we didn't get a table. We were just sitting at the bar and it was his birthday and it--which is the 17th of March. And he said--as he passed by the bar on his way from doing his gig, she said, "Happy birthday, Nat," and he looked to see who it was and he realized it was Nadine and he just kept walking. And I was stunned. I just didn't know what to do. I couldn't look at her. I couldn't do anything. And she touched me and she said, "It's over. It's over. I'm all right."
Story_ID: 588331
Speaker 1: Now, as we go through these years, we want to discuss--you mentioned Nat King Cole and your relationship with him, but let's also talk about some of the female greats, namely Dinah Washington and Billie Holiday. Let's start with Billie Holiday. You had an association with her?
Speaker 2: Well, as I told you in, in the intermission, Billie Holiday was some--a singer that you either liked or didn't like. There was no in between with her. I happened to have been one of those that really liked her. I was a fan. And I--when I went to New York [New York], she was working there, somewhere, and I went to hear her and I, I was so enthused about hearing her in person. Because the first time I heard her, I thought it was Ella Fitzgerald singing on the radio--on the juke box. But, I was so enthused about her and I went every time I could to hear her. She was in San Francisco [California] working when her chauffer got busted with--for heroin. They were after her. And they came--she called me in Los Angeles [California] and asked me to come there because she had trouble. I was in Los Angeles. And I went to San Francisco and they came--the police came and they searched her room, but she had hidden her dope outside in the curtain of the hall, so they didn't find anything. But the captain who--and it was the captain of narcotics who, who lead the squad that, that raided her hotel room and investigated and looked for dope. And her chauffer's still in jail. He came in to my room and told me that he could understand my being a fan of hers but she was a drug addict and his job was to prosecute, arrest and prosecute drug addicts, and he was only doing his job. But he had investigated me and thought that I was a nice woman and a good woman, didn't use drugs, and he advised me to stop the relationship and I thanked him and thanked him for his consideration and they left. But--so, I called Charles Matthews [Charles H. Matthews] in Los Angeles who was an attorney. Tom--when Tom Bradley quit the police force, he went in business as a lawyer with Charles Matthews, and Charles told me, he said, "They're gonna arrest her and put her in jail to find out how long she can go without dope." He said, "Get her out of here." I said, "How?" He said, "I don't know, but don't call me anymore but get out of there." So, she was working there and I went to work with her, and she did the first show and I had lined up through a girlfriend of one of the San Francisco 49ers. I had arranged with her to get her driven to Los Angeles. So, after the first show, he was there and I put her in the car with her and sent her to Los Angeles so white--a white couple who are friends of mine, very good friends that I had known a long time in Hollywood, they were writers, and I told them what--they were Holiday fans, too. And they told me that she looked like a B movie actress when she got out of the car, drunk. She drank--Billie Holiday not only shot heroin, she drank a fifth of cognac a day, at least a fifth. And he said, she was bedraggled and looked, looked what she was, but they put her to bed 'cause I was getting a plane in the next morning coming down. I had so many good friends that helped me. When I called Joe Louis and told him, he said take her to my apartment. He kept an apartment in Los Angeles. Hickey [ph.] who owned the (unclear), Hickman [ph.], he, he came every day to see that we had everything to eat that we wanted, all--you know, everything. I remember that Billie had told me that on a picture that she was making with Louis Armstrong, that she had told me about a man that she had met, an extra on the picture, who said he was working to help his sister who wanted to go to nursing school and she was a nurse. So, I went over on Central Avenue and found this man and I told him and his sister came and nursed her while she was kicking her habit 'cause I was hiding her out from the--
Speaker 1: Police.
Speaker 2: --San Francisco Police [San Francisco Police Department]. They had a statewide police thing out for her and I was hiding her out in Joe Louis' apartment. If they found her, they would find her clean because I, I had seen to it that she had kicked her habit. I had my doctor to come over and, and see her. But he tested her heart and he said, "Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key], I can't be involved in this. She's got a strong heart and she's gonna have to kick it by herself, but she can 'cause her heart was saying it." That's when I found her--this man whose sister and his sister came over 'cause I didn't know what to do for her. And it was awful. It was awful to see her kick that heroin habit.
Story_ID: 588332
Speaker 1: But, Hickey [ph.] came at three o'clock in the morning after she was kicking the habit and drove us down to Riverside [California] where my family was and my brother [Malcolm Key, Jr.] took us in, and we stayed in Riverside. And she'd walk around and smell a rose and said, "I don't remember ever smelling a rose." I felt so sorry for this girl who had so much talent as far as I was concerned and she was so wasted. So, after I thought it was over and she was clean and, and healthy, I called Joe Glaser who was her manager and told him, don't worry about Billie [Billie Holiday], I've got her, but I'm hiding her out. She's clean. She's kicked her habit. And he said, "I'll send you the money. When you think she's safe, put her on a plane and I'll meet, meet or have her met in New York [New York]." So, we were sitting in the kitchen, Billie and my mother [Louise Beverly Key] and me and my doctor, and the doctor told her, "You're a drug addict and you'll never change." And he said, "Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key] has stuck out for you and your friends have stuck out for you, but you're a hopeless character. I have jeopardized my career to try to help you, but I don't--." I was--hated him. I hated him for the way he talked to her. So, "Stuff" Crouch [Julius "Stuff" Crouch] who had a afterhours spot came over and I asked him to take her to the airport 'cause I didn't want to--them to see us together. And she had a little Chihuahua dog that she kept--put in her mink coat, in her pocket of mink coat that she took on planes with her, and she--he took her to the airport. But what Joe Glaser had not sent was a one-way ticket from Los Angeles [California] to New York. She got off the plane in Chicago [Illinois], he called me up and he said, "My people were at the airport and she wasn't on the plane." I said, "Well, then she must've--." I said, "Was it a one-way ticket?" And he said, "No, it was one stop in Chicago." She had stopped in Chicago and was back on dope. The next time I saw her was the same 331 Club [Los Angeles, California] where Nat [Nat King Cole]--where I seen Nat. She didn't even know me. Or if she did, she didn't--refuse to recognize me.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: That's the last time I saw her.
Speaker 2: So do you think that she just never had a chance to begin with, huh? You think it was--
Speaker 1: From the time she was born. She was born in a whorehouse I think, but she never talked about her childhood but except it was bad. And then when she got to New--when she started singing, she met pimps and drug people who put her on drugs, you know. She never had a chance.
Speaker 2: How about Dinah Washington?
Speaker 1: Dinah Washington was a love. She was a--she could sing to--for me. She sang the kind of singing I like. I liked Dinah. Dinah was wonderful and she was wonderful in many ways. She was devoted mother. She married a football player [Richard Lane] and I think she was married to him when she--when she died. She died suddenly. I think she died in Detroit [Michigan], your hometown.
Speaker 2: I think so, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, off stage or off the stage, off the bandstand, how was she? Was she funny? Was she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was an entertainer. She didn't bother about--she was entertainer. She was accepted as Dinah Washington. That was good enough for her.
Story_ID: 588333
Speaker 1: So, you had a lot of significant relationships with a lot of significant people, but you still always had your activism going. So, we move through the '60s [1960s] and you've done the--you've, you've been the PR [public relations] person for the council or, or the Committee for the Rights of Women. And you're in your fifties now, going into your sixties, '69 [1969] to '72 [1972], tell us about the Economic Opportunity Board of Clark County [Nevada]? What did you do for them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I--the Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women, I was in Carson City [Nevada] for the vote on abortion and Dave Hoggard [J. David Hoggard, Sr.] who was head of the Economic Opportunity Board flew up there to talk to me and he told me about--you see, I was at the meeting a few years earlier when the woman who headed the tuberculosis association [National Tuberculosis Controllers Association] talked about the economic opportunity program and she said it was coming to Las Vegas [Nevada] 'cause she had put in the application for it, and she had recommended David Hoggard to help. And he wanted to know when this Nevada Committee for the Rights of Women were over, would I come to work for the EOB? That's how I started to work for, for them. They had--they--the economic opportunity program was built for failure. They didn't intend to let--[U.S.] Congress didn't intend for it to be a success. I went to work with him for the new careers program [Nevada Careers Program]. The new careers program provided that you couldn't enlist anybody in the program who had attended school past the fourth grade, but you gave them a college education and what kind of atmosphere did they call it, but it was supposed to be--they knew that they were uneducated and that they would, would need special treatment, and they--
Speaker 1: Remedial courses. Remedial, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, rem- and then half the time, they would attend UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] for this remedial course and the other half, they would be placed on jobs and do jobs. So, I told David, I said, "David, there's no way in the world for anybody who hasn't been past the fourth grade to--into this program, so you have to cheat it." And he said, "What do you mean cheat it?" I said, "Get people who at least graduated from high school or have, have some high school," so that's what we did. You just had to ignore what the program called for. And they had this remedial course and the man who conducted it, the professor at UNLV, he later ran for something, either the [U.S.] Senate or the assembly [Nevada State Assembly]. I voted against him (laughter), who, who ran it. He, he had no business running it because he meant well but he, he didn't know what they needed. And my job was to do this. Flora Dungan who was in the assembly and who was one of the great--they got a--UNLV, they get a building named for her. Flora Dungan was a friend of mine and she called me and she said, "Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key], get rid of the EOB and come to work for the Democrat [Democratic Party]." She said, "I'm gonna see to it that an office is opened there. I want you to run it." I'm a registered Democrat. So, I said, "Thank you," (laughter). So, I went to work for the Demo- Democrats on the--on the thing.
Speaker 1: So, between 1969 and 1972, now, chronologically you're fifty-eight years old going on--in your sixties now--
Speaker 2: I didn't feel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're still working.
Speaker 2: --any different.
Speaker 1: What are people saying? Why are you still working? Anybody say anything to you?
Speaker 2: No, nobody said--in fact, I don't--I don't know why they didn't know it because I have never lied about my age and not told anybody about my age, but I never felt any different. I didn't feel like--there was too much to be done. There's so, so much that still needs to be done that I resent the fact that younger people aren't more involved in getting things done that they should be.
Speaker 1: So, seventy--and so between '69 [1969] and '72 [1972] or after '72 [1972], you started working for--you, you worked for the party.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Louise Beverly Key] got sick in '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she fell and broke her pelvic bone and she was in her eighties or just turned eighty, so I left Las Vegas [Nevada] and went to Riverside [California] to take care of her and I stayed there. I'd, I'd come back and forth, but I took care of her for seven years until she died in '87 [1987].
Story_ID: 588334
Speaker 1: So, as you were taking care of your mother [Louise Beverly Key] and you were also working for--working for the Democratic committee at that point, right, for, for the party? And what, what was your role there?
Speaker 2: At the Democratic Party? To help Democrats become elected.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you were--
Speaker 2: And that's how I met so--and why--I met Harry Reid when--the first job he ever worked for, ran for was the board of hospital trustees here. I was editing the newspaper [Las Vegas Voice] for Dr. West [Charles West] then and he came in and introduced himself and told me what he was running for and he wanted to know if I was--could be instrumental in getting out the black vote for him, and I said it's according to what--well, the first thing he told me, he said, "Well, I'm a Mormon." I said, "Oh my god." And he said, "No, don't say oh my god to me because I, I believe in what you what you believe in." And I talked to him a while and I supported him and the newspaper supported him and we got him elected. And I supported him for every office he ran for and he ran all the way up to where he is now in the U.S. Senate. He's the head of the U.S. Senate. Richard Bryan, I met him at the newspaper. He called up one day and introduced himself. He was the first public defender we had here. And he told me that he heard that we had a jobs program on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] and he would like to meet the director of the jobs program because he had so many clients who were first offenders and he thought if he could promise a job for them, he could get them off from going to jail. So, I introduced him to the director who was here from Los Angeles [California], I can't think of his name, but he was the head--Lubertha Johnson's Operation Independence [Las Vegas, Nevada] was running that program and I introduced him to the director and he was successful in keeping a lot of people from going to jail who were first offenders. That's how I first met Richard Bryan. And he--when he became governor, he was the one that appointed me to the deputy labor commissioner.
Story_ID: 588335
Speaker 1: And I'm moving to that period right now, actually. It--it's--at this time, are you thinking about--have you ever thought back--it's like 1980 now, have you ever thought back about the fact that you were just going into a drugstore to see your mother [Louise Beverly Key] one day and you got a chorus girl job, and now here you are now as, as active as--your whole life has went through a, a major--I mean, you've done--you've done things on the entertainment side and seen Europe and things that most have never seen, met the greatest people in the world, and now here you are also a known activist for civil rights. Did you ever think about how all this came together for you or why it came together?
Speaker 2: Too busy.
Speaker 1: Too busy doing--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So, in 1980, you became the director of the Las Vegas branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: I think it was before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, whenever, it was during Dr. McMillan's [James B. McMillan] second administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had asked me to become his executive director when he ran for president at the same time. I said, well, if you get elected, I will be and he was and I did. And it was a very fulfilling job because we had an organization. We got the consent decree, which I have a copy of it here. And although all the terms of the consent decree were not--didn't happen, didn't become a reality, it helped and it provided that--and although we asked the government to investigate the discrimination that existed here against minorities in Las Vegas [Nevada] and all of Nevada, but when the U.S. government decided that our accusations were true after the investigation, they--the consent decree reads blacks, not minorities. It said our investigation proves that the discrimination against blacks is true and it is hereby ordered that every hotel and casino employ blacks to the point where they represent 15 percent of the population of that department from the kitchen to the--what's the top thing?
Speaker 1: The, the head manager, the administration.
Speaker 2: Yeah, executive department. Well, that didn't ever happen, but it certainly did cause a lot of jobs that were closed to us before because we had already broken down where you could either work as a janitor or maid. We had broken that down, but you never got any further than a, a desk clerk, but that consent decree made them open up the jobs in every department.
Speaker 1: And this was as late as the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, '70s [1970s] going into the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: This consent decree I think is signed by a judge in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, as you move through that, things are changing. Is the attitude in Las Vegas changing for black people? Are, are people freer now?
Speaker 2: Well, the whole town changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it--the gangsters no longer ran it, Corporate America came in. I don't know much about the Strip hotel or casino [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] anymore. I know I don't like it. I know that when Joe Neal was our senator, our black senator, in the legis- state legislature here that his number one aggravation and his point was always letting people know that although we had the biggest gaming operation than any other state in the union and every state in the union has gaming except two, that's Utah and Hawaii, that all of them pay more state taxes than Nevada, and he wanted to raise Nevada's taxes. We don't have state income tax. And we can't afford to give people the kind of services they need from the state because we're not taking a--that's why people are moving here. People are just moving in by droves because we don't have a state income tax. And we, we can't take care of the traffic here. We can't take care of anything. And the gaming only pays less than half of the most highly gamed taxes of any state in the--in the nation. And Joe Neal--and he's very unpopular. That's why now although he's retired from the senate, after being there for twenty years or so, he doesn't have one of those plush jobs that all the ones do, because he fought gaming so hard.
Story_ID: 588336
Speaker 1: So in 1983, Governor Bryan [Richard Bryan] named you the dep- deputy commissioner of labor. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't name me at first. He named a black man as deputy labor commissioner. But they found a bottle of whiskey and a lady's bra in a state car, so his job was over.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I got an--a telephone call from his appointment secretary and she asked me to meet him that night for a drink at some bar and she said it has to be a bar that supported him when he was running for governor, so we went. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] doesn't let anybody go by itself. That's what I learned from this, always have someone with you that can verify what you say had happened. So I took my friend, Mavis [ph.], who is dead now, she was in real estate here, I took her to meet him and we had a drink and he offered me this job. I said, "You know, until now, I didn't even know there was a labor commission let alone what a labor commission does. I have no idea what it does." He said, "Well, I know you're smart. What I'm looking for is loyalty and I know you're loyal. I know--I'm, I'm the governor, I was elected governor, I don't know what a governor is supposed to do, but I'm as smart as the next man and I think I'll do and I think you'll do it," so I accepted the job, and I stayed there. The head of the, the--the chairman of the ways and means committee was my optometrist at the time--was it optometrist? Yeah, ophthalmologist is the next step. So, I went to him and told him that I had this appointment. So, he said, well I'm chairman of the ways committee. They got--you are too old to last ten years. The state has a ten-year employment before you can get eligible for settlement, so he got through a law in Nevada that makes it possible to be eligible for a pension in five years but I stayed ten years. And I--Dick Bryan ran on for the United States Senate and was elected and Dick Miller who was the--not Dick Miller, what's his name? Miller--our governor [Bob Miller]. He was lieutenant governor and he followed him into office. When I called him up and told him I was resigning, he said, "You can't resign on my shift, you got to stay there because before Dick left, he told me that he never had to visit the Las Vegas [Nevada] office and neither did the labor commissioner from Carson City [Nevada] because you were handling the office so well. So, you got to stay as long as I'm here." I said, "You don't know how old I am." He said, "How old are you?" And I told him. He said, "Goodbye (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So that's when I resigned after ten years.
Speaker 1: So, you resigned actually in, in '93 [1993], so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you were like eighty-two years old when you resigned.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they had no idea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 588337
Speaker 1: And during that time after that, you, you started some more organizations, The Ladies Who Danced [The Ladies Who Danced, Inc.] and also the Barbara Jordan Democratic Club [Barbara Jordan Democratic Women's Caucus].
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about those two organizations.
Speaker 2: Well, some girl who was a bar maid in New York [New York] gave a--an affair in New York for The Ladies Who Danced. Her opinion was that she was--she was the niece of The Pointer Sisters, I think, one of those singing groups. And she said the chorus girls who had done such a great job had never been eulogized and never been given the credit for what it--what they did in the show. So, she wanted to give this affair and she invited all the girls who had been in the chorus or were in the chorus to come to New York for this affair. So, I went from here and several people went from Los Angeles [California], and when I came back from there, it was such a success and so nice, I got a tape of it, I organized the chorus girls that were here into The Ladies Who Danced. And we did an affair at the Stardust Hotel [Stardust Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], which they have torn down. Have they torn it down yet? Yeah. Boy, they blow up these things. You know, they were there one minute, the next minute they're gone. We had a very successful affair and financially successful. We gave the money to the senior citizens, the City of Las Vegas [Nevada] senior citizens organization and to the EOB [Economic Opportunity Board] senior citizens program. We gave them $3500 apiece. Then, the Barbara Jordan Democratic women's club, Bernice Jenkins who was our first black, first known black school board of trustee, who really shook up the school district and who was a great friend of mine. We sat in my labor commission office one day and dreamed up the Barbara Jordan Democratic women's club to educate black people at the issues that are involved, that involved them, and to get them active and involved. So, we founded the Barbara Jordan Democrat--we got permission from Barbara Jordan to use her name and we founded the Barbara Jordan Democratic women's club, but the wrong president volunteered to be president, and she used the Democratic--Barbara Jordan Democratic women's club for what she wanted to do, not for what we wanted to do, so we broke up.
Speaker 1: Okay. And were, were you able to get anything going anyway even though she was--
Speaker 2: Historic--black historic preservation committee [Las Vegas Black Historical Society, Inc.]. And the reason why I thought this was important was because people have come here from other states who are taking credit for things that people had done before them. I give you for an example, what really pissed me off, was The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Now, Thelma Toms came here from San Francisco [California]. See, when I first came to Nevada, there was no organization here at all. There was not a sorority, a fraternity, there was nothing but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and the NAACP was very effective. They had a handful of people who were working hard to counteract the existence of the discrimination in Las Vegas, and I decided to join them because they were active and they were effective. But, Thelma Toms came and she organized the first sorority here. She spoke to me for--immediately about it because I was editing the Voice [Las Vegas Voice] and she liked publicity and I was giving her plenty of it, and I told her I was not society minded, I was politically minded, and I thanked her but I wouldn't join, but I would support her in her effort. Then, she organized The Links. Now, there's a surgeon from Detroit [Michigan], Dr. Ice, came here, his wife [Pamela Ice] became president of The Links, his wife, and she's taking credit for being the pres- founding The Links here. And I saw her one night, so I went over there and I said, "Thelma Toms founded The Links 'cause she called me up in Riverside [California] and told me she was going to find--found it and wanted me to be a Link and I said the same thing holds true." I did join a sorority once because they got to fighting so much in the sorority that she founded, she said, "I want a sorority that is free of fighting. I want you to be the basileus of it." So, she finally did the (unclear) and I was the basileus for a year. Then I said if you can't find another basileus 'cause this is taking away all my time--but we hosted the regional. We were very effective. And as Dottie West [Dottie Seaman West] used to always say, tall loves each other 'cause she belonged to the first sorority. And she was a charter member of The Links as is Ann Bailey [Anna Bailey], Bob's [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] wife. So, there's a girl now from--there's three Californians that I've met who are volunteering here for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], his candidacy for president, and they're volunteering on their own. They're paying their own rent here to work for the caucus here, and one of them is a Link 'cause she asked me, she said, "Are you a Link?" I said, "No, but I know them all." And I said, "I'm the best friend of one who is the charter member." She said, "I'd like to meet her." So, we're gonna have lunch next week.
Story_ID: 588338
Speaker 1: Okay, so we've moved through the '93 [1993] now--and between '93 [1993] and 2000, what exactly did you do, those, those two committees (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I moved back to California after I retired. I lived with my cousin and her husband who live on Prince Albert Drive on the golf course [Victoria Club] at--in Riverside [California], lovely home, and they've been there long enough to have it paid for, and it's worth about ten times as much as what they paid for it. But, my daughter [Alice McAbee] who stayed here got sick and I was running up and down to visit her, and she lived here. And the manager told me one day, she said why don't you move here? You come up so often to see about your daughter and I'm gonna have a vacancy in May, and I said, well I lived here a long time. She said, well, shall I keep the apartment for you? And I decided, yes. So I've been back seven years.
Speaker 1: Since 2000. And it's--
Speaker 2: Is that the year I came back?
Speaker 1: I would imagine so.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, it's my seventh year.
Story_ID: 588339
Speaker 1: So, in 2005, you, you were inducted into the, the KLAS Channel 8 [KLAS-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] hall of fame. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well it seems like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wall of fame.
Speaker 2: --Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] forgot to tell anybody that it was my television show ['Talk of the Town'], my friend Bob, and they had inducted him a long time as having done it through Channel 8, the first all-Negro nation show. So, friends of mine who resented it sent them a copy of the booklet and told him, that was [HistoryMaker] Alice Key's show. Bob wasn't even on--they pulled their whiskers. I said it doesn't matter because I don't want recognition. You see, my grandfather [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves] taught me--taught all of us that we were born to serve and that's what I believe in. I don't want recognition, I want--but they kept after me and I said, okay. So, Bob and Anna [Anna Bailey] were invited to--when they--when I was inducted, so they inducted me as you said the year before last?
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005].
Speaker 2: It was 2005? So, they inducted--I think I got the plaque in there.
Speaker 1: And you basically retired from public service, but you've still been doing some--
Speaker 2: I retired from retirement.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's why I didn't want to do this interview. I told that girl I was retired from retirement even.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she told me how important you all were.
Speaker 1: And we appreciate it.
Story_ID: 588340
Speaker 1: Now, this--there have been a couple things you have been involved in, though. Tell us--tell us about the Moulin Rouge Preservation Association [Moulin Rouge Preservation Association, Inc.]. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that was an association that Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy] started because she was--she had bought this--she and her husband [Joe Preddy] and her, her oldest son [James Walker] had bought the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] and was trying to reestablish it to its former glory, and this organization was started and I, I think the president of it was an assemblyman and the vice president was Dee Dee Jasmine. But, Sarann called me one day and she said, "Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key], will you join this preservation comm- committee because they're not doing anything and you're my friend." They wanted--well, whatever they wanted to do. She said, "They're glorifying themselves." And I joined it, but the Moulin Rouge went down, she lost it, and we lost the preservation committee.
Speaker 1: Is the building still there or has it been--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, they've torn it down and everything. And how about the Black Las Vegas Historical Society [sic. Las Vegas Black Historical Society, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I started it. And I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I told you it may have been a thing. I resented the fact that newcomers were taking credit for what old-timers had done. So, we were at a meeting at the art center one day and I said, you know, we were discussing this fact because the Urban Chamber of Commerce which used to be the Black Chamber of Commerce, they changed the name, I don't know why, came from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. It was the second organization here. Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan] started it. He had Katherine Joseph to look into it and to find out all about it and to get it started. I think Sarah Ann was the first president of it. So, while we were talking, I said, well, you know what we really need here is a black hist- I don't like the term African American. I don't like it because you don't have to be a black to be an African American, and I'm very black. And Sarann was there and Katherine Joseph. I forgot who else was there. And they said, well, let's start one. So, I said, okay. Well, I think it was Katherine who said I'll--I'm willing to start if you'll be the president. I wrote the bylaws for it which I'm always regretful for the fact that I wrote that the, the, the officers, the first officers would stay in office three years 'cause I'm, I'm really tired of it, (laughter) you know. I, I want to be active in it but I'm tired of being president. We're a 501(c)(3) organization from the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], but we need to do things like we're gonna do in February, honor the pioneers who contributed so heavily to the community. But, I tried to get them to have an election of officers last year and one of the board members said to me we can't because of the bylaws. The bylaw says that the founding election officers have to remain for three years. I said, well, I only did that because I wanted to be sure that it didn't happen to the--happen to this organization what happened to the Barbara Jordan Democratic women's club [Barbara Jordan Democratic Women's Caucus]. I wanted to be president until it got founded and organized and we got a 501(c)(3). We've got that now and I want to be active with something else and I want--and I want David Washington to be the next president, which I told him and David accepted, he will be, but we can't do it until 2008.
Speaker 1: So, it's still active and it's moving through because you wrote the bylaws all the way through to 2008 (laughter).
Speaker 2: I wrote the bylaws (laughter).
Story_ID: 588341
Speaker 1: Well, now, is there anything else that, that you'd like to add to this that we haven't asked you, anything that I didn't ask you?
Speaker 2: The only thing, I wish the Black Historical Society, Inc. [Las Vegas Black Historical Society, Inc.], does its job and my hope is that it becomes a textbook and it's in the schools so they know--so the children are taught the history of black people in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I--what my hope is. I don't know whether anybody has that hope and I don't know how many years the Lord has left me, but until some other issue arises--now, if I were younger, I'd be down in Jena, Louisiana. If some other issue arises, I don't know whether I'll get involved in it, but that's what my hope is for the Black Historical Society.
Speaker 1: Miss Key [HistoryMaker Alice Key], how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what--and what's important to you so far? How do you feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel that I try to be a Christian. I'm a long way from it. I--we're all sinners, but I try to be a Christian and I try to respect everybody. I try to do to others as I'd have them do unto me and I think we're all born to serve. I think that's why--what we're supposed to do.
Story_ID: 588342
Speaker 1: And for those that want to go into the field of--let--let's say the field of entertainment or activism, what suggestions do you have for them, like, for a young person that says--that says, I want to be in entertainment or I want to be in activist (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as far as entertainment is concerned, I think they both--they first should have talent--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which a lot of people today as far as I'm concerned don't have talent but they're celebrities in the entertainment field. About being an activist, all you have to do is join someone, a group that's active, if their active and they're right. 'Cause there's plenty of people who are anti what we stand for. Don't join them. Join the ones that--and, and work for Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election. I think Obama is not only the most qualified candidate for president, the fact that he's black or half-black don't hurt. Ever since I heard him give that keynote speech at the Democratic Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts], the last one, I have wondered about him. I've read about him. I've bought both of his books. I've give- was given one of his books for my birthday. He didn't write it, but someone wrote about him, and I really believe he wants to change the way things are operated here, and that's what we need is change 'cause it's all--the lobbyists are running the country.
Story_ID: 588343
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done already that you would've done differently or anything you regret?
Speaker 2: Oh, plenty.
Speaker 1: Anything you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, share with us something. Give us something that you regret or you would've done differently.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I would have been more tolerant, although you have it there. They admitted me, which I didn't know, to the tolerant society in Georgia, Alabama, wherever it is because I'm--but I'm not as tolerant as I should be of other people. I'm intolerant of stupidity and I'm intolerant of people who work for themselves or for their own glorification and don't work for the other man, don't work for us all.
Story_ID: 588344
Speaker 1: And what are your thoughts about the Civil Rights Movement or the--or racism and, and, and the struggle today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we've always had civil rights movements. I think that was proven by Crispus Attucks' actions in the Revolutionary War. I think that the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] era brought it to the attention of all people. I heard a man the other night, we, we formulated a African council or African American--although I went along with the term for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I didn't even argue it, African American council's call for Obama. These are African Americans that are supporting his candidacy. Someone got up and read a letter from Martin Luther's Ki- friend and founder of the Southern Leadership Council [sic. Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and it was a long letter, and when she got through it, I said I wonder why they just didn't read the letter that Martin Luther King wrote to the church when he--when they asked him why couldn't he wait? He said the wrong thing, it took him longer to say it. He told them why we couldn't wait when the, the church council questioned his actions, he said--I have it here. The Unitarian church took his letter out of a book he later wrote called why I can't wait--'Why We Can't Wait' [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. He told why we can't wait 'cause we've waited two or three hundred years and we hadn't gotten satisfaction, so it has to be now and it has to be non-combative.
Story_ID: 588345
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community in the future? What do you hope for?
Speaker 2: I don't think they're focused enough on the right thing. I think there's too many people who are just interested in their own individual circumstance or success. You see, the reason why we were successful in getting a civil rights bill and changing this [Las Vegas, Nevada] from its cognomen, Mississippi of the West, was because the few activists, black activists here were all focused on the same thing. They were all focused and we don't have that focus, that unity of feeling now.
Story_ID: 588346
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why do you consider those values important besides being a Christian and besides born to serve? Any other values you think are necessary?
Speaker 2: I think family. I think family is very important. I believe that the fact that I came from the family I did helped mold me into the kind of person I am because my family believed in values. They believed in behavior. They believed in respect. And I think that's what I came through and I think that's important. My family is a big family and we're still together. We had--they came here for my ninety-fifth birthday. We went to Riverside [California] for my cousin, Gaye [ph.], who is the next oldest person in the family, for her birthday last year. I'm going there for Thanksgiving. Many of us are together and we're all together when it's important.
Speaker 1: So, family values.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 588347
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered and, and what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't even care (laughter) because I won't be here, but if they do think about me, I hope that they say I'm the kind of person that they respected and that I did the kind of work for the community that was supposed to be--that was important, and that I cared about what happened to--and I cared about my country. And I feel strongly that if Bush [President George Walker Bush] stays president, we won't have a country 'cause we have no allies. I'm very concerned. Although, I won't be here, I've got a daughter [Alice McAbee] and grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and they'll be here.
Speaker 1: So, what message do you have for those children, your grandchildren, and all of our children and grandchildren (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the one I give them all the time, get active. None of them are. They said you were active enough. None of my children are active. My daughter just laughs. She told me on the phone yesterday, she said, you've done enough for us all. I said that's why your, your sons don't care. Of course, my youngest grandson is now a Muslim. He's joined the Muslim church and I said, well, I don't object to it, but tell me why. What does a Muslim church offer you that just being black doesn't offer? Why do you have to be a Muslim? He says that he's a different kind of Muslim, American Muslim, than he--I forgot what he told me whether he's a Sunni or Shia.
Speaker 1: He's not part of the Nation of Islam or any of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 588348
Speaker 1: Now, why do you think history is so important?
Speaker 2: Because I think if you don't know what's happened in the past, there's no way for you to map out your future. If you don't know what's happened, you have to res- respect the fact that a lot of changes need to be made and it's up to you to make those changes or to support the people who are making the changes.
Speaker 1: Would you choose a different path for your life if you had a chance? Would you do anything differently?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Would you choose a different career path? Would you choose a different--
Speaker 2: No because I didn't choose the career path that I've had. It just--things just happened, one after the other.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you. You know, you've been a very gracious, gracious subject and we really appreciate your time and we're gonna do some--few more things here, but I want to thank you for what you've done for, for not just Nevada but for all of us in general. We want to thank you for this interview. It's been excellent. Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And thank you for interviewing me.
Speaker 1: You're welcome (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're a very nice man. I didn't want to be interviewed. I told that lady who called me from Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 588349
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your work with the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] here in, in--
Speaker 2: Well, the actual program is called the WonderChild program [WonderChild-SHEROES] and Eileen Oser founded it and heads it up, and what she does is work through the Boys and Girls Club that you spoke of and she goes over and conducts these classes from kids up until ten or twelve years old, all girls, and she gives them self-esteem. When she finishes working with them, they feel like they're somebody. They have self-esteem that they didn't have any more because they have come from families that don't have self-esteem or from localities that don't give them self-esteem, but that's what she's working at. And she has a--as a part of her program, she's initiated something that she calls sheroes. A shero is a woman who has been active in doing things to make things better for people, and Rosa Parks and I were the only two sheroes she had. I worked with her because she's working with girls and, and many of the girls are black at the Boys and Girls Club. Some of them are not, but whoever they are, they need self-esteem and she gives it to them.
Speaker 1: And do you feel that self-esteem is a very important value that's missing a lot of times today? Do you think that that's a missing factor in a lot of these young people's lives, the fact that there is no self-esteem? Do you think that's the problem?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's because they have been ignored or have been made to feel that because they are black that they are lower than--did you read about the scientist [James Watson] in this week's paper? It was in one of the papers either this week or the last or last week who said that his studies had shown he felt sorry for Africans, black Africans because his studies had shown that blacks are int- intellectually inferior to whites?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a, a Nobel Peace Prize winner, you know, and he--I think he was highly reprimanded for saying that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think that, that he, he--I think he was well in his eighties and he had found this--found this information. He discovered DNA is the person you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: One of the DNA--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --founders.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a respected scientist, but other scientists have gotten on him for that remark.
Speaker 1: Well, we thank you for that information very much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 588350
Speaker 1: Well, this is my daughter who I adopted in 1942. She was two years old when I adopted her. Her name was Alice Beverly. Her name now is Alice McAbee. She's sixty-three or sixty-four years old. You do the math. And--high school in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: And my beloved mother [Louise Beverly Key]. As I often say, everybody who has a baby isn't a mother and I was fortunate, I had a mother. Anybody who was a friend of mine was welcome and she took care of all of my friends as well as me. She died at eight--in '77 [1977] at eighty-seven years old. I miss her. I mourn her always.
Speaker 1: My (unclear) days. I was glamorous then. I was a show girl still. That picture was made by Ted Allan, a photographer in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] who had been a makeup man at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.]. He photographed--he made you up first and then photographed you. I don't know what year that was but I think it was in the '50s [1950s], could be the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Aunt who died last year at 101 years old and her husband, and one of their younger generations in front. I'm not on it but my mother is here between Vinny [ph.] and my aunt, and that's my grandfather [Key's maternal foster grandfather, John Alves] on this side of my aunt and my grandmother, Mary Alves on the other, and my cousin, Cora [ph.], and her husband, Frank [ph.], who is my favorite relative. I was nine years old when he was born. I can't see who that is. I think that's Amelio [ph.], my other cousin's brother. I can't name them all. There's too--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where is your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is in between--huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where is your mother?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is this her, Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key]?
Speaker 1: Right there. No, no, no, between them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh.
Speaker 1: My mother there. And then that's my brother in the back standing taller than anybody.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: No, in the back row, tallest one. That's my brother, Malcolm [Malcolm Key, Jr.], who died--I was just looking up his year he died. I, I don't remember when it was, but.
Speaker 2: My friend Eileen Oser, the founder of WonderChild program [WonderChild-SHEROES] of which I am very proud to be a part of. She made me a shero at the tribute they paid to me several years ago. When was that picture taken?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We took it February 8th, this year [2007].
Speaker 2: February the what?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) event. February 8th.
Speaker 2: Of this year?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This year, two thousand--
Speaker 2: Taken from a book written by--what's the disc jockey's name? A picture of me and Duke Ellington. I was out of show business then, but I had worked with Duke several times and I don't remember when or where that picture was taken. I don't have the picture. I took it out of a--out of the book, but Duke Ellington was one of the people that I am proud to say I worked with him because I believe that Duke was our greatest composer.
Speaker 1: Dorothy Dandridge on it, Louis Armstrong, "Stuff" Crouch [Julius "Stuff" Crouch] in the back row, [HistoryMaker] Prince Spencer, a very famous dancer, Hal Nicholas [Harold Nicholas] of the Nicholas brothers, "Sweets" Edison [Harry "Sweets" Edison] is on the end, Count Basie. Where was this picture made? It was so long ago, I don't even remember it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-two [1942].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946]. Well, I know it was a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Recently, we went up to visit Harry Reid. Harry Reid is a, a very big man now in the Democratic Party. He is a leader of the Democratic Party in the United States Senate, but I have supported his candidacy for everything he ran for since his first candidacy, which was for the hospital board of trustees. He says I'm a patriot.
Speaker 1: And this picture was taken at the intermission at Jazz at the Phil- Norman Granz's Jazz at the Philharmonic. It's me with Louis Armstrong on the left, Billy Eckstine, Count Basie, and the one you can't see, Art Tatum. It was a snapshot that I had made into a picture.
Speaker 2: I don't know what that is, a proclamation.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): From the governor.
Speaker 2: From who?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The governor.
Speaker 2: The governor? Who was Kenny Guinn then, a Republican.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's when you were--
Speaker 2: Here's a proclamation--that was for the tribute that was given to me by a committee of people.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's this tribute.
Speaker 2: Program of the tribute that was given to me for my contribution to the development of the program. Somewhere in there it shows the, the committee members. If I--reach it for me and I'll show you who is on the--
Speaker 1: That picture was made either by the church or--our, our church puts out a book and they had us take a picture. I belong to Calvary Southern Baptist Church [Las Vegas, Nevada]. We lost our pastor this year. He died with cancer and he was only--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who--who's this? Who's in this one?
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in New York [New York]. That's Dr. Strickland [ph.] on the right of--brother-in-law of Dr. West [Charles West] who I was familiar with. I can't remember the name of the club, but Billy Daniels was there singing 'That Old Black Magic.' That's who we went to see. And that man was from St. Louis [Missouri] or Kansas City [Missouri]. I don't remember his name. He was with Dr. Strickland, who I went with.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, on the left?
Speaker 1: Yeah, on the left. And I don't remember his name. But that was taken in New York City downtown at a nightclub.
