Story_ID: 360186
Speaker 1: My name is Evelyn Pounds and I am the interviewer and Adrian Jackson is the videographer and I'm going to address you as sir.  Sir, please state--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I just want to remember the location and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay. Please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Including my middle name?  My name is Reed DeWade Kimbrough [HistoryMaker Reed Kimbrough].  R-E-E-D, middle name, D-E, capital W-A-D-E, Kimbrough, K-I-M-B-R-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: February 27th, 1951, Selma, Alabama, that's Dallas County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 23rd of November, 2005.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview, the address, we're at The HistoryMakers office at 476 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia.  Your occupation.
Speaker 2: I, I'm the director of diversity programs and community relations at the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, here in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 360187
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish type questions.  Just bear with me.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Whoo, my favorite vacation destination?  I don't think I have it on, if I had anywhere that I would go to, it'd be Portofino, Italy.
Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying?  I probably got a bunch of them (laughter), I just can't remember them right now.  Oh, man, that's something you have to ask my son [Anthony Kimbrough].  He could probably think of a bunch of 'em.  My favorite phrase--
Speaker 1: Well, that's all right, that's okay.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.
Story_ID: 360188
Speaker 1: We'll just go on and explore your family background--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just something about your early days.  Please tell us about your mother.  What was her name and like where was she born, where did she grow up and what do you know about her background and her growing up but first state your mother's name and spell that for us.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ernestine Willis Kimbrough, E-R-N-E-S-T-I-N-E, Willis, W-I-L-L-I-S, that's her maiden name, Kimbrough, K-I-M-B-R-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Dallas County, Alabama, Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up there?
Speaker 2: She did, she did grow up in Selma.
Speaker 1: In, okay, what do you know about her background and her growing up days?  Did she tell you any stories about when she was young in Selma?
Speaker 2: My mother was a, was a self-described tomboy.  She was very much into athletics, cheerleading and things like that.  She brags a lot about the fact that she could outrun her siblings, particularly her brother and those around her.  She lived on a farm with my grandparents [Bessie Davis Willis and Andrew Willis], actually owned their own land outside of Selma which was an anomaly back then, but she talks about going to school in a one-room school, doing a lot of walking and religion and her spirituality really plays a large part in her life and in her upbring- up, her rearing.  She's a beautician and she talks a lot about fixing hair in Selma.  She lived outside of Selma actually, like I mentioned, and the bus only went so far outside of the city limits and from that point she would have to walk along country roads, dusty roads, and, to get home, usually at night, and she talks about having to jump into the ditch when she saw headlights coming because that usually meant, she didn't know who it was and those were understandably difficult times for black people, African Americans (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what year did you say, what year was she born?  Her birthday?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1928.
Speaker 1: What month and date?
Speaker 2: April, the 26th of April, 1928.
Speaker 1: And she was a girl born up in Selma, Alabama.  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She's a typical middle, middle child.  She's a typical middle child.  She has an older sister and a younger sister and then a much younger brother who came along much later but primarily it was the three of them.  She always, and still, and still does need to be the center of attention and, and we grant her that privilege to be the center of attention.
Story_ID: 360189
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What was his name and would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is William, William Reed Kimbrough [William Kimbrough], W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Reed, R-E-E-D, Kimbrough, K-I-M-B-R-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, but let me just go back to your mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] when you said she had to jump into the ditch when she saw headlights coming at night.  Did she share any of those stories with you or did she share a story with you about what could possibly happen if she hadn't jumped into the ditch because we know those were times of segregation?
Speaker 2: Well, well she always knew that she could be accosted.  She never did share any time when she was actually accosted but (pause)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You can re-ask the question so he can start to answer it again.
Speaker 2: Okay, would you tell it, did she share, did your mother share any stories about what, why she felt she had to jump in the ditch when she was a young girl?
Speaker 1: No specific story.  She just talked and alluded to the fact that you could be accosted if you were out on a lonely road and, and came upon a white person, usually white men, and that she always avoided that.  As I mentioned before, in segregation times, it was, they were just awful tough times and I'm sure her parents [Bessie Davis Willis and Andrew Willis] and their community were steeped in defense mechanisms and how to avoid trouble as much as possible.  I do know, and I just learned this recently, I go back to the fact that my grandparents owned property that other people would come and work, that some of that property was basically taken from them.  They were offered chances to sell portions of it and my father, my grandfather was a very strong individual and he would not sell, he and his brother would not sell their property.  And so, the city would just annex part of it and they would lose it.  But even now, our family owns about fourteen acres of land outside of Selma [Alabama].
Speaker 2: And that's in the same place where your mother grew up?
Speaker 1: In the same place.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was interesting for blacks to have a land at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  My grandfather, went in the Ar- went to the [U.S. military] service.  Our land is situated behind what is, was Craig Air Force Base [Alabama], outside of Selma, and when he went into the service during the First World War [World War I, WWI] and came out, he had some money that he had saved and they, they purchased some land and kept the majority of it.  I think at the height of, they had probably about forty acres of land.  So like I said now we still have about fourteen of those acres.
Story_ID: 360190
Speaker 1: Now your father's name again is William (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William, William Reed Kimbrough [William Kimbrough].
Speaker 1: All right.  Did, where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born, actually my father was born in Clarkedale, Arkansas but his family came out of a little place called Kimbrough, Alabama, which is outside of a little place called Nanafalia, Alabama which is in the southern--southwestern portion of the state.  For a period of time they had moved to Arkansas where he was born and then they moved back to Alabama and settled in Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that Kimbrough, Alabama, is that, does that have anything to do with the last name?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure, and I don't know this for sure, but I'm pretty sure that Kimbrough, Kimbrough is a Scottish name and there was probably a landowner who owned a bunch of African slaves who took his name.
Speaker 1: And that's interesting that you should have a last name, Kimbrough, and, but we'll get on into that as we move on to be named after a particular town.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he share any stories about his growing up days?
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, not many at all.  My father's a pretty private individual, and I came up in a time where kids were, were expected to be seen and not heard which meant that you didn't get to hear a lot of things that you would normally hear today.  So, most of the things that we heard, we gleaned from folks who were willing to tell us.  My father didn't, didn't share a lot of information.  He was a pretty stern individual and I think his sternness came from, from his, his upbringing but he is not, I've never had him share much information in terms of what it was like when he was a boy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year and month was he born in?
Speaker 2: My father was born May 30th, 1919, in (pause) Clarkedale, Clarkedale, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: In Clarkedale, Arkansas.
Story_ID: 360191
Speaker 1: There was a little bit of a difference between his [Kimbrough's father, William Kimbrough] age and your mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] age, right?
Speaker 2: A little bit, a little bit.  My mother, my mother graduated from high school in Selma [Alabama], it was a segregated high school and went to Montgomery [Alabama] to attend Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University], I guess they called it Alabama State College at the time, and she took, she took a room with, with Pearl Kimbrough [Pearl Perkins Kimbrough], didn't know my father.  My father was away in the [U.S.] military at the time and, and when he came home on leave, they met, they met and around about my mother's sophomore year, my father convinced her that, that they should get married which they did and they got married that December of nineteen--I believe she said it was 1947.  I believe that's the right time.  And consequently she never, she never finished her, her work toward her degree.
Speaker 1: What was she majoring in?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know (pause).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about Alabama State, but a lot of colleges when they first started out in university, they started out as teacher colleges and perhaps, you know, she might have thought about education but she never stated.
Speaker 1: It could have been and she may have told me and I've forgotten but I think that's, that's a pretty good assumption.
Story_ID: 360192
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Who they were and like what origin, what mix?
Speaker 2: Not far back.  I can only, in terms of my father's [William Kimbrough] family, I know that my father's father's name was Tom, Tom Kimbrough.  I can't go any further back than that.  I remember my grandmother's [Pearl Perkins Kimbrough] on my, on my father's side.  I remember her mother, my great-grandmother, but you know what, I can't even recall her name right now but she died when I was a, when I was fairly young and I always remember her as being the strange lady that lived in the back of the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why would you call her that?
Speaker 2: We were afraid of her.  She was just, she always yelled at us as kids but, and I didn't get to see her very much.  I really didn't get to see her very much.  On my mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] side--I know that on my father's side, that there was some Indian, Native American blood.  My father's mother was, was full-blooded Native American.  I never saw her, I never met her and I can't say, I can't really trace my grandmother's lineage.  I kind of lost that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I kind of lost that--
Story_ID: 360193
Speaker 1: Now on your mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] side, you stated that they were landowners--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --her mother [Bessie Davis Willis] and father [Andrew Willis] were, were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --landowners and do you have, what, what mix, do you know if they were, the mother, your mother's mother, was she mixed, or was she--
Speaker 2: I don't think she was.  I know my father, my grandfather, my mother's father was a light-skinned man and, and that's what we trace that Indian [Native American], that Indian blood there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, but my grandmother was a, was a very dark-skinned woman.
Speaker 1: Do you know if they were free or if they had any connections with slavery, either of her parents?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Are there any family stories that they passed down to your mother or that came down to you, you know, through your mother about either of them or their parents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No family stories?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Story_ID: 360194
Speaker 1: Now on your father's [William Kimbrough] side, are there any stories that he might have passed down?
Speaker 2: From slavery days?
Speaker 1: Or from just any family stories, either from slavery, no whispers or--
Speaker 2: No, no whispers or anything.  Slavery really wasn't talked about much in our family.  I don't know why, I don't know why but I was born in Selma [Alabama] but I was not raised in Selma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I believe that, that my parents really worked hard toward the goal of integration and opportunity and that was one of the things that they did not really discuss with the kids, with the children, and I was the oldest child and I would imagine that if, if that had been discussed, I would have heard that first but I can't recall.  I do recall when I was in high, in grade school, we were doing a project in school and (pause), and the teacher had us, had the students draw a plantation scene.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: A plantation and I remember that she had me, and I believe there was one or two other black students, we worked on the slave quarters part of it.  We couldn't work on the big house.
Speaker 1: Now what was this again?  What school was this?
Speaker 2: Gosh, this was in, this was in a, in a [U.S.] Department of Defense school, dependent school [U.S. Department of Defense Dependents School], in Germany and I must have been in like the third grade, maybe the fourth grade that I, and I don't know why I recall that but I recall that so much that we only got to work on, on depicting the scenes of, of the slaves and cotton and all that stuff but I remember thinking that, thinking back to my, to my [maternal] grandfather's [Andrew Willis] farm, and she asked me a question, you know, "What did your grandfather do?"  And I said, "Well, he's a farmer," and she said, "A farmer?"  I said, "Oh, maybe he's a rancher," because I know he's got, he's got horses and he's got cows and, you know, got crops, but it's a farm in Alabama and I remember her looking at me kind of quizzically thinking that that was kind of odd because she thought maybe he worked on a farm.  I said, "No, that's his farm."
Speaker 1: And this was a German teacher?
Speaker 2: No, it was an American teacher.  It was, it was, I had all American teachers and they were all white women or men as I was coming up in, in grade school.
Speaker 1: In Germany?
Speaker 2: In Germany.
Speaker 1: That was very interesting to say the least.  Now both of your, well especially your father and mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough], did they ever, because of their birthdays, did they ever talk about the Depression [Great Depression] at all?
Speaker 2: They talked about the Depression and that had a real impact on, on my parents.  They were very frugal, particularly my father.  My father was, he was very frugal.  You could, he could squeeze a nickel until it cried and he took great pleasure in doing that but I could tell, I've always thought that because of the way they raised us that the Depression had a severe impact on them, that they had no desire to ever be that poor again.
Story_ID: 360195
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up in terms of?
Speaker 1: When you were a child.  Is there anything that stood out in your very early years?
Speaker 2: I remember trips back to Alabama.  I remember--most of my memories really for me start in, in, overseas, in Germany, when I was say pre-nursery school.  Just snippets of, of learning how to ride a bicycle, just playing outdoors and just being with other kids and they evolve into, into stronger memories in Oklahoma, attached to the same sort of activity and trips back south to visit my, to visit my grandparents and those are really clear to me because that was about the time my grandparents died when I was about five or six years old and those were pretty traumatic experiences to, to see your grandparents pass away, and evidently I was close to my [maternal] grandfather [Andrew Willis].  I remember crying really, really hard at his funeral.
Speaker 1: Now that's the grandfather who was in the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: That's the grandfather that was in the military.  That was the farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was your mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough]--
Speaker 2: That was my mother's father.
Speaker 1: --your mother's father, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And during this time, is, when you were still in, you were in, a military dependent?  You were with the department (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a military dependent.
Story_ID: 360196
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe what family life was like, holidays, special events, daily life when you were very young?
Speaker 2: Holidays, holidays were normally, when I was very young and that goes back to that, that early '50s [1950s] period, '55 [1955], '56 [1956], '57 [1957] when we were in, in Oklahoma.  Our holidays were primarily spent in Alabama.  We would go back to that location and the relatives, my cousins, would all congregate back at, at the home place.  We were close, it seemed to me that we were closer to my mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] side than we were to my father's [William Kimbrough] side at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's where the holidays were actually, took place?
Speaker 2: Those were the, that's where the holidays were actually spent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Everyday life, everyday life revolved around school.  My mother stayed home with me.  I was the only child for about seven years so the biggest change in our life came when my brother [Mark Kimbrough] was born in 1958.  It was an exciting time.
Speaker 1: You were glad to have some company?
Speaker 2: I was glad to have some company.  I was a spoiled kid.  I was a spoiled kid (laughter) and I was a shy child and I was the child that, that would bribe my, my playmates to play with me by giving them things, you know.  I'll give you this truck if you come over and play.
Speaker 1: About how old were you then when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, six or seven years old.
Speaker 1: Six or seven and where were you all at that particular time?  Where was the family?
Speaker 2: We were at Fort Sill, in Fort Sill, Oklahoma, right outside of Lawton, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a spoiled child (laughter).  I was always dressed real cute.  You know, I had the two guns, you know, I had the whole cowboy outfit, you know, with the, with the chaps and the hat and the two-gun kid, that's who I was.
Story_ID: 360197
Speaker 1: All right, please give your siblings' names, in birth order, including yourself.
Speaker 2: Okay, including myself.  I was born on February 27, 1951.  My brother, who was seven years my junior, was born April 1st, 1958.  My sister, my brother's name was Mark Rene, M-A-R-K, middle, R-E-N-E, Kimbrough [Mark Kimbrough].  My sister, IVA Demeris, and that's capital I, capital V, capital A, IVA, Demeris, D-E-M-E-R-I-S, Kimbrough [IVA Kimbrough], was born July the 18th, 1961 in Frankfurt, West Germany [Frankfurt, Germany].
Speaker 1: Now she has a very interesting name.
Speaker 2: Yes she does.
Speaker 1: And could you tell us something about her name.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Everybody wants to make it Iva but it is IVA.  I don't know how my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] came up with that but it has stuck.  She has never used Demeris.  It's always been IVA.
Speaker 1: And know--
Speaker 2: Now my brother's name has changed.  We used to call him Rene and now we call him Mark.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your sister, is it I period, V period, A period, or just IVA?
Speaker 2: Just IVA.
Speaker 1: All right.  I know that a lot of times in, when you look at older African Americans, they have like J.W. and it does, and there are just a lot of--
Speaker 2: It doesn't mean--
Speaker 1: --initials but no names and I say this, and the Demeris, was that German or, in your sister's name or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know how she got that either.
Speaker 1: She didn't, do you know, okay, how she derived that name.  That's a very interesting name.
Story_ID: 360198
Speaker 1: What street did you live on and, because you moved, you started out in Alabama.  Did you, do you remember the streets that you lived on in Selma [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Now the--no I don't, I don't.  I know how to get to it still but they were dirt roads, there were probably, I think they're still state roads, pretty much out there but I don't--I can't recall a street name that I've lived on until I get into almost high school.
Speaker 1: All right.  When you were in Selma, did you live on your grand- your mother's father's [Andrew Willis] property or did you all, when your mom [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] and dad [William Kimbrough] married, did you move to a different location?
Speaker 2: My, my father, I have to take you back to that.  My father and my mother got married in Montgomery [Alabama] in 1947.  He was then stationed outside of Baltimore, Maryland and that's where I was conceived.  Then he was assigned, he went to Korea, in the Korean War, in the Korean conflict, and that's when my mother came back to Selma and that, and I was born there while he was in Korea.
Story_ID: 360199
Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your father [William Kimbrough] and mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] right after they got married and we were talking about your daily--now what was life like for you when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they moved--
Speaker 2: They moved to Baltimore [Maryland].  He was stationed at Fort Meade, Maryland [Fort George G. Meade, Maryland] and they lived in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: And this is before you were born.
Speaker 2: And this is before I was born.  I know my mother has talked about the white steps in Baltimore, but then he was assigned to Korea during the Korean War, and my mother came back to, to Selma [Alabama] to have me and, you know, she stayed on the farm with her parents [Bessie Davis Willis and Andrew Willis].  Of course, I don't remember any of this stuff but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is right around 1951--
Speaker 2: About 1951 and then my father came back.  When he returned, we moved to, to Texas.
Speaker 1: In what part of Texas was that?
Speaker 2: It was Fort Bliss, Texas, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Speaker 1: And this was around, you were, like what age?
Speaker 2: One or two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything of Texas and our time out there.
Speaker 1: And these were all assignments that your father was getting--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when he was moving?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Where he's moving and then we went, then he was assigned overseas to Germany and--
Speaker 1: So what year was that when you ended up going to Germany?
Speaker 2: That had to be, I would say, about 1953, '54 [1954], somewhere like that, '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 360200
Speaker 1: So we went, we went to Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, West Germany [Wiesbaden, Germany] and, and I remember a few snatches of memories from that.
Speaker 2: And that's close to what city?
Speaker 1: Wiesbaden is close to, fairly close to Frankfurt [Germany]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --fairly close to Frankfurt.  It was about that time, it was about that time that my folks [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough and William Kimbrough] were looking at, they were having trouble having another child and they had even looked at the possibility of adopting a, a German baby.  For what, for whatever reason it didn't, it didn't work out and--
Speaker 2: Do you remember what nationality the German baby would have been?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't know.  I seem to remember trips to an orphanage but they're really sketchy.  They just come back in little sketches.
Speaker 2: Because this was roughly the few years after the war [World War II, WWII] so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --there would have been children who might have been orphaned in Germany because--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and there might have been a black baby, I don't know, I don't know, but that didn't happen because I remember being excited that I was going to get a sister because I think they were looking at a little girl.  Had that happened, I probably, they probably would never have had my brother [Mark Kimbrough], I don't know.
Speaker 2: So, what is the earliest recollection that you have of childhood?  What, where were you stationed?  Where was your family stationed then?
Speaker 1: That was probably in Wiesbaden, was my earliest recollections of, of some things that I can grab hold on.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what street you lived on?
Speaker 1: Have no idea.  We lived in the housing area.  They were like apartment buildings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was military housing?
Speaker 1: --in the military housing area.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and describe that for us, describe that military housing, like how it was situated, what type of families lived there.
Speaker 1: You would have these huge housing areas.  You may have an apartment building that might have, say, four flights, with two, two apartments, or units, on each flight, three of those stairwells in a particular building.  So you may have, let's see that's, two, four, six, eight, sixteen, you might have twenty-four units in a building and there may be, I would say, fifty to sixty buildings in this, in this housing area.
Speaker 2: What was the outside like?
Speaker 1: The outside?
Speaker 2: Of the building like.
Speaker 1: They were, they were, oh God, how do I describe it?  I want to say they were like either brick or stucco kind of buildings, very clean, very orderly, they were German constructed with paved streets and, and there would be playgrounds situated throughout the community.  Usually, the way military housing went, you would have people or soldiers of like rank congregated together, say, all sergeants together, all, all, and then all officers would be in a separate housing area together.
Speaker 2: And what rank was your father in at that point?
Speaker 1: My father was an enlisted guy so at that time he must have been like a, an E-4, E-5, which is a buck sergeant.  That seems about right.
Story_ID: 360201
Speaker 1: Tell me about what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: What sights, sounds and smells?  The sounds of, of police cars, in Germany they were like a melodical-kind of sound, dar-de, dar-de, dar, which is different from what, the sounds of sirens you would hear in the states.  I remember round doorknobs.  I remember opaque glass in the stairwells that you couldn't see through but light would come through.  I remember large picture windows in each, in each housing unit, you know, each set of quarters.  Smells, God, I can't remember smells that far back.  The one thing I do remember back then was, we were on the edge of a sort of an industrial area, it was a, some kind of quarry piece and kids being kids, they would like to explore things and I remember a kid getting caught in one of those apparatuses and losing his arms.  Safety was the big issue as I was coming up.  Always, the focus was on safety and making sure they knew where their kids were.
Speaker 1: Did most of the mothers stay at home who--
Speaker 2: All the mothers stayed at home.
Speaker 1: [U.S.] military, okay.
Speaker 2: All the mothers stayed at home.  My mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] supplemented the family income by fixing hair.  So that was a smell that comes back to me, the smell of the hot comb.
Story_ID: 360202
Speaker 1: Were there African American families in the housing complex?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Were there, how many would you estimate?  Was it a lot or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I probably can't even estimate at that time.  Now we're talking about Wiesbaden [Germany] but I know that we lived in, for that time which was a really integrated environment because there were all sorts of people.  I remember Mexicans, I remember Puerto Ricans and I remember white people and I remember Koreans, Asian folks being around us but there were more white people around us than anything.  As I look back at pictures now of times when I was young, growing up, I remember being one in a sea of white people.  I played sports, primarily baseball, and if I look back at my baseball pictures, I see a team of white guys and me.
Speaker 1: And this was still in Wiesbaden?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's further on down the road but, but I'm sure, I remember, I remember travel, snippets of travel and I remember snow because it was always, in Germany it was cold a lot and I don't like the cold.  So I remember a lot of snow, even though I liked playing in snow, I didn't like being cold.  Of course I just described the fact that I was an only child and I would like to be dirty and I didn't like to be uncomfortable.
Speaker 1: When you were--did you travel a lot in Germany other than moving from one city to another with your--
Speaker 2: We did travel a lot but most of the traveled I remember came on subsequent visits to Germany.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I remember tying my shoes in, in Wiesbaden.  I remember learning how to tie my shoes.
Speaker 1: Would you spell Wiesbaden for us?
Speaker 2: W-E-I-S-B-A-D-E-N [sic.].
Story_ID: 360203
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: I have tons of memories.  We left Wiesbaden [Germany], we went to, we went to Oklahoma, Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  I remember that very well because that's where I had difficulty with my name.  Being, it's tough being an only kid and being a new kid every, every two or three years and being, and that contributed to me being as shy as I was.  I found it hard to make friends early on, hard to fit in.  It got better over time but going to, going to Oklahoma, that's where I started, I started first grade in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: So that's around 1957?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], '56 [1956], '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Yup.
Story_ID: 360204
Speaker 1: And that's when I recall making annual trips to Selma [Alabama] during the summer and it seems to me that they coincided with, with crops coming in because there was a lot of activity in Selma.  I remember people coming to the farm, working the farm around cotton gathering time.  I remember going into town, going across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] and once you got across the bridge, we'd always turn right and never turned left because if you turned left you went to the white side of town, you turn right, and that was the black side of town and that's where all the commerce was done on Saturday morning, the selling of your crops and whatnot.
Speaker 2: And this, and where did you live when you went to Selma for the summers?
Speaker 1: Always lived on, on the farm.
Speaker 2: On the farm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On my [maternal] grandfather's [Andrew Willis] farm.
Speaker 2: --and the farm was situated close to the Norman Pettus Bridge [sic.]?
Speaker 1: It was, it was about, I would say about four miles from it, behind the [U.S.] Air Force base [Craig Air Force Base, Alabama], four miles behind the Air Force base.  I remember snippets of stories of--it's odd that this came back to me just now, but my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] saying, "There's no telling how many people are in that river."  I didn't know what that meant at the time.  I know what it means now.
Speaker 2: And the river she was talking about was--
Speaker 1: Was the, what is that river [Alabama River] that runs through Selma?
Speaker 2: That runs underneath the--
Speaker 1: That runs under the Edmund Pettus Bridge.
Speaker 2: It wouldn't be the Mississippi, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: No, it's not the Mississippi.
Speaker 2: It wasn't around that way.
Speaker 1: Is it the Red River?
Speaker 2: It's going on down, it should be going downhill, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But she would say--
Speaker 1: But they would say, every time we went across it, "There's no telling how many people are down there," and I was like, what are people doing living in the river?
Speaker 2: And that was in '56 [1956] and '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: I remember one particular trip back.  I mentioned that my mother's brother was the youngest of them.  He was in his early teens and he was a strong, strapping young guy and I remember him getting into trouble in Selma.  He had gone to Selma for something and he had been attacked by a group of white guys and he had torn the antenna off of a car and beat them off of him and the sheriff came to get him, came out to the farm and took him into town and I remember hearing my mother and her sisters and their concern about what would happen to Curtis, his name was Curtis, Curtis Willis [ph.], wondering if they would see him again.
Speaker 2: And what year do you think that was?
Speaker 1: This must have been about that same time, '56 [1956], '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: It was around this time too, right before that, that Rosa Parks didn't give up her seat so this was a time of a lot of--
Speaker 1: A lot of things were going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) racial appeal.
Speaker 1: --a lot of things were going on.
Speaker 2: This was at the beginning of the civil rights--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I remember the people would always, would never go anywhere alone, they would always go with somebody.  If they wanted to take a trip to another church, say down to Troy [Alabama], there would be two or three cars that would go and not just one car would go.  I remember being, I remember asking to pick cotton, asking.  I wanted, I wanted to do it because everybody was out there doing it and, and my mother finally relenting and saying okay.  They gave me this big bag.  I'd carry it out there and I couldn't have been more than six or seven years old and I remember I didn't get down an entire row of cotton before I gave up (laughter).  She says, "You don't want to do this?"  I said, "Yes I do."
Story_ID: 360205
Speaker 1: So your [maternal] grandfather [Andrew Willis] owned the land so this was his own land and he--
Speaker 2: That was his own land.  He and his brother, my Uncle Baby [ph.], we'd call him Uncle Baby, that lived a little, a little distance away, pretty close, but on the same land, and they farmed that land and they had people that came in and, and sharecropped for them.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather had to have purchased this land before 1928?  So, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, had to be.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather had to been born around 18--
Speaker 2: My grandfather, if I remember correctly, was born in 1898.
Speaker 1: In 1898, okay, and he was in the [U.S.] military so he served in one of the wars, did he not, like--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, he served in the First World War [World War I, WWI].
Speaker 1: He has quite a bit of history there.  Did he share any of those, any stories with you about his experiences?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I can't remember a lot about my grandfather 'cause I was so young when he died.  They say that we were very, very close.  He died at the, at the VA, at the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus] in Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: So the brother actually tended the land after your grandfather died--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --when you would go there for the summers?
Speaker 2: He did, he did but two years later, my grandmother [Bessie Davis Willis] died, two years later my grandmother died and they hadn't decided what Curtis [Curtis Willis (ph.)] was going to do 'cause Curtis was still in high school.  As a matter of fact, he had one year to go and, and we were getting ready to go back to Europe at the time and there was a lot of discussion whether or not Curtis should go with us back to Europe, instead he joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: And what became of the incident with Curtis when the police came to pick him up?
Speaker 2: They, they released him, they released him.  I haven't talked to Curtis about that in a long, long time but they released him.
Speaker 1: And, so he went to the Air Force.  Who was left to take care of the land after--
Speaker 2: After Curtis left?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: After my, after my grandmother died, we went back overseas, Curtis went to the Air Force and, and my Great Uncle Baby, handled the land, took over the land and actually worked the land.
Speaker 1: Did, you said your mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] would make the statement about the bodies that were probably, let's say housed, in the river [Alabama River] underneath the Norman Pettus Bridge [sic. Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama].  Did you hear any other stories about the, the bridge and that particular area in Selma [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No, it--I came to understand many, many years later that that's, that were, people were thrown off that bridge into that river.  Bloody Sunday wasn't until, until we were back overseas because I remember reading about that in the newspaper and thinking back on that and I remember from my teachers, asking me, "Aren't you from Selma?"  And I said, "Yeah, I'm from Selma," and it became almost like a, a note of distinction that I was, I was from that town.
Speaker 1: And these were teachers in Germany or just--
Speaker 2: These are teachers in Germany, yeah.
Story_ID: 360206
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you say you attended and at that particular time, you all had moved to--
Speaker 2: In, in Fort Sill [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I attended Custer Elementary School [ph.] in, at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Named after General Custer [George Custer].
Speaker 2: General Custer, General Custer.
Speaker 1: Where there any teachers that influenced you and, if so, what were their names?
Speaker 2: I can't think of any at that time.  I can think of some names, much, much later in high school but, but not at that time.  My, my childhood memories revolve around the introduction of the ballpoint pen.  I remember, when I was registering for school, one of the teachers said, "Have you tried one of these new ballpoint pens?"  And, and I don't know why that stuck with me either, but the things that stick with me about, about elementary school are corporal punishment and the fact that if you got punished at school that you probably got punished when you got home.
Speaker 1: Would you explain what corporal punishment was, was to you?
Speaker 2: You got spankings, you got spankings.
Speaker 1: And that was by--
Speaker 2: By the teacher.  At that time, it was by the teacher.  They took care of that right there in class.  If you went to sleep or you cut up or you just misbehaved in, in any particular way, you got, you got touched up as they called it and then a report would go home and then your father would touch you up again when he got home, for acting up.
Speaker 1: Now did they administer the punishment with their hand or with belt or with--
Speaker 2: Sometimes with the hand, sometimes with the paddle, sometimes with whatever they had available but back then teachers were really in charge of their classrooms.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you then?
Speaker 2: I talked too much (laughter).
Speaker 1: You went from being shy to talk--
Speaker 2: I was shy before school started and, and I still was shy but I think I was just very, very inquisitive then and I used to get on my report card a lot, talks too much, nah.  Now you could look at it in a number of ways.  You remember this is 1957, and I was a black kid that was talking too much.  Now, was I just inquisitive or was I a troublemaker?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the racial mix of your class?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: If I look on my--and I'm going to have to look at those school photos, you know, you used to do a school photo every year?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: There may be one or two other students of color in my class but there were only one or two others.
Speaker 1: And these, this school was on the base?
Speaker 2: This school is on the base.
Speaker 1: And you had American teachers?
Speaker 2: And I had, I had usually a white female teacher.
Story_ID: 360207
Speaker 1: What was the young Reed [HistoryMaker Reed Kimbrough] like?  You said you're a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a first and second grader [at Custer Elementary School (ph.)]?
Speaker 1: Yes, as an elementary student.  You said you were--
Speaker 2: As an elementary student?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was, I was always into something.  I was always probably where I shouldn't have been.  We lived in a housing area that was across the tracks.  I remember that 'cause we had to cross those tracks every day to get across the railroad.
Speaker 1: And that was the military housing?
Speaker 2: And this was the military housing and--
Speaker 1: Did across the tracks have the same significance as in the neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know 'cause I haven't been back there and, but I do recall my father [William Kimbrough] still was, was still a relatively junior enlisted, enlisted man with a family.  There were, there were still white and black and brown and other kind of people in our housing area but this particular housing area backed up to the, to a training area that the kids used to like to go to because, and it was a hand grenade training area and we weren't supposed to go out there but we found our way back there, you know, to play games, you know, to play soldier.  And so we got in a lot of trouble for being back there because we shouldn't have been back there, it was dangerous.  Also, there were a lot of critters, there are a lot of snakes and prairie dogs and tarantulas and things that are just indigenous to Oklahoma.  So I keep going back for the whole safety piece.  There were probably concerns that we shouldn't be too far outside the community because of what was happening at that time.  You know, it wasn't too long, when was Emmett Till?
Speaker 1: It was, it should have been the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It should have been around that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about around that time.  So now, as I get much older, as I got much older, I started to understand the significance of all this insistence on being in, you know, before the streetlights come on, you know, be where we can see you.
Speaker 1: Even in Fort Sill [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Even in Fort Sill.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're still in the South?
Speaker 2: Even in Fort Sill.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was still in the South and that was a little bit different from in Germany?
Speaker 2: That was a bit different and it's always different from, from Europe to back overseas.  In Europe you're American, you know, over, back here, you were black.
Speaker 1: Now in the military housing, with grenade form in the back where they would practice outdoor, would that, was that also on the other side of the tracks or did, was that just because that military facility or that housing that you were living in was?
Speaker 2: I think it was just because of that housing.  Usually most, as I recall, most of those families had children.  I always remember a lot of children.  There was a big playground, big play area there but I don't know why that particular housing area was there.  I, I don't think it was any kind of social construct, I think that's just the way they put it.
Speaker 1: That was the way they put it, and on the other side of the track was where the school--
Speaker 2: On the other side of the tracks was where the school, where the main post was because we were kind of off the main post but there were other housing areas on the main post as well but, again, based upon rank and so forth, was the big discriminator there.  I remember going to the movies a lot there, going to the kids matinee on Saturday morning.  I remember having a TV, a black and white TV.
Speaker 1: And this was in your house or--
Speaker 2: This is in my house, this is in my house.  I remember going in town for church.  I remember being able to go to Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] but not on Sunday because there was nothing open on Sunday back then.
Speaker 1: And what did you all do on Sundays?
Speaker 2: We went to church and then we went to somebody's house to eat and then we went back to church.
Speaker 1: And what church did you all attend?
Speaker 2: We attended the Church of Christ [Northwest Church of Christ, Lawton, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: And that was on base or--
Speaker 2: That was off base.
Speaker 1: Off base.
Speaker 2: That was off base but I also remember socializing from a church standing with, with white people.
Story_ID: 360208
Speaker 1: We're going to talk about, when you were, your other years in elementary school, when you were in Fort Sill [Oklahoma], did you stay in Fort Sill up until you finished elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, we left Fort Sill in 1959.  That would have put me right about the third grade.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: My father [William Kimbrough] was reassigned to, to Friedberg, Germany, which is outside of Frankfurt [Germany].  We, we didn't go with, we didn't accompany him right away, so we went back to Selma [Alabama], my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] and myself and my brother [Mark Kimbrough].  My brother was born in '57 [1957], and so we spent probably four, five months there during, and then I started school in Montgomery [Alabama].  I was excited to get overseas because I found out, my father wrote back and said that Elvis Presley was in his platoon.  That's when Elvis went into the [U.S. military] service.  There's a lot of things connected here and he happened to serve in my father's platoon.  My father was a platoon sergeant.  So we were excited to get over because I kept saying, man, I've got to see Elvis, you know, because I was a big, I was, everybody was a Elvis fan, maybe not every black person was, but I was because of my existence.  But anyway, I went to, in the interim I went to school in Montgomery.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the school.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay in Montgomery?
Speaker 2: I stayed there, we left there right after Christmas, right after Christmas.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959] because I remember Halloween and Christmas and I played Santa Claus in a Christmas play.  I was the different kid because I was the kid, the only kid in that school that didn't have a southern accent which--
Speaker 1: Now, was this school racially mixed or, it couldn't have been, it had to be an all-black school at that time.
Speaker 2: No, it was an all-black school.  It was an all-black school, it was a segregated school and I was the only one that, as I look back on it now, the teachers paid a lot of attention to me because I spoke differently and I was, I had good grades based upon the level of education that I had, I had received in kindergarten, first, second grade [at Custer Elementary School (ph.)].  So, there were some kids that didn't like that too much, the attention I was getting so I had a number of fights that I had to work myself through.
Speaker 1: So you were a bit more rambunctious?
Speaker 2: I was a good kid.  I was, I was kind of rambunctious, you know, I would break the rules from time to time but I was a good kid.  I was a smart kid and I think, probably I was viewed as a rich kid, even though I didn't view myself as a rich kid, I was just a kid.
Speaker 1: But you would protect yourself?
Speaker 2: I would protect myself but I was still a shy kid and I didn't like to fight.  I didn't like getting dirty (laughter), but I could run, but I could run.  I was fast.
Story_ID: 360209
Speaker 1: Before you moved back to, well before you moved to Friedberg, Germany, in between Montgomery [Alabama] and going to join your father [William Kimbrough], did you all visit Selma [Alabama] again?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did, we did.  You know, it's interesting, and I didn't talk about this earlier, but I remember as a child moving, and I go back to Fort Sill [Oklahoma], I remember us going back often and it was always an adventure.  I thought it was an adventure at the time and I didn't realize until much later how it was structured.  We would leave early enough in the morning that we would get to the Mississippi state line after dark.  My mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] would cook loads of food that we would take with us but we couldn't eat it until much later and I didn't realize it until many, many years later that was because there weren't very few--there weren't very many places that we could stop in Texas and Louisiana and Mississippi.  My father planned the trips very carefully because he knew where he could stop to get gasoline, and this is before the interstates.  He stopped, he planned our stops very carefully because he knew where we could go to the restroom and where we couldn't.
Speaker 1: Did you mainly stop at military facilities?
Speaker 2: There were no military facilities between, between there.  We would stop in Texas and spend the night and, usually, and then we would, then we would not stop again until we got to Alabama and we would always arrive in Selma, always arrive in Selma, after midnight.
Speaker 1: In Texas, did you stay with a family, like friends or relatives?
Speaker 2: Stayed with a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stayed with a family.
Speaker 1: So you mainly traveled the highways and the routes and the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --farm roads, those were the two?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did those highways look like?  They were--
Speaker 2: They were all two-lane highways and I never knew what the highways looked like in Alabama because it was always at night, Mississippi, always at night but I understand why that was necessary now.  This was 1956, '57 [1957], '58 [1958], '59 [1959] and as far as I know, we never got stopped, as far as I can recall but they were always interesting trips.
Story_ID: 360210
Speaker 1: So, we, my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough], my brother [Mark Kimbrough] and I moved into my paternal grandmother's house in Selma, Alabama [sic. Montgomery, Alabama], that's Pearl Kimbrough [Pearl Perkins Kimbrough], and that's, I would walk from school, I mean walk from her house to school every day.  If I broke the rules, Grandma Pearl would, would take care of issues.  I thought she was very, very mean but I think she was very, very cautious that I did not get into the wrong circles.  Again, the whole issue of safety came about.  They knew how long it took me to walk from the house to school and from the school to the house and my instructions were come straight home.  They were always, come straight home.
Speaker 2: Now was your grandmother's home close to your mother's father's [Andrew Willis] property?  Or was that close or was it far away?
Speaker 1: No, it was quite some distance, Montgomery [Alabama] from to Selma was, it must have been about sixty miles.
Speaker 2: Oh, when you were in Montgomery, you lived in your--
Speaker 1: But when I, when I was going to school in Montgomery, I lived at my, my Grandma Pearl's house, my father's mother.
Speaker 2: Okay, she was in Montgomery, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was in Montgomery.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do, what were some of your earliest recollections of the City of Montgomery when you were there for that short period of time?
Speaker 1: We went to church.  Our whole existence, my whole existence in Montgomery revolved around school and church, school and church.
Speaker 2: And what church did you attend?
Speaker 1: We went to the Holt Street Church of Christ [Montgomery, Alabama].  Holt Street was about six or seven blocks away.
Speaker 2: So she lived more in the city?
Speaker 1: Yes, she lived more in the city.
Speaker 2: Than--
Speaker 1: She lived on Malvern Avenue--Malvern Street, which is off of Macarthur Avenue [sic.].  Macarthur Avenue runs straight down to the town.  I remember that summer because the kids around in the neighborhood had, they had ragged shorts.  They were, they were trousers but they all, they were cut offed, they were cutoffs, and in the course of playing, they would, they would tear and to me they looked cool and I remember tearing up a pair of my pants and tearing 'em so I could fit in.  I got the worst beating for messing up my pants (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you were there from like September to December?
Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty much September to December.
Speaker 2: September to December in Montgomery. And she lived close to Macarthur Avenue.  We have the Montgomery, we have the Montgomery Bus--cott--Boy--what is it, the Bus Boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Was she in that vicinity because it seems like she was in a neighborhood that was--
Speaker 1: She was right in the middle of all of that.  She had to be right in the middle of all of that.
Speaker 2: Okay, what year did your grandmother die, Kimbrough?
Speaker 1: My grandmother died--
Speaker 2: Around?
Speaker 1: --my maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Paternal, the one in Montgomery?
Speaker 1: The one in Montgomery died in, oh my goodness, she died, it must have been 1965, '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Did you ever get a chance to go back and stay with her after you went abroad?
Speaker 1: We came back to visit.  I don't think we ever stayed with her again but we did come back to visit.
Story_ID: 360211
Speaker 1: So in December of '59 [1959], you left Montgomery [Alabama] and joined your father [William Kimbrough] in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Friedberg [Germany].
Speaker 1: Friedberg.
Speaker 2: Yes indeed.
Speaker 1: All right, and you were fourth grade, third grade, going into--
Speaker 2: Like the fourth grade I want to say but I was real disappointed when we got there because Elvis [Elvis Presley] was gone.  He didn't stay in my father's platoon very long because that's about the time he came out with that saying that, the only thing a black person would do for me, only thing a black man could do for me is to shine my shoes and buy my records.
Speaker 1: And how did you feel about Elvis (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I felt hurt, I felt hurt, I felt disappointed.  At the time, the haircut of the time was a flat top.  I don't know if you remember flat top haircuts?  And so I was trying to grow a flat top.  Everybody wanted to have the flattop like Elvis, even the black guys, and I never got my flat top, and, and my enthusiasm around Elvis subsided, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, what school did you start in Friedberg?
Speaker 2: Friedberg, I went to Bad Nauheim Elementary School [Bad Nauheim, Germany].
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: B-A-D, second word, Nauheim, N-A-U-H-E-I-M.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bad Nauheim was where they placed the elementary school to serve two or three bases.  There was a base in Butzbach [Germany], there was a base in Bad Nauheim [Germany], there was a base in Friedberg and Friedberg and Bad Nauheim, those were the two housing areas and they were separated by about ten, fifteen miles.  And, so all the kids were bused to Bad Nauheim to go to elementary school.  I came there, I got there in January and again was a new kid.  Every [U.S.] Army kid is a new kid from time to time 'cause they just travel so much and I was a good student.  I still was a good student.
Speaker 1: Did you, what are some of our memories of the school?
Speaker 2: I remember that they had a cafeteria.  They didn't, they had a lunchroom, not a cafeteria, it was a lunchroom, where you brought your food to eat at lunch.  If you didn't have food to bring, for whatever reason, then they would allow you to go over to the PX, the post exchange, which is right across the street from the school and you could eat in the cafeteria there.  I remember that so well because I loved grilled cheese sandwiches and, and tomato soup and that's where I would go to get my grilled cheese sandwich and tomato soup.  It seemed to me, though, that I always went alone, particularly early on and then I would come back to school and then my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] started sending me lunches to school that I'd hate it because they weren't grilled cheese and tomato soup (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you say you went alone, there were no children to go with, I mean, you--
Speaker 2: I was the new kid.  I didn't have any friends and most of the, most of the, my classmates had brought their lunch with them.  And so in time, my mother would make me, and I hated it, but she would make me hotdogs and by the time I ate them, the bread would be moist.  I know, things that kids remember.  Those things that kids remember.
Speaker 1: So did you stay at that school until the sixth grade or did you change, have to change school?
Speaker 2: I stayed, I stayed there for about, for a little while because then we changed, we went, it was the strangest thing because we went to another base because of housing.  We couldn't get housing and then we came back to Friedberg so I attended a couple schools that particular year but I ended up there.  I finished fourth, fifth, fourth and fifth grade there, fourth and fifth grade there.
Story_ID: 360212
Speaker 1: The other thing that stood out is fifth grade you're about, what, eleven, twelve, eleven?  Fifth grade.
Speaker 2: Yup, about eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven, right around puberty, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, beginning, onset.
Speaker 1: Yeah, onset of puberty and, and there were all kind of kids there and kids just, you know, start gravitating to, to the opposite sex.  We used to have this thing called the kiddie matinee on Saturday mornings and, what you would do, you'd get your group and say, okay, we're going to meet at the matinee, you know, Saturday morning and usually it was about ten o'clock.  Matinee ran from, from ten until about one and that's where all the kids went on Saturday morning and that's, you know, the, the mothers got a break because all the kids were at the movie and there was a young lady, a little girl and I were sweet on each other and so we decided we were going to meet up at the movie.  Well she came back and said, "I can't go to the movie with you," and I said, "Why?"  And she said, "Well, my, my father said because you're black, you're, no, you're colored."  And I said, "Yeah, but we're all colored."  I said, "You're kind of pinkish and I'm kind of brownish."  I mean, it just, it just flew over my head.  I didn't know what she meant and that was the first time that I really can remember racism kind of impacting me on a personal level.
Speaker 2: And this was in Friedberg [Germany]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Friedberg, Bad Nauheim [Germany], Bad Nauheim, yeah.
Speaker 2: So did you go onto the movie alone or--
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, we went with, you know, with other folks but it was a, it was, it had an impact.  I still remember it, I still remember it because I asked her, I said, "Well let me talk to him."  "Nay, that's not a good idea."  She was a little white girl.
Speaker 2: Do you think that this had any effect on you as an individual in the future or on your career or did it impact you in any way?
Speaker 1: I think, I think it started to create limits.  You know, when you--unavoidably the things like that create limits in your mind.  There are certain things I can't do and I guess that's one of them.  I mean, there weren't many black girls around school, you know, where I was at.  You know, there weren't many black people so.
Story_ID: 360213
Speaker 1: Now where did you attend junior high school?
Speaker 2: I attended junior high back in the states, back in the states, in, 'cause we left, we left Germany and we had an assignment in Kentucky and then we left Kentucky and went to California.  So I really started middle school in California, or what they call junior high school, part in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], South Central L.A., when we were staying with my, with my mother's [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] sister, my mother's sister and her family were out there in California, my uncle was a minister and then we moved, once we got quarters, we moved into Barstow, right outside Barstow, California, a little place called Fort Irwin [Fort Irwin National Training Center, San Bernardino County, California], they call it Camp Irwin now [sic.], the National Training Center.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of that Fort again?  What was the name?
Speaker 2: Irwin, I-R-W-I-N, and it was out in the desert, it was out in the desert.  A couple of notable things happened there, I learned to swim there and I learned, I started singing there, I started singing.
Speaker 1: Now, what mix were your classmates at that particular time in California?
Speaker 2: Still predominantly, oh, in California--
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you moved to, in--
Speaker 2: --in L.A.?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In L.A., it was, it was predominantly black, majority black, and back in Fort Sill [Oklahoma], back in army school [Custer Elementary School (ph.)], so it was, it was predominantly white but it was, is mixed, it was mixed as much as, you know, mixed could be.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the middle school that you went to in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: P.S. something or other.  It had some number.
Speaker 1: But that was in South Central?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in South Central.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Close to Compton [California].
Speaker 1: Close to Compton, and at Fort Irwin, what, do you remember the name of that school that you went to there, the middle school?
Speaker 2: I don't recall the name of it.  It was just the post school to me.
Speaker 1: Are there any experiences that stand out in your middle school experiences?
Speaker 2: That was around the time of the Cuban Missile Crisis and I remember us being very, very anxious for a period of time during that point when my father [William Kimbrough] was on, when all the fathers were on, on alert.  That's when I realized I had a talent for singing in choirs and was selected to, as the all-region choir.  I learned that I wasn't fast as I thought I was 'cause I went to a track meet and got smoked.  That's where I, as a child, decided I was going to start smoking and, and got caught there too.
Speaker 1: Would you tell us what happened then?
Speaker 2: I stole a pack of cigarettes from my father and he found them, he found out, and I thought I was, I thought he was going to beat me but he didn't.  He just scared me to death and that's about the time he quit smoking because he had a heart attack.
Story_ID: 360214
Speaker 1: Now you said that this was around the time of the Cuban Missile Crisis and everybody was on alert.  Did that impact or did it affect your travels or your activities on base or vicinity (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were restricted to base.  We're, I do remember we were restricted to base because at the time we went to church in Barstow [California], which is about thirty miles away, but other than that, there's a big sense of community with the military families, particularly when they're in a, when, in a remote location like that was at the time.  So there was a lot of bonding in terms of families and the kids, the same kind of bonding that you would see overseas as a military dependent, you were an American.  Now if you were in another situation, say you were in a, in a larger metropolitan area, you found that there was a little breakdown in that because then all of the social mores became more attached to your everyday existence, you know, white people going to white churches, black people going to black churches.  You know, you're going to the black side of town and they're going to the white side of town, it became more of a black or white issue, but when you're in a remote location like Fort Irwin [Fort Irwin National Training Center, San Bernardino County, California], I don't know, you were a military kid, you were, you were all military people.
Story_ID: 360215
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Okay, we left Fort Sill [Oklahoma], I mean Fort Irwin [Fort Irwin National Training Center, San Bernardino County, California] and we had, we went back to Fort Knox [Kentucky] for about a year where I completed the seventh grade.  Then my father [William Kimbrough] got orders back to Europe and I spent my next few months in a, in a segregated school in Louisville, Kentucky, that was called Shawnee Junior High [Shawnee Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky] and now I'm starting to remember the names of the schools.  Didn't stay there long but that's when I started realizing that school had changed.  There were more fights and there were more serious fights, people were starting to get hurt.  They weren't getting shot yet but they were getting cut.
Speaker 1: And what do you think that was attributed to?
Speaker 2: Shawnee High [Shawnee High School, Louisville, Kentucky] was, and Shawnee Junior High, were, they were going through a change.  There were still some white folks there but there weren't as many and this is 1964, '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: Muhammad Ali had, had decided that he wasn't going to, not go into the [U.S.] Army and folks were angry, folks were angry.
Speaker 1: So, we're looking at a little racial upheaval?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and you could really feel it, you could really feel it.
Speaker 1: What affect did that have on you?  How did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: It made me cautious, it made me cautious.  I was still, I was still a new kid.  You know, I didn't have any, you know, new, I didn't have any roots there.  But I decided to protect myself but it made me cautious as to how aggressive I was in protecting myself because folks, I knew that folks would hurt you, unlike anything I'd ever felt before so it made me more cautious.
Speaker 1: And these, were these people of the opposite race or were these people of the same race or--
Speaker 2: People of the same race.  I just thought people were mean.  There was a mean element there, not that everybody was, was out to get you, but there was a meanness there at that school.
Story_ID: 360216
Speaker 1: So we left there [Louisville, Kentucky], we left there before Christmas and went to Germany, Vilseck, Vilseck, Germany.
Speaker 2: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: V-I-L-S-E-C-K, which is outside Nuremberg [Germany].
Speaker 2: Now, did you attend high school at--
Speaker 1: I attended ninth grade there and tenth grade, my sophomore year at Nuremberg High School [Nuremberg American High School, Furth, Germany], another feeder school.
Speaker 2: Okay, was this, was there, in Germany, was the setup still the same in the United States, the middle school and then high school?
Speaker 1: Pretty much except, except in this case, because of the location of the various installations.  If there were small training installations, which Vilseck was, their school went through elementary up until about the ninth grade and then they would send the tenth graders, eleventh graders and twelfth graders to a senior high school in Nuremberg and if you went to that high school, you had to stay in a dorm.  It was a five-day dorm and you would come, you would leave, go to school on Monday morning, stay in the dorm until Friday afternoon, and then come back to wherever your family was.
Speaker 2: And did you attend eighth grade there in Vil- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I attended, I attended eighth and ninth grade in Vilseck.  I attended my sophomore year in Nuremberg High School.  That was the year my grades dropped (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, boy I thought my moving had taken me a lot of different places but goodness gracious, I mean, I'm traveling all over the world again with you going, that's good.
Story_ID: 360217
Speaker 1: In 1965, you moved to Vilseck [Germany] and to Nuremberg, Germany and after you finished the ninth grade, you started tenth grade at Nuremberg High School [Nuremberg American High School, Furth, Germany] and would you describe that experience for us, in high school?
Speaker 2: Nuremberg High School was, was the--it was the Nuremberg American High School which took in students from outlying [U.S.] military facilities, installations, communities, one of which was mine, and they would bus students starting Monday mornings, say about six o'clock, and we would travel for a couple of hours to high school, go straight into class and then following class, that Monday afternoon, we would, we would check into the dorm and we would stay in the dorm Monday night through Thursday night and then on Friday, we would get back on the bus and go back to our insta- to our families.  It was the first time I had spent any kind of substantive time away from my family.  It was probably too early, particularly for me, probably for me and a number of other kids as well, because you're fourteen, fifteen years old, with time on your hands.  Of course we had counselors and supervisors that were there at the dorm and we had set studying time but it was different.  It was just, it was like a mini-boarding school, I guess you would call it, for military kids.
Speaker 1: Did you all wear uniform?
Speaker 2: No we didn't wear uniforms.  We, we dressed in just regular school clothes.
Speaker 1: And what time were the classes?
Speaker 2: Classes started at eight o'clock in the morning and they normally ran until about two-thirty, three o'clock and there were activities after school.  You know, I played football but it made it problematic because if you weren't a star, which I was not, your games were on Saturday and that required you to either spend the night with somebody that was local, right there in Nuremberg and then, you know, your parents would come up and drive you home which is what my father [William Kimbrough] did but after a couple of weekends of me not actually getting a lot of playing time, he, you know, he kind of called that experiment to a halt and said, "You know, you're not really playing and so why am I doing this?"  So, I didn't play the whole season of football.  Football was not my major sport anyway.  My sport was, was baseball and they didn't have a baseball team but--
Speaker 1: So after you finished with football, did you pick up, what did you do after hours, after classes?
Speaker 2: Probably did what most high school boys do (laughter).  Our mind was on playing pool and, and chasing the girls.
Speaker 1: Did, were there pool room, pool hall facilities on the campus?
Speaker 2: In the dorm?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There were, there were two rec rooms.  One was a pool room and one was a place to play ping pong and then there was another lounge too, and there were two wings to this particular dorm.  There were really four wings but there was a girls side and there was a, the boys side and the recreational facilities were right there in the middle of the building.  The, the ninth and tenth graders got the front of the, of the two wings and the, the juniors and seniors got the back side of it which allowed the juniors and seniors to sneak out from time to time.  I was never a junior at that school so I didn't get the opportunity to sneak out.
Story_ID: 360218
Speaker 1: So you stayed at the school [Nuremberg American High School, Furth, Germany] one--
Speaker 2: One year, one year.  There wasn't a lot of activity, a lot of things to do back at, in Vilseck [Germany].  It was a small installation, not a lot of activities for kids so kids found things to do.  Most of our activity revolved around what was called the American Youth Association, AYA, that was the hangout, you know, where you could go and you could play pool, play ping pong or whatever.  I spent a lot of time in the library during the summers but that summer between my junior and my sophomore and junior year, I was instrumental in doing a couple of things.  I started a band which consisted of a number of kids that were, were learning how to play the guitar, learning how to play the drums, I sang and so we spent that summer as one of our big activities, the band.
Speaker 1: Now was the band formed at Nuremberg American High?
Speaker 2: The band was formed at, in Vilseck.
Speaker 1: In Vilseck.
Speaker 2: In Vilseck.
Speaker 1: It was after you had left--
Speaker 2: It was after my sophomore year.  The other thing that I helped do that year was to start a baseball team for our installation.  Because there weren't enough kids, enough males, male kids to really field a specific team, say sixteen to seventeen years old or, we, we took kids as early as, as young as thirteen up to as high as nineteen and, but it turned into a piece that spurred the development of teams in these other outlying installations and so we would, that became an activity that I helped found for kids that actually, after we left that summer, continued.  So, the band, even the band, the band became an outlet for kids, local kids to, to engage themselves during the summer and play gigs at the service clubs and at the NCO [non-commissioned officer] clubs.  So that was two, I don't know how long they lasted but I know they lasted for a couple of years after we left.
Story_ID: 360219
Speaker 1: I want to know why did they name it Nuremberg American High School [Furth, Germany].  Was the other, was there another just Nuremberg school for the German children or was this--
Speaker 2: They just--that's, was the name of it.  Now Nuremberg American High School no longer exists.
Speaker 1: And it, I mean, did you all go, was for military children only?
Speaker 2: Military children only.
Speaker 1: And you had American teachers, again?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All white?
Speaker 2: And it was, it was a good thing for, for teachers.  Teachers that worked in the [U.S.] Department of Defense schools [U.S. Department of Defense Dependents School], they got good assignments, overseas in Europe, they got to teach and they got to travel during their summers off.  It was a, it was a really good piece for those folks who wanted to teach and they wanted to teach overseas.  So we had, we had some excellent teachers.  I always thought we had excellent teachers.  You--
Speaker 1: Did you ever get any black ones doing that?  Or were they mostly Europeans?
Speaker 2: They were mostly white teachers.  I don't recall--
Speaker 1: Many black ones?
Speaker 2: I don't recall many black teachers.  I know that there were some, I just don't recall many.
Speaker 1: The reason I ask that, I was in Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], but it was in Bluffton [South Carolina], at the University of South Carolina [University of South Carolina Hilton Head Gateway campus] and this lady was over human resources but she said that she was from a military family, well her husband was in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and she talked about, that was what her daughter wanted to do and she said it was a big thing and she was talking about the qualifications her daughter was going through to do it but I never had heard of it because I was under the impression that when you were abroad, you went to the schools that, like you just went to, you had people in Germany, two teachers that are, either they were fam- like my friend was in the [U.S.] military but his mother was a teacher so I thought that that was the way it was.  I never knew they recruited teachers.
Speaker 2: Oh, they did and it was, it was a very, it was a prestigious post and that's probably why I can't remember many African American teachers.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I can't, I don't think of many of 'em who knew about it because--
Speaker 2: Not, probably not many of them did.
Speaker 1: 'Cause when I was in Maryland, there was a lady that I met and she did military housing and she was black but she did military housing and she did a stint in Japan but she talked about how plush her surroundings were and she had maids but she worked for the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and she would just go and set up military housing in different parts of the world and I had never heard of that.  I thought that it would be employed--well, she was an employee of the government, you know, but I never heard anybody doing it, let alone a black person, but those are careers that--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --are just not out in the public's eye that people can actually pursue.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, but I do remember that Vilseck [Germany] was the first time I had an open--I want to say he was openly gay--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --but back then, back then, in '65 [1965], '66 [1966], that wasn't the kind of things that you just talked about but I know, I know it was an English teacher who was gay.  I know he was, I know he was but he was, he was a good teacher, he was a good teacher.
Speaker 1: But I'm going to be bad.  They usually are (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --but he was an excellent teacher.  We learned a lot that year.  That was the year I served on our, on our student newspaper.  I was very active, probably all through high school, in student government and in activities.
Story_ID: 360220
Speaker 1: And I want to ask, what do you contribute that to 'cause I'm going to, I'm going to get to that 'cause I see that you started getting active at a point in your life, it seems like, well after junior high, maybe it was around this period.  You were doing other stuff when you were younger but here you are, you're looking toward, you're establishing a band and doing a baseball team.   You're, you're getting ready to get out there, you know, you're not looking at starting fights, you're not looking at doing other stuff, you're doing creative stuff, you were very creative (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And let me tell you why, let me tell you why.  You know we talked about my grandfather [Tom Kimbrough] being a stern, mean guy.  My father [William Kimbrough] was a mean guy and I feared him probably more than I respected him at the time which is probably not unlike the experience of a lot of kids in my, in my generation because my father was the leader of the household.  I knew I wanted to be good, I knew I wanted to stay out of trouble and so I found ways to direct my energies into the positive.  I see it now, I don't think I see it, saw it then but I saw ways to direct my energies into positive avenues, such as starting that band, start--such as, as doing the baseball team because I had to fill some time and my, my nearest sibling [Mark Kimbrough] was seven years my junior and so we were in two totally separate spheres.  I was the kid that, that had a couple of guys that we sang on the street corner.  We sang The Temptations songs on the street corner, you know 'cause that's what we did and it's probably--
Speaker 1: And this is in Germany?
Speaker 2: And this is in Germany because there was nothing to do.
Speaker 1: But these were white guys?
Speaker 2: Some were white guys but by this time, I was starting to find myself closer associated with, with black guys who understood the music.
Speaker 1: Now were they on the base?  They were [U.S.] military guys?  They were dependents?
Speaker 2: No, these, these were dependents, these were teenagers.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were dependents.
Speaker 2: These were teenagers and we would each take a part in a Temptations song and we would be The Temptations on the street corner.  And it's similar to the kind of thing that was happening, say on the street corners of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Um, it didn't, and then even in the country where I grew up, these guys had their own quartets--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: My brother used to do it out in the backyard and then around, anywhere they found a place to hang, that's where they did their entertainment.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 360221
Speaker 1: And our role models were, were the men that we saw around us, [U.S.] military guys, that were doing positive things, at least moving in a positive direction.  Did they have their own issues?  Yeah, they probably did but those are the folks that we saw that were making decisions.  They were primarily enlisted guys but they were sen- by this time they were senior enlisted guys.
Speaker 2: Now were these, these role models that you're speaking of, the older guys, were they black or were they white?
Speaker 1: They were primarily black--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about this time and now I'm talking about, you know, when I was, when I was a sophomore and then further on.  Most of the officers were white, even then.  I'm sure--I know there were black officers but they just weren't at, at our installation.  Our installation was a training installation.  So, and this is about the time that Vietnam [Vietnam War] was really getting hot.  I remember it being, poking fun at a vet [veteran].  There was a group of us leaving the movie [in Vilseck, Germany], about four or five of us teenagers leaving the movie, and we saw this guy who was obviously intoxicated coming up the road and, and so we started picking fun of him.  That's what, that is what military kids did.  Military brats, they were teenagers and they, and they pulled pranks on folks and the only people they had to pull pranks on were soldiers who were about a few years older than them and we saw this guy coming up and he was staggering he and his buddy and we started poking fun of him and he looked at us, he said, "I'll kill you."  He said, "I just got back from Vietnam," and he reached down to take his shoes off and we took off running.  That was as close as Vietnam had gotten to me at that point.  We had seen newsreels at the, at the movie theatre because at that time you go to the theatre, that you get, you get a newsreel and you get a cartoon and you get the feature.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I remember the bombing of the U.S. embassy, or the officers club, in Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] and because we kept getting fed that stuff.  We were very patriotic.
Story_ID: 360222
Speaker 1: We were very patriotic but we were kids, we were [U.S.] military kids.  That was probably the last time I got this true sense of being an American kid, was in Vilseck, Germany because I think, I think at some point we saw our childhood starting to slip away and we knew that we were going to have to address some of the realities of life.  I think that's what we saw in that guy's face, that Vietnam vet's [Vietnam War veteran] face.
Speaker 2: Was he black or white?
Speaker 1: He was white, he was white (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were a group of black guys?
Speaker 1: And I was with a group of mixed kids.
Speaker 2: It was different children?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Different races.
Speaker 1: Because at the time, at that time, what you did is you hung around with kids about your age and they tended to be different kind of kids but that was the last time I really felt that real closeness because later that summer, we moved, we got reassigned and we came back to the states, we came back to Kentucky, Fort Knox, Kentucky, and that's where, that's where I did my junior year and my senior year [at Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky].
Story_ID: 360223
Speaker 1: So, we came back to the states in the summer of 1967, back to Fort Knox [Kentucky].  It was interesting being back at Fort Knox because it felt familiar, unlike most of these other moves had been, it was, it was--normally we would move to a place that was totally unfamiliar and you'd have to re-establish yourself.  Now, we're back in sort of familiar surroundings.  In '64 [1964], before we had left the, or before, you know, that was the same place that I had gone through the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination when I was in the seventh grade.
Speaker 2: And what on the, what did the [U.S.] military base have at facility-wise or, for the Kennedy assassination?  Should I say, what did, what did you all do?  What did the military do?
Speaker 1: I don't recall necessarily what the military did.  I do imagine that we were put on some kind of alert which would normally be what would occur but I do recall being in school [Shawnee Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  I was in science class when I heard a, a female student run down the hallway crying.  I mean, not crying, just, just shrieking, and we changed classes right after that, and then in the next class, the class started with the instructor saying, "There is something I need to tell you," and she told us about the assassination.  She told us about the attempt, the shooting because they didn't know at the time.  By the time we changed for the next class, they said we're letting school out, the president has died and all of the schools were dismissed and we went home and we stayed home and we watched TV and I remember just watching TV and how quiet it was.  I don't think we went anywhere that week, that weekend.  It was the same place that I remember watching the, the March on Washington, on that same TV, in that same room, and seeing that speech.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a dream speech, yes.
Story_ID: 360224
Speaker 1: So, in '67 [1967], we're back at Fort Knox [Kentucky] and I'm a junior, I'm a new kid again and I had a bad sophomore year, my grades had dropped sophomore year and I knew I didn't have much time and I needed to get my grades back up again, and I did.
Speaker 2: And what school did you start attending?
Speaker 1: Fort Knox High School [Fort Knox, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: And was this on the base or was it on the facility?
Speaker 1: This was on the base, this is on the base.
Speaker 2: Now was there any difference between Fort Knox High School and Nuremberg High School [Nuremberg American High School, Furth, Germany]?
Speaker 1: It was a smaller school, it was a smaller school.  Many of the kids had been there since their freshman year.  There were some like me who were coming in new that year.
Speaker 2: So this was ninth through twelfth?
Speaker 1: This, the school was a nine through twelve.
Speaker 2: Because in Nuremberg it was ten through twelve.
Speaker 1: But even, even Nuremberg was a nine through twelve--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for the folks there, right there in Nuremberg.  So--
Speaker 2: Now, but at Fort Knox High School, you did not have to, there were no dormitories?  You didn't have, you still could live with your parents [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough and William Kimbrough] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No dormitories.  As a matter of fact, I walked to school.  My father, each time there, we had gotten better housing and now I was in the housing area that was, was pretty much across the street from the school, so I could walk to school every day.  I didn't have to catch a bus.
Speaker 2: Now, what rank was your father then?
Speaker 1: About then he was a first sergeant, he was a first sergeant--
Speaker 2: And did, did this give you any more privileges than you had before he moved up in rank as a dependent?
Speaker 1: Not as a dependent.  As a dependent, you had the same, pretty much, same privileges.
Story_ID: 360225
Speaker 1: The only thing that really changed for me, and this had more to do with my age, is that I got, I had the opportunity now to join, what they refer to as Tahoe [ph.], which was the teenage hangout, and this is where all the high school kids went for activities, after school, or on the weekend, and you had to have a card to get in.  So it was sort of like a private club for teenagers but only for teenagers, [U.S.] military teenagers.  It was a safe place.
Speaker 2: On base?
Speaker 1: On base, where you could go and play pool, play ping pong, play pinball.  They had a soft drink bar.  They had a dance floor.  What it was, it was an old renovated field house and down where normally the basketball area would be, they had converted it into a dance area and they had a TV room, lounge kind of thing, and so that was the place that you went to after the football game on Friday night or the basketball game and just to have a hangout during Saturdays.
Speaker 2: Is this common on most military bases for teenagers or was this just--
Speaker 1: Probably some kind of facility like that but this is kind of unique for, for this particular place and when you, and here was the thing.  When you graduated from high school and went to college, you could no longer go to that club.
Speaker 2: And was there an age limit on it or--
Speaker 1: There was an age limit, it was nineteen.
Speaker 2: So like from thirteen to nineteen?
Speaker 1: Really like fourteen to nineteen, and fourteen, you had to be out, you know, by like eight or nine o'clock, when the big kids came.  So, being a process--became a process of meeting new friends, building new relationships, getting involved again in student government.  I was on the student council [at Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky].  I participated and was active in, in drama club.  I was on the baseball team.  I'd given up football by this time and I was playing basketball and I was studying.
Speaker 2: Was, how was Fort Knox [Kentucky] situated? When you were in Los Angeles [California], you stated that it was like in a desert area.  Was Fort Knox close to the town or any city?
Speaker 1: Fort Knox was right outside of a little place called Radcliff, Kentucky, which was a typical army, army town but it was only about forty miles from, from Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Did you travel into Radcliff?  Did you leave base?
Speaker 1: Oh, we spent a lot of time in Radcliff 'cause it was right outside the gate.  You know, that's where the kids would go for, say, immediately after, after the game, to get hamburgers and things before they ended up over at the teenage club.  A lot of jockeying for position, you know, show off your car, you know, take your girl for a hamburger, and it was still, it was still, interestingly enough, that's where all the kids went, not just the black kids, not just the white kids, but all the kids.
Speaker 2: Did your band have a chance to perform?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, my band, I left overseas, you know.
Speaker 2: All right.  Did you form it back up again?
Speaker 1: I almost joined another band but decided not to, decided not to.
Story_ID: 360226
Speaker 1: Now you were in with, the junior year at Fort Knox High School [Fort Knox, Kentucky].  What teachers, who were some of the teachers who influenced you at Fort Knox High School?
Speaker 2: There were probably three dominant teachers that, that influenced me and one that impacted me.  The three that really influenced me were Ms. VanDyke [Lucille McWilliams VanDyke], V-A-N-D-Y-K-E, who was the government teacher, what I guess used to be called, at one point it was called, social studies, then it turned into government.  The other one was Ms. Schlenker, S-C-H-L-E-N-K-E-R, who was my English teacher.  Now she wasn't my junior English teacher, she was my senior English teacher but Ms. Schlenker was such a force at the school, as was Ms. VanDyke, that you could not avoid being influenced by them.  The other one was Ms. Abbott [ph.], who was our music teacher.  There was one other teacher that impacted me but impacted me from a perspective of understanding that there was another force out there that may not be for good.  She was a young teacher who had just graduated from, who's doing her student teaching with us out at the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  I can't think of her name.  But she has some issues.  Now all these are white women, all these were white women but she taught me the idea of ethnocentrism.  First time I had ever heard of that term and it always stuck with me how we, how we tend to look at the world through our own particular prism and then we make value judgments based upon how others or other things match up to our own particular reality which is normally a white male, an American standard 'cause that's what I was taught, that's who taught me.  And I remember her so well for that piece which was a good piece but then for another piece when she, I overheard her saying some cutting remarks about a good friend of mine who happened to be black and I realized that there were two sides to the coin that I had to pay attention to.  So, my junior year, as I mentioned before, revolved around me getting back on my studies because I knew I was going to college somewhere, that was just expected of me.  It scared me because I wasn't sure that I could make the grade because I'd done so badly my sophomore year [at Nuremberg American High School, Furth, Germany].
Speaker 1: Do you think that the comment that she, that you overheard the teacher making have an impact upon your life at that particular point that would affect a future?
Speaker 2: It did because it jarred me.  I didn't expect it from her.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what that comment was?
Speaker 2: And I can't remember what it was but it was, it was blatantly racial and she made it to another student, another white student, and I thought it was so out of place for a teacher to be saying because I had, I was taught and brought up to respect people in authority, teachers, particularly.  That was part of my makeup and that shook me, it just shook me to my core, that it made me start looking at people differently.
Story_ID: 360227
Speaker 1: Do you think that that served as a turning point in your life?
Speaker 2: It probably was something that spurred what happened as we went on 'cause like I said, I started there [Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky] in '67 [1967] and in '68 [1968], that same school year in April, was when Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was shot and that was the first time I had ever seen my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] vividly angry.  I mean, really, down, deep angry.
Speaker 1: How did she express her anger?
Speaker 2: She said she was pissed off and I never heard my mother say that before.  At the time my mother was working outside the home, she was working at the local bank as a teller and I overheard her saying, "I ain't coming in. I don't care what you do, I ain't coming in today," and I heard her tell me, "I can't go because I'll say something I'll regret," which meant to me that there was something that she had been holding back to survive but she made me go to school.  Now here's the interesting thing.  In '63 [1963], they called school out [after the assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  In '68 [1968], we had to go to school and I didn't want to go but I went and I remember it being quiet because nobody knew what was going to happen.
Story_ID: 360228
Speaker 1: I was really excited about getting the opportunity to vote because I was going to turn eighteen the next year and I was really disappointed that I could not vote in '68 [1968].  You know, the president had decided, Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had decided that he was not going to run again, that Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been killed, and then Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] got killed that summer and everything changed.  I just felt, I felt that just the change in, in the rotation of the planet.
Speaker 2: And how did this affect life on the base [Fort Knox, Kentucky], Martin's and the--President Johnson's statement and Bobby's--
Speaker 1: I think President Johnson's was, was met with some relief.  It was, it was relief mixed with amazement that he would actually do it.  He was getting hammered, he was getting hammered and for him to quit like that was like, dang, but it was like, okay, phew, maybe we can get out of this thing [Vietnam War] now because, you know, all of our, our fathers were going to Vietnam.  Mine [William Kimbrough] hadn't gone yet and I hadn't gone yet, not in '67 [1967], but those things happening just the way they did, it just, it just made me concerned that things were going to spin out of control.  I remember being really afraid.  I remember sitting in my little '62 [1962] Volkswagen and when, when Bobby Kennedy got killed and saying, my goodness because I think we were really searching back to try to get to our vision of Camelot and he was our ticket back and young folks were starting to get energized because they were getting the right to vote.
Speaker 2: But when you say that it, you wished that you could vote, what did you have in mind doing?
Speaker 1: I was going to vote, I just, I was, I was excited about the whole prospect of finally getting a chance to vote.
Speaker 2: And how did you feel your vote would impact going forward?
Speaker 1: I just knew I was going to be another vote in terms of all these millions of people voting but, but the ability and the chance, and the opportunity to get involved in the system, was exciting to us as, to me and to my peers.  I remember us talking about it.  We always thought that we would be the generation, we would be the class that would make the change, that would help us make the change and when, when those shots rang out, it just, it, I think, I think it took something from us.
Story_ID: 360229
Speaker 1: At this particular time, were you thinking about going to college or--
Speaker 2: I was, I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know you--
Speaker 2: I didn't know where, I didn't know where but like I said, I was afraid and I'd even mentioned to my father [William Kimbrough] the fact that, why don't I just take a couple years, join the [U.S. military] service first, which didn't sit well with him.  In no uncertain terms, he told me that was a bad idea, not no, but hell no, that ain't going to happen.  And so, you know, I was sort of like, okay.  And it was just fear and the fact in the whole idea, could I, could I actually do college work.  I wasn't sure I could do college work.  I just wasn't sure.
Speaker 1: And your father had still not left for Vietnam at this time?
Speaker 2: Not at that time, not at that time.  He didn't leave, he didn't leave for Vietnam until the middle of my senior year but he knew he was going, it was just a matter of time, but I took the SATs.  I took the SATs and I took the PSAT, the SAT and the ACT and I was so naive.  I didn't know what they meant.  It was just another test.  You know, I'd been taking standardized tests all my life and so it was just another test and I went in and I took those tests and I scored really high.  I think I exceeded anybody's expectations for me, as a student.  They knew I was a pretty good student but I wasn't, I wasn't a high achieving student.  You know I struggled and, but I did my work and sometimes I did very well, sometimes I didn't do as well but when I came back with the scores that I did on my SATs, I think it got some people's attention.  In fact, it surprised me how much attention it got.  I keep, I keep that clipping in my book, you know because they put it in there, you know, local student, you know, is a top scholar, Fort, you know, Knox student, top scholar, you know, and I was a semifinalist for the National Merit Scholarship, didn't get it, but I was a semifinalist which was, which was good and I didn't know what that meant.  I had no idea what that meant.  My father had never been to college, you know, my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough], you know, spent a year and a half in school [at Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], I didn't know what it meant.
Speaker 1: But how did it make you feel doing that well on the SAT and even being qualified to obtain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It gave me a lot of notoriety.  It made me feel good, you know, it was sort of like, man, I'm glad I didn't know what that test was about, you know.  And, and I got a lot of attention.  Suddenly, and I think I was well-liked but suddenly I became one of those, those notable students, you know, that was doing something different.  I started getting, in my homeroom, I started getting letters from colleges, you know, recruiting letters, and I wasn't an athlete, and that really blew people's minds.  It was like, this black guy, you know, what's up with him?  And I hated math but I scored really high on the, on the English side of it.
Speaker 1: Now do you think your English teacher had an effect on that, the English teacher, Miss, the VanDyke [Lucille McWilliams VanDyke], Mrs. VanDyke, no she was government, Mrs. Schlenker--
Speaker 2: Not yet because that was junior year, that was the end of junior year.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That was the end of junior year and I hadn't had Schlenker yet.  I knew I was going to have to go through her the next year though and she was, she was the ultimate teacher.  Those two teachers were the two ultimate teachers in the school and you knew that if you had those two teachers, that one, you were going to have to work hard but, but it was going to be a test.  So I knew that was coming, I knew that was coming.  So, we start senior year and in homeroom I'm getting all of these letters, Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], schools I had never, some of the schools I never heard of, and it was like, ooh, and I kept studying, I kept studying, but I thought, I always thought that I was going to be a [U.S.] military guy, I mean that's, that was my existence, that's what I knew and that's probably what I would do and--
Speaker 1: In, in the school, in Fort Knox High [Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky], did they, were there any military classes for students, their dependents?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  We didn't have any ROTC in our school.
Speaker 1: So being a dependent did not necessarily mean that you had to have any military training--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --or affiliation in the school system?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, none at all.
Story_ID: 360230
Speaker 1: Where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: I ended up at Eastern Kentucky University [Richmond, Kentucky].  I wanted to go to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado].  Truth be known, when I was going to Shawnee High School--or Shawnee Junior High [Shawnee Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky], I read a number of novels by, on West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and they followed a student as a first year cadet, second year or third year and fourth year and I convinced myself, man, I'd love to go to West Point and, but my junior year, my father [William Kimbrough] said, "They want to talk to you about West Point," and suddenly I didn't want to go to West Point (laughter).
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: Because I didn't like my father then, you know, it was like, nah, if he had not said anything, I might have been right on it.  And I probably could have gotten in because he had, he had found someone as I had done for my son [Anthony Kimbrough], subsequently, he had found an officer who was willing to write a letter for me based upon what I had done on those SATs, I know that now, and I just said, I don't want to do that.  I want to go to the Air Force Academy.  I want to be in the [U.S.] Air Force and I want to fly it, I want to fly planes.  So, I put all of my resources into doing that and did all the background paperwork, took all the interviews, took all the physical tests and battery of tests and I was unsuccessful.  I had a couple of secondary nominations but all of the primary alternates decided to go and when they, and when I got that information back in my senior year [at Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky], like the second semester, I was in a quandary.  I said, what can I do?  I haven't, I haven't applied any place else (laughter).
Story_ID: 360231
Speaker 1: So what did you do?
Speaker 2: So, so I heard, I heard about an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] scholarship, okay, it was [U.S.] Army ROT--but it was ROTC and I said, and it said that if you, if you were successful at acquiring a four-year ROTC scholarship, you could take that to any school that would accept you.  I said, good.  So I applied for that.  Part of the process required me to go to, to Richmond, Kentucky, campus of Eastern Kentucky University, to take an interview, one of the three interviews that I've--three or four interviews that I ever had in my life and I had to interview this board of officers about why I would be a good candidate to get this scholarship and I just, I had not prepared for the interview and I didn't do well but, and I knew when I left it, I hadn't done well.  You know, how you get that feeling.  A buddy of mine was with me and he had, he rode along with me, and so I left the interview and we decided to walk around campus.  First time we'd really set foot on a university campus and I said, "What do you think about this?"  Bob [ph.] said, "It looked pretty good," you know, and you know we saw some people walking around, it was spring break so there weren't a lot of students there but we knew that there was one guy who had gone, who was there, who was, who had come from our high school [Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky].  A guy that I had helped through his government class.  He was a basketball player.  And so while we were walking around, we found our way into the administration building, just totally by accident and, and an administrator came and saw us while we were there.  It turned out he was the dean of students.  As I think about that incident, I know why he came and stopped us, though he said, you know, "Can I help you?"  Well, we were out of place.  Here we were, two young black guys in the administration building and they're wondering, okay, what are you doing here?  Well I told him that I was there to interview for the scholarship and I, he said, "Really."  He said, "What's your SAT score," and I told him.  He said, "You ever think about going to school here?"  And I said, "Not really."  He said, "How would you like an application?"  I said, "Sure, we'd like one."  And so he brought us a couple of applications.  He said, "Go on, fill those out, send them back to me, here's my card."  And I said, okay, I said, okay.  And we did and we both got accepted.  And so that's where I ended up.  I didn't get the scholarship and I ended up going for a full year, my parents [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough and William Kimbrough] paid, but I reapplied for the three-year scholarship and, and won that and that's what paid for my school.
Story_ID: 360232
Speaker 1: How was the college experience at the university [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: It was good.  It was good.  A couple of things happened to me there.  I was, I was scared to death to go.  I just was but I went.
Speaker 1: And what were you afraid of?
Speaker 2: Failure.  I was afraid that I would fail and I thought, and that would be a bad reflection on my family and on me and what could I do.  And all I could see to do because I had tried that summer before, before, between graduation and going to school, to get a job close to my home.  We had moved.  By this time my father [William Kimbrough] had gone to Vietnam and we had moved outside of Louisville, Kentucky and I couldn't get a job.  I couldn't get a part-time job.  I couldn't get a job just for the summer.  They wouldn't hire me and that was the second time I had come up against an obstacle in terms of what I felt was lack of opportunity, a lack of getting a chance to do something.  They would not hire me.
Speaker 1: Now was this on base [Fort Knox, Kentucky] or was this out in the city?
Speaker 2: This is off base.  We were living off base by then and I couldn't get hired.  So my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough] was working at the bank still.  She got me a job at the bank.  It's a part-time job, I was the assistant janitor.  There was only one janitor and me and he gave me, he was a black guy, he made me do everything he didn't want to do and I worked like I'd never worked before.  I mean, I mopped floors and I cleaned bathrooms, I hauled computer paper, that's back when they had the big, the big green bar, in the, and once a week this big semi-truck, trailer truck would come up and it would, I'd have to unload this big shipment of computer paper and take it down to the storeroom and the stuff that I couldn't get down there, I had to unload off this truck, put it on the small panel truck and take it out to a branch and take it down these long row of steps, stack it up and then when we ran out of paper, back at the main branch, I had to go back and pick it up and pull it up, back up these steps.  I have not worked so hard in my life and I said, if I don't get an education, this is all, this is what kept me in school.  That job kept me in school.  Every time I wanted to quit, I thought about, and do what?  Become an assistant janitor, 'cause that's all you can do (laughter).  So, it was great.
Story_ID: 360233
Speaker 1: College was great for me.  I worked on my social skills.  I learned, I said, well you know what I'll do is I'll get on, become part of student government and nobody would vote for me (laughter).  Nobody would sign, nobody would sign my petition to get, to get on the ballot.  None of the white guys in my dorm would sign and there weren't many black guys and I had to have a hundred signatures.  I couldn't get a hundred signatures and I was living in a, I was on a campus that was predominantly white.  There was probably, there were less, there were 186 students, black students, on this university campus [of Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky], I was one of them, and the campus had a student population of 15,000.
Speaker 2: So what did you do?
Speaker 1: I joined the Black Student Union.
Speaker 2: And this was in your freshman year?
Speaker 1: This is my freshman year.
Speaker 2: So we're around 1970--
Speaker 1: We're 1969.  So, I, I started to pledge an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], a [U.S.] military fraternity, it was called the Pershing Rifles and I joined the Black Student Union and I joined the University Ensemble [EKU Gospel Ensemble], which was the, which is the gospel choir and that sustained me for the first year.  I didn't date, because nobody would date me, and I studied and I protested.  We had a white, a white fraternity that, that used to have a annual celebration of Old South Week and Old South Week started with a parade.  This was the KA's, Kappa Alpha's [Pi Kappa Alpha Fraternity].  Old South Week started with a parade where the white fraternity members would get dressed up in Civil War regalia.  Their sweethearts would be in the southern belle, antebellum dresses and they would parade through campus with the rebel flags and we protested and--
Speaker 2: Approximately how many of the black students were there protesting with you?
Speaker 1: About 186 (laughter).  I don't know if it was all of us or not, but there, but everyone that we could get out to do it, did.  We used to have organizing meetings about, okay, what do we do to change this campus to make it more accommodating to us?  To keep people from yelling obscenities at African American women.  We had to escort women across campus, particularly after dark.  None of us had cars so, and the only place that we could enjoy ourselves and party on the weekends was downtown, in the black side of town.  And so we would all walk in groups because we were fearful that if we walked by ourselves, that would be, we would be accosted.  So I became very active and I described that four-year period as my immersion period and I became very black and I became very angry, because we fought every day, we struggled every day just to be accepted on this campus and we recruited.  And by the time I left college, that less than 200 African American presence was around 2,000 and we had two black sororities and two black fraternities.  We no longer had the, we no longer had the Black Student Union but we had the organizations now.
Speaker 2: And what fraternal organizations were there that were started?
Speaker 1: The Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] came on campus first.  The Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] came on campus second.  The AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] came on campus and then the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].
Story_ID: 360234
Speaker 1: Now after the bash of Old South Week, what happened next?  You brought the black fraternities in.
Speaker 2: I brought the black fraternities in, we were successful in getting the school to, to begin a black studies program that they put on Saturday morning at eight o'clock.  We were successful in, in getting the first black cheerleader which led, and subsequent years to, the first black homecoming queen and most of us graduated, most of us graduated to the point that now, as alumni, this group of students who came in '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], '71 [1971], '73 [1973], primarily those five years, we're being courted to come back to the university [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky] and we do so on, in, on an every other year basis for a African American alumni special homecoming weekend.  It's on homecoming but it's the special time when, when we are invited back en masse for an African American reunion to which the president attends, the president comes and attends and actually addresses the African American alumni.
Speaker 1: And this is the president of the university or the president of the United States?
Speaker 2: This is the president of the university now [Joanne Glasser].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you all have special activities, the black alumni association?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You do, do you, okay.  How long do those activities last?
Speaker 2: They last the entire weekend.
Speaker 1: And they're activities that you actually sponsor?
Speaker 2: That we sponsor and that we primarily populate.  The current university president understands the need to have a diverse student body and this is a way to get the kind of exposure that they need to attract minority students.
Speaker 1: Now do you gear the activities toward black students or any nationality?
Speaker 2: They're, they're open to anybody, they're open to anybody but it's primarily, and it gets good press and it gets good publicity that they know that we're coming back to the point that this past year, they've even started sponsoring special concerts geared toward the returning African American alumni.  They really want our money but that's okay, we understand that.
Story_ID: 360235
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1972?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 2: I graduated with a business administration degree and a commission and a commission as a second lieutenant in the United States Army.
Speaker 1: All right, so you were in RO- I mean, you did [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: I did, I did four years of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and then I did nine subsequent years in the, in the military.  I left Eastern [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky] on a Thursday night and Friday morning I, I signed in, back at Fort Knox [Kentucky] as a, as a second lieutenant, which is interesting coming back as a, as a second lieutenant.  Then you go back to school and see Ms. Schlenker, Miss, Ms. VanDyke [Lucille McWilliams VanDyke] and I didn't, I didn't talk about them near enough by, in terms of their impact on me.  Miss, both of them, I credit Ms. Schlenker on teaching me how to write, which has served me immeasurably.  She questioned and challenged us, all of us, not just me, but all of us, at, that were in our class, to the nth degree.  I think I was one of two black students in our English class.  Ms. VanDyke, Ms. Schlenker's dead now, bless her soul, Ms. VanDyke challenged us to think outside the norm in terms of politics, every step along the way.  I think Ms. VanDyke is still living but they really pushed us, they pushed us.  Those two teachers pushed us unlike anybody else would, they really did, and we were all the better for it.  We graduated eighty-six students in my, in my senior class at Fort Knox High School [Fort Knox, Kentucky].
Story_ID: 360236
Speaker 1: Ms. Abbott [ph.], the third teacher, was the one that just, just nourished the other side of us, our creative side.
Speaker 2: That was the music?
Speaker 1: With the music and through her I, I was selected to the all-state choir.
Speaker 2: And that was in high school [Fort Knox High School, Fort Knox, Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: And that was in high school.  You know, I even got to, I didn't tell you this.  I even, I'm one of a few people that you can look at that actually worked in the, in the gold vault at the gold depository [U.S. Bullion Depository] at Fort Knox [Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Well explain that experience to us.
Speaker 1: It was, but it caused me to miss out on the trip to all-state choir but they wanted a group of male students to spend the week in the gold depository on a clean-up project and so every morning for a week a group of us would meet at the gate and be escorted into the gold depository, which is a very highly secured area.  It looks nothing like 'Goldfinger' but--
Speaker 2: Well, describe the gold depository to us.
Speaker 1: I can't, then I have to kill you (laughter).  We're sworn to secrecy.  Basically what it is, it's a place where they in the past have stored gold bullion and they had some then.  I don't know how much they have there now but it is, it is a, it's a highly secured series of vaults that stores, at that time, stored coin, quarters, nickels, dimes and other sundry items that I really can't talk about.
Story_ID: 360237
Speaker 1: Now when you returned to Fort Knox [Kentucky] as a lieutenant, and that was second lieutenant.
Speaker 2: Um, second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was, it was eye-opening because it became, I came full circle, you know, from a child living on the installation to a student studying on the installation, to an officer being trained on the installation and being afforded the privileges of an officer.  I saw things I'd never seen before.  I saw things I had seen before from another vantage point and it was interesting because some of my instructors knew my father [William Kimbrough] and so that was that little spin on it too.  You know, here I was, I was a home grown kid, as home grown as an [U.S.] Army kid can get coming back in a way being successful in coming back.  So it was really good and I came back on another occasion as well.
Speaker 1: Now what did you do after leaving Fort Knox?  What was your career path?
Speaker 2: My first assignment was with the, was with the 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell [Kentucky] but my first, my first stop leaving Fort Knox was to come to Fort Benning, Georgia, for Airborne School [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia].  Yeah, a young guy, afraid of heights and learning how to jump out of airplanes, a novel, a novel solution to my, to conquering my fear but it put me back down in the South and I got, and gave me an opportunity to look at the South a little bit different, from a different perspective.  When I left there, that was the last time I saw my Uncle Baby [ph.].  I stopped by to see him at the old property, just on a whim, just on a whim.  I stopped in to see him and it was the last time I saw him.  Two months later he was dead and we spent the greater part of the night just sitting down, talking, and he hadn't seen me in a number of years.  He hadn't seen me since I was a child.
Speaker 1: Now he was in Selma [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, he was in Selma.
Speaker 1: And he was still living on the property?
Speaker 2: He was still living on the property.
Speaker 1: And how had things changed in Selma from when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much (laughter), not much, things in Selma haven't changed that much now.  I mean, not much.  You know, people have a greater voice but I go back now and I look at Selma and I look at the places that I remember, and which aren't many, and I wonder what life would have been for me had I stayed, had my parents decided to come back to Alabama.  It would have been so much different, it would have been so much different.  It's so interesting because the last job I had, the last assignment I had with the newspaper [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], I had an employee that's from Selma, that worked for me, and, and she's doing well and I've gotten her promoted a couple of times but we talk about that from time to time 'cause she had to get out.  She said she had to leave and in Selma you do, you need to leave, you just need to leave.
Speaker 1: No job opportunities?
Speaker 2: Some but not a lot of growth opportunity, not a lot of growth opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did your training in Fort Benning?
Speaker 2: I did my training in Fort Benning, Georgia, signed in on post at Fort Campbell, spent a number of years there as a, as a junior officer in, in the cavalry and eventually, you know, got promoted, got promoted, came back to Fort Knox as a captain for my advance training, got married there at Fort Knox in the Main Post Chapel [Fort Knox, Kentucky] to a young lady [Charlcye Ritchie Kimbrough] that I'd met back at Eastern [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky], after I graduated.
Story_ID: 360238
Speaker 1: So how did you and your wife meet at Eastern [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: We met, we met on Valentine's weekend in 1976, 1976.  I just happened to be on campus that weekend, she just happened to be there, she was in her junior year and we happened to meet and two years later we got married.  She's an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], by the way, and (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And what is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife's name is Charlcye, Charlcye Ritchie Kimbrough.  Charlcye was born in La Grange, Kentucky, outside of Louisville, Kentucky.  Charlcye actually came to, to Richmond [Kentucky] the September after that August I graduated.  I graduated in August and she arrived on campus in September and we didn't meet for three more years but we've been married for twenty--it'll be twenty-eight years in April.  We got married April 15th, 1978 at the Main Post Chapel at Fort Knox, Kentucky, so I really did go full circle.
Story_ID: 360239
Speaker 1: Okay and after marriage you were captain now?
Speaker 2: I'm a captain, we went, we left there, I went to flight school and became a qualified aviator, helicopters, rotary wing, and following training, and that was down in, in, outside of the Ozark, Alabama, Fort Rucker.  We came back to Fort Campbell [Kentucky], spent enough, couple of years and then finally left the [U.S.] military in October of 1982.  I, I took a job here in Atlanta [Georgia] with the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And what was your title with the Federal Reserve Bank?
Speaker 2: Management trainee.  They couldn't really decide what they wanted to do with me at the Federal Reserve Bank.  I was recruited as part of an attempt to diversify the management staff of the Federal Reserve Bank and that was being, that was a program that was the brainchild of the then fed president who six months after I got there decided he wanted to go back to San Francisco [California] whereupon my program kind of evaporated and I eventually, I got a couple of promotions but then eventually lost that job.
Story_ID: 360240
Speaker 1: Then what did you do next [after working for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I sold some insurance and I sold some yogurt.  I tried to help a guy start a business and worked for the [U.S.] Census Bureau during the 2000 census and one day I stopped by the branch closest to me and I took a, I took a job as a part-time newspaper carrier.  This was in the middle of the recession and I was looking for a job and I took that job that fifteen years later turned into what I'm doing today.
Speaker 1: And would you state what you're doing today?  Your title and the company that you're with, again?
Speaker 2: Today I serve as the director of diversity programs and community relations for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.  My career path through the newspaper has been one that defies any kind of logic, it just doesn't normally happen, but the newspaper's a place where people come for a number of different reasons and end up staying for totally separate reasons.
Speaker 1: So what did you do before you became the director of communications and--
Speaker 2: For community relations?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well let me tell you, take you back to being a carrier.  I delivered routes for about eighteen months as I looked for other employment elsewhere.  Suddenly, over a period of time, other opportunities presented themselves in the newspaper and I became a supervisor, I became a manager in circulation, then I moved to production.  After about seven years in circulation, I moved to production and worked in our services department, became the manager of shipping and receiving.
Story_ID: 360241
Speaker 1: And at that point somebody decided that maybe I should go away and get, get my perspective widened and I went to a, a leadership development program, a three-day course, through the National Association of Minority Media Executives [National Association of Multicultural Media Executives (NAMME)] where I met some folks with some national reputations.  I learned more about the newspaper business and within a year of that, less than a year of that, I was tapped to become the, the operations manager of our packaging department, which is commonly named, known as our mailroom.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what, how do you feel that NAMME affected that, your change in position at the newspaper [Atlanta Journal-Constitution]?
Speaker 1: NAMME, NAMME helped me, and it was in Chicago [Illinois], it was in Chicago at, at Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management], Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  NAMME gave me an insight into what newspapers, how newspapers can impact people and I think I always knew that but didn't really know what role I could have in that but in that three day period and doing, listening to some presentations and talking to some people, I realized that there were a lot of things in my background that I brought to the table that I had not adequately applied.
Speaker 2: And just what are a couple of those things that you realized?
Speaker 1: That business is built on relationships and that companies seek actively, leaders, people who could lead other people.  I'd always decided that I would take a, as much as possible, take the backseat in terms of being a driver of anything.  I felt I was better suited as a support person because I could get people to do things for me but as I thought about what, what, some of the things I share with you today, I realized that over the years I've always been kind of at the forefront, if not the leader, at least the guy that was saying, well you know, we can do this.  If we just do this, we could do this.  If we just did this piece, we can do this too and, you know, who knows what it'll look like in ten years and I had not done that with the newspaper.  I was more plotting, I was more methodical, I want to do this, I want to do this and then we'll see what that happens.  Somehow I came away from that three day period with a clearer understanding of how I could apply some of those skills, some of that leadership skill, and how it would just require a little bit of risk.  Me just taking a little bit of risk and stepping outside of the comfort of my confines and I did that.
Story_ID: 360242
Speaker 1: I started volunteering my time.  I started exposing myself to folks I had not exposed myself to and I just started seeking advice, seeking advice.
Speaker 2: Now when you started volunteering, what organizations are you affiliated with now?
Speaker 1: Well it starts with, with my fraternity.  I've been active with my fraternity since the day I was, I pledged.  So that's over thirty-five years.
Speaker 2: And that is, the name of the fraternity?
Speaker 1: Kappa, I'm a Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and if, if you look at our fraternal organization in the black community, particularly beyond the undergraduate level into the alumni chapters, they're predicated on service to your community if you're really serious about it.  I've been doing that with my fraternity anyway and I had started mentoring long before I went to NAMME [National Association of Minority Media Executives; National Association of Multicultural Media Executives], which is a scary thing, to start mentoring a sixth grader because of the responsibility that's attached to it.  So, in the course of that, I got connected with Hands on Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia].  I got connected with the Atlanta Food Bank [Atlanta Community Food Bank, Atlanta, Georgia].  I got connected with Habitat for Humanity [Atlanta, Georgia] which led me into my involvement with United Way [United Way Worldwide] through my company [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] with our Empty Stocking campaign [Empty Stocking Fund] through my company, through the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation [JDRF], just on a volunteer basis.  Somehow somebody caught sight of that and nominated me for a volunteer award, which I won during the company.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of that award?
Speaker 1: That's called the Golden Link Award.
Speaker 2: And that is awarded to an individual, when?
Speaker 1: To individuals who have, who have exhibited the pension for volunteering, volunteerism.  From that I started, I was tapped to, to do some training, to do developmental training, management development training and became one of the first three individuals to be certified trainers in a new training program that we, that we had, that we eventually rolled out.
Speaker 2: Is this through the company or through--
Speaker 1: This is through our company.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is through our company.  So, now I'm just a, I guess I'm a couple of days from actually being sworn in as a member of the 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And the 100 Black Men of Atlanta, what is their mission for the community?
Speaker 1: Enrichment, empowerment and, and community service.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Community, enrichment, empowerment.
Story_ID: 360243
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add about something like something we didn't ask today?
Speaker 2: I don't know, we covered a lot of ground, we covered a lot of ground.
Speaker 1: Why do you feel that it was significant for you to tell your story?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know other than, I tend to have conversations now with employees unlike any I've ever had.  I think had it not been for the things that I experienced and where I came from, I could not have those conversations and maybe guide somebody in terms of their career choices.  I never thought I would be doing today what I'm doing today.  I never thought, in terms of doing what I do--I in essence am the community face of our newspaper [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], the largest newspaper in the Southeast.  How does a little old boy from Selma, Alabama get to this point?  I don't know, particularly when he had no idea he'd be in newspapers.  I also am responsible for our diversity initiatives with the newspaper.  How does that happen?  I don't know but I know that I have the opportunity now to impact people in a way that I never thought I would and it's, and it's, it's an awesome opportunity when you sit down across from somebody and get them to see things in a way they have never seen it before, things that they had never thought about before and I'm talking about the majority of people, white people, people of color, when you ask them questions, why do you do that?  Why do you think you do that?  How does it feel when you do that to somebody?  How does it feel and they come back and they said, "Thank you for taking me someplace I've never been before," maybe that's why I'm telling this.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you? (Pause) Believe me now, we're almost through.
Speaker 2: I hope so (laughter).
Story_ID: 329555
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: I think I've lived my life about as, as well as I could.  Has it been a perfect life?  No, it has not.  It's been far from perfect.  But has it been of value?  I value, I value family.  I value my relationship with, with my creator.  I value my community.  You asked me earlier what was, and I didn't answer you, what was the phrase I use the most.  I believe that each one of us has a responsibility to impact somebody's life and a lot of times people come into our life at a particular point in life for a particular reason and oftentimes that reason is something that we don't clearly understand until much later.  So if I had to say that would be the thing that I probably use most often because I really believe it's true and I think it impacts almost everything you do because you have to make some conscious decisions.  Will that impact be positive or negative?  Now, sometimes you don't have control over that because you don't know how people are accepting you or taking you but I think my values and attached to that, to that credo, I look at things like my son [Anthony Kimbrough] and, and what he has become and what he's becoming.  I think that is a direct extension of the way I lived my life and that I have tried to provide for him a good example and measured as much as possible, measured advice and correction along the way because I think it's important.  I look at my relationships at work and outside of work and I think, for the most part, they're quality ones.  Are some deeper than others?  Yeah, some are, but again, I think we meet each other, our responsibility is to meet each other where we are as opposed to where we want that person to be.
Story_ID: 329556
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is one that I shared just recently that we can find it within ourselves to look at ourselves as our best allies.  I think too much, we compete too much against each other and that's a concern of mine, that it closes us off and we can't become better than we are if we're always competing against each other.  We are all we've got, really.  Unlike most other people that you know, I don't think we, I don't think we appreciate sometimes just how strong we actually are.  I don't think that we really think about that.  I heard George Fraser [HistoryMaker George Cylie Fraser] say just a few days ago that if you change your perspective, then if you think about, we were probably sent here to save this place.  I think too often we think we were taken from where we were, then maybe we were sent here for a better reason, for a higher purpose, and I don't think we look enough at that higher purpose and it disturbs me how materialistic we've become.  Just sitting here today and thinking about my grandfather and my father [William Kimbrough], and somehow, somehow we lost something somewhere and we've got to get it back.
Story_ID: 329557
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That he was a good old guy (laughter).  That he really was, yeah, you know, sometimes he stepped on your toes but, you know, he really, he really was a good guy.
Story_ID: 329558
Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children [Anthony Kimbrough], grandchildren and the world?
Speaker 2: What lessons?
Speaker 1: Message or lessons.
Speaker 2: We've got to figure this thing out.  Now I think it's, it's sad that we have not figured out that we need, we need each other to live and why we think we can't, that we can't, we can't figure that out.  We should have figured this out a long time ago.  We were so close.  We were so close to getting this thing right.  I really think we were so close to getting it right and that's what hurt me so much in 1968, is that we were so close and that things just started rolling themselves back.  I've talked to a number of people just in the recent times and, and a number of people that share with me their, their feeling that we may be close to a tipping point and we will either tip toward the negative or tip toward the positive.  I don't know if you feel that way but I feel that way sometimes 'cause I listen to what people say.  I do a seminar, a diversity seminar six times a year and, and I've really started to listen to what they say and sometimes it really frightens me.  Maybe we have too many choices and maybe we need to get back to basics.
Story_ID: 329559
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: There are other people that have said it better than I've said it, but I think it always comes back to that old, that old saying of that, that if you forget where you've been, if you forget history, you tend to repeat history.  I did not always think that way.  I thought history was really boring and maybe it was in the presentation but the longer I've lived, the more compelling it becomes to me.  I'm reading 'Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn' ["Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn: The Saga of Two Families and the Making of Atlanta,' Gary M. Pomerantz] now and it causes me to look at Atlanta [Georgia] in a totally different light because I understand some of the things I never understood before and I walk around in this all day, every day.  History is very important, history is very important.
Story_ID: 329560
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I didn't know I would ever had a legacy.  Maybe that, that, what I want my legacy to be?  Maybe that, if I can get people, if I can help people start to talk to each other, maybe we'll learn more about each other.  We don't talk enough to each other.  I know my, my, I didn't learn enough about my people and I'm talking about my grandparents and my great-grandparents and their great-grandparents.  We lose a lot of time when we don't do that and we don't talk to each other and we don't dialog with each other.  We lose time and we don't have that much time.  It sounds like I keep talking about this tipping point, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's good.
Speaker 2: And I guess as we get older, we understand that we don't have that much time left.  I'll be 55 in a couple of months.  I always said I would live to be 110.  That means I'm halfway through.  I'm probably more than halfway through 'cause I don't know when I'm going, actually.  So, what will my legacy be?  I would love it to be that, that he helped us dialog, that he helped us talk it through, that he helped us talk together.
Speaker 1: Well thank you and thanks for being so gracious with your time.  Thanks for the life that you had led and now we need to move on to recording your photos.  I will need to move to where you're sitting and you move here to where I'm sitting and we'll go over the photos.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 329561
Speaker 1: So that's one of the--
Speaker 2: That's Andrew Willis, my grandfather and, taken in 1918.
Speaker 1: And where was he at that particular time?  Do you know what city?  Was he in Selma [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I don't know what city he was in but that was his, him in uniform.
Speaker 1: And is this your mother's father?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's father, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that's myself and my father and my mother [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough].
Speaker 1: And you were approximately how old at that particular time?
Speaker 2: One year old.
Speaker 1: And your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Ernestine.
Speaker 1: Maiden name?
Speaker 2: Willis.
Speaker 1: Married name?
Speaker 2: Kimbrough.
Speaker 1: And your father's compl- whole name?
Speaker 2: William Reed Kimbrough [William Kimbrough].
Speaker 1: And that's, this was taken, I should have left it up there, in Selma?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I was going to say, just make sure the ones you use, set them to the side because I'm going to have to do snapshots after we finish.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now when was this one taken?  And starting from left to right.
Speaker 1: That was taken, that was a family shot that was taken in 1966 in Vilseck, Germany and there's my sister, IVA [IVA Kimbrough], my mother, myself, my father and my brother, Mark [Mark Kimbrough].
Speaker 2: And you were approximately how old at that particular time?
Speaker 1: I was approximately, let's see, '66 [1966], I was about fifteen.
Speaker 2: And what school were you attending then?  You were in--
Speaker 1: I was at Vilseck Elementary School [Vilseck, Germany], or school.  I was, I was in the, I was in ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, that was a middle school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Middle to high school for Nurnberg [Nurnberg American High School, Furth, Germany].  It was Vilseck or Nurnberg?
Speaker 1: That was Vilseck, yeah.  I'm pretty sure that that was the date.  What does it say?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], how about that?  Was that good or what?
Speaker 2: That was pretty good.  That was pretty darn good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I will do this one.
Speaker 2: That's my graduation picture, 1969, Fort Knox High School [Fort Knox, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: And the city and state?
Speaker 2: Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: I think I missed those.
Speaker 2: That's my father, William Kimbrough.  That was probably taken, see, looking at his rank, that was probably taken like 1949 maybe, probably 1949, 1948, 1949.
Speaker 1: And that was right before you were born, right?
Speaker 2: Yup, right before I was born.
Speaker 1: And he was in the United States Army?
Speaker 2: United States Army.
Speaker 1: Was that after, that was definitely after the Korean War wasn't it?
Speaker 2: About the, about the same time.  There's nothing on the back of that?  I don't think there's anything on the back of that.
Speaker 1: No, it doesn't, it doesn't say.
Speaker 2: I see service stripes.  He has one, two, three, two, four, six years to combat, that's right after Korea so that's probably 1950, '51 [1951], yeah.
Speaker 1: Squadron, 17th Cavalry [17th Cavalry Regiment], 101st Airborne Division, Fort Campbell, Kentucky, probably 19--probably 1975, '4 [1974], '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Repeat the first half of that.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just repeat what you just said again.
Speaker 1: What, [HistoryMaker] Reed Kimbrough, first lieutenant?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, it was you and where you were and what--
Speaker 1: Oh, I was assigned to the second squadron, 17th Cavalry, 101st Airborne Division, Fort Campbell, Kentucky, yeah, that was about, that was '75 [1975], 1975.
Speaker 2: Let's do this one.
Speaker 1: Is there a mark on my forehead there?
Speaker 2: On this one right here?
Speaker 1: No, this one.
Speaker 2: Yup, I think it's all right, right on the eyebrow?
Speaker 1: Uh, that was 1976 because I had an automobile accident.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right there.  Okay, I thought you had a flight accident.
Speaker 1: Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: You know, something like that.  Do you still fly?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't flown in a long time.  That's myself, myself Reed, and Charlcye [Charlcye Ritchie Kimbrough], I'm a captain so that was right before we got married, yeah.  That was right before we got married.
Speaker 2: That, when--
Speaker 1: That was probably 1977.
Speaker 2: And that was and you met in 1970--
Speaker 1: Six [1976].
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ooh, and that's my band.  We called ourself the Aesthetics [ph.] and that's me, leads, Roger Cleeton [ph.] on secondary leads, Rufus [ph.], God, what was Rufus' name?  I can't think of Rufus' name.  The guy that's playing the drums, his name was Phil [ph.] and that's Louie, Louis Walters [ph.] on, on lead guitar, rhythm guitar, excuse me, rhythm guitar.
Speaker 1: And that was in, where were you then?
Speaker 2: That was in Vilseck, Germany.  That was really taken at the rod and gun club, probably the year was, let's see 1966.
Speaker 1: And this was a band that you started?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the one that organized the band, yes.
Speaker 1: And where did you all, where did you all start out of?  Where did you start practicing?  Was it in the basement?  Was it a basement band or--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't in a basement.  I knew that he was, he was learning how to play the rhythm guitar and I went over to his house and noticed that he was playing the lead guitar, learning how to play.  I said you know what?  We ought to get together and, and play, we can go to the service club and pick up some, some amplifiers, which is what we did, and then we started, we recruited this guy to play drums but then we found this guy that could play drums better and I hated singing with this guy because he had bad breath (laughter).
Speaker 1: You all were kind of close.  And about how old were you then in that one?
Speaker 2: I was fifteen, yeah I was about fifteen.  Are we smooth?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We thought we were going to be the next Beatles [The Beatles].  We weren't (laughter).
Story_ID: 329562
Speaker 1: That's me, that's [HistoryMaker] Reed Kimbrough playing first base for the Fort Knox High School [Fort Knox, Kentucky] Eagles baseball team.  That was 1969, my senior year.
Speaker 2: And what position?
Speaker 1: First base.
Speaker 2: You said first base?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was first baseman.
Speaker 2: All righty, and why don't we move onto here.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's more current.  That's taken in, whoa, where was that taken?  That was just taken a couple--that was taken last year.  That was taken last year.  In the picture with me is Booker Izell who retired, whose place I took when he retired in 2004, 2004.  Wayne Estes who, who still works alongside me.  He's the manager of risk management, myself and George Alfred [ph.], who's also retired from the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution].  He was our, our chief negotiator and HR [human resources] director.
Speaker 2: This is a group picture taken at, at the Eastern Kentucky [Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, Kentucky], the Eastern Kentucky African American alumni reunion.  This picture was taken 2003, '4 [2004], 2004, October.
Speaker 1: Now most of the people in the picture alumni?
Speaker 2: Most of those folks in the picture, if not all, are alumni of Eastern Kentucky University, are all good Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] men and the folks that you see in the front, on the front row, this guy, this guy, this guy, this guy, are, and this guy, are, are charter members, founders of the chapter at Eastern Kentucky.
Speaker 1: So they were there when you first started with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were--
Speaker 1: They came in--
Speaker 2: --we all started, we all started the chapter together and everybody else at some point in time pledged.
Speaker 1: And that was around 1971?
Speaker 2: We started, we actually got our charter, 1973.  We actually got our charter, spring of '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Can you get that one?  It's--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I can get anything you put up there.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, good.
Speaker 2: That's the group, that's a picture of my family, including my wife, Charlcye [Charlcye Ritchie Kimbrough], my son, Anthony [Anthony Kimbrough], we call him Tony, and myself.  This was taken the day of, it was ring weekend when he was presented his, his class ring, his senior year in the spring of 2004.
Speaker 1: And where was he, what school was he attending?
Speaker 2: The Citadel [The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina].  This is The Citadel in Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I want to go back to this one.
Speaker 2: Hah, this is me as a, myself and, and another fraternity brother of mine, his name was Bo Middleton [James Middleton, Sr.].  I'm the guy with the part down the middle, our senior year, just before graduation.  We weren't really as militant looking as we looked but folks thought we were.
Speaker 1: Now was that high school or college?
Speaker 2: This is college.  This is right outside our dormitory, our senior year in college, nineteen--spring of 1973.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the dormitory?
Speaker 2: Dupree Hall.
Speaker 1: At the university.  Give the name of that.
Speaker 2: At Eastern Kentucky University.
Speaker 1: Do you still know, I mean, know where he's located?  Is he still affiliated with the alumni?
Speaker 2: Yes, James, we called him Bo, is, is in Richmond.  He's in Richmond, Virginia.  He is a minister.  Yeah, he's a minister and I'm wearing my father's [William Kimbrough], one of my father's [U.S.] Army shirts with a Afro pick stuck in the, in the pocket (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and my mother, Ernestine Kimbrough [Ernestine Willis Kimbrough], taken earlier this year, 2005, as a matter of fact, just a couple of months ago.  She had always wanted to meet John Lewis, you know, that's with the Selma [Alabama] and Edmund Pettus Bridge connection.  And so she got a chance to meet him.  That's one of the things I'm proud of.
Speaker 2: And what occasion was that he was in town for?
Speaker 1: This was for a function, what was this function?  This was, gosh, oh, I can't remember the name of the function.
Speaker 2: But it was in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 1: But it was in Atlanta, Georgia, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Go back.
Speaker 1: That's me, that's me.  I couldn't be, I couldn't have been more than three.  I couldn't have been more than three which would have put me in Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, Germany.
Speaker 2: And we play a close attention to how you're dressed.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, nattily attired, I tell you, I tell you.  I was an only child at the time.  You know, the world was my oyster, I thought.
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, look at that guy.  I was in eighth grade [at Vilseck Elementary School, Vilseck, Germany] when that picture was taken.  I was in Vilseck, Germany.
Speaker 1: That was right before, right af- before your brother [Mark Kimbrough] was born or a year after your brother was born?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, my brother was around but this is like 1965, '65 [1965].  Everybody was wearing dickies and I didn't have a dickie so my, my mother devised a piece for me to wear for my school picture that year, that looks sort of like a dickie (laughter).  You remember what a dickie was, right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yup, so she did her version of it so you could--
Speaker 2: That was her version of the dickie.
Speaker 1: That's it.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Is that it?  Is that it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it.  Now, you wanted some more?
Speaker 2: There was something else in here that I got in there but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was my announcement of my promotion that, the big head shot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we're rolling.
Speaker 2: Okay, this one now, we're ready.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was, that's my current head shot, taken earlier this year, early in the spring.
Speaker 2: And that's as director--
Speaker 1: As, yeah, my current position as director of diversity programs and community relations.
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: At the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, yes, and--
Speaker 2: Is this the one you're talking about?
Speaker 1: And that's, that's the, the shot that accompanied my promotion announcement in 2004.
Speaker 2: That's a black and white.  I have the color over, don't I?
Speaker 1: And that's a--
Speaker 2: And that's the color?
Speaker 1: That's probably a bet--yeah, that's probably the better picture of the two.  I like that one better.
Speaker 2: And this is a better shot.
Speaker 1: Of what?
Speaker 2: Oh, that one.  That one.  That was taken in New York on Long Island.  That's my son, Anthony, my wife, Charlcye and myself at the occasion of, of the wedding of our goddaughter.  Her name is Ronnie Ramos [ph.], yes.
Speaker 1: This is the one we're looking for.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that's the one, oh that's the one you want to see?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's me--
Speaker 1: And that one doesn't look like it wants to stay up there.
Speaker 2: It probably won't because it's curled.
Speaker 1: It's curled.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I have a piece of tape we can put on.
Speaker 1: You got a quick peek?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That, yeah.
Speaker 1: The Pershing Rifles Company R-1, Eastern Kentucky University.  This is the exhibition platoon, the trick platoon, where we did exhibition drills, you know, spinning rifles and throwing them up in the air and then catching 'em, and that's me in the corner, the top left-hand corner.  The guy right below me is a guy named Ron Shelton [Ronald Shelton] who, who's retired in Louisville, Kentucky, Bobby Brown, my roommate--
Speaker 2: No relation to Bobby Brown?
Speaker 1: The Bobby Brown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nah, nah, nah, that's a, there's a whole sordid story connected to him but of interest in this particular picture is Bobby, myself, Dieter Carlton and Jim Albright [James Albright], all, we were all graduates, we were all in the same graduating class at Fort Knox, Kentucky and eventually Dieter, Jim and myself graduated from Eastern Kentucky together and I haven't seen Jim Albright since graduation and Dieter and I stay in contact through the Internet.  He lives in Orlando [Florida].
