Story_ID: 33808
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Carlton, C-A-R-L-T-O-N; middle name is Wayne, W-A-Y-N-E; and last name is Kent, K-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: Sir, now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Not as I know of.  I don't--I didn't--I've never looked up the history, but I think if you look up Kent, it's somewhere between England and Scotland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I just wondered if maybe you were named after one of your relatives or something.
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, people tend to laugh when I say "Carlton Kent," because those are two cigarettes, and my mother didn't smoke at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is November 5th, 1957, and the place of birth is Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation now is, I own a small business with two partners, and the name of the business is KCK, which stands for Kent, Campa and Kate.  And what we focus on is insuring that we get those great young men and women jobs that have served in the military, and we focus on wounded warriors, you know, actually getting them to work also.  And we have a passion for that, so that's a great thing and that's our calling to make sure we continue to take care of these great young men and women that served this country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but you are a retired Sergeant Major?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I am--I retired as the 16th Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Sixteenth African-American Sergeant Major?
Speaker 2: No.  The number sixteen.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's only been--we're only on seventeen of the entire Marine Corps since the history of our Corps, which was founded in 1775.  So, the number 16--each Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps was given a number since the first one.  And I was honored to be selected to serve as the 16th Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, but I was the third African-American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 16th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to--well, I don't know.  Maybe we shouldn't even ask that question (laughs).
Speaker 2: Well, we're on the Marine Corps Base Quantico [Virginia] (maybe).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Good.
Story_ID: 33809
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up and they only require a short answer.  First question is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like food.  I can't say I have a favorite food, but if you ask me, I like a bow of frosted flakes every morning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color would be blue.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think the holiday season is a--well, I actually think, you know, for me Thanksgiving is the best time of the year, because you live that to be thankful for what you have and thankful for the people, your family and friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used a favorite phrase all the time.  When I see the Marines, I always used the term "Devil Dog" to greet them, and it's a story behind "Devil Dog."
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the story behind "Devil Dog"?
Speaker 2: The story behind "Devil Dog," the Germans, during World War I, when the Marines were attacking the Germans in a place called Belleau Wood in France, the Germans was (sic) amazed how the Marines just come and kept coming forward through all the fire.  You know, the Germans was (sic) just lobbing everything over on the Marines as far as artillery; you know, you name it, they were lobbing over it.  And the Marines kept coming forward like fierce dogs.  So, the Germans called them "Teufel Hunden," mean (sic) dog, fierce dogs in German.  And that's where we earned that title of "Devil Dog," during World War I.  And every Marine is proud to be called "Devil Dog," because that was a pretty--a significant time in the history of the Marine Corps during that battle.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think the woods were almost blown completely down.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: In that battle.
Speaker 2: You know, as a matter of fact, if you go through there now, I mean, it's set up the same way.  You got the wheat fields--it's, you know, it's like sacred ground.  It really is.  And I really like going over there visiting.
Story_ID: 33810
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, before we go into depth--well, I've already done that. Let's see.  I'm going to ask about your family history now.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  Starting with your mother's side, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother (sic) full name is Helen, H-E-L-E-N.  And the last name Kent, K-E-N-T.  Now, would you like her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Banister, B-A-N-I-S-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on December 27th, 1919.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as tracing my mother's side of the family back, my mother really never talked to us, but--because when I was born, my grandmother and grandfather had already passed away, so she didn't do much talking about my mother's side of the family.  But I knew that they are around the Mississippi-Tennessee area, is where you can track them all the way back.  But my mother was born and raised in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they're from the Tennessee-Mississippi are?
Speaker 2: Mississippi area, yes.
Speaker 1: You know where about in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Probably down by Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about your grandparents that you've heard?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, about my grandmother, you know, my mother talked about her all the time.  She was a pretty firm lady, kept the house in order.  My grandfather is a famous blues player from the 1800s or up into the 1900s.  His name was Frank Stokes.  And he has a lot of history in blues.  If you go down on Beale Street, they got the Walk of Fame and his name is on the sidewalk, doing the Walk of Fame.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a particular song he's associated with?
Speaker 2: He's put out numerous songs throughout the--and they were--they were hits back in the late-1800s, the early 1900s.  But he has put out numerous songs.  He was a singer, and he also played the guitar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any recordings of him?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  Plenty.  They just honored my mother on behalf of him in Memphis not too--about three months ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't know if there's any specific song that he's note for, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  He's noted for plenty; I just can't think of them right offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  It's a lot of times these guys have like one particular song, everybody knows that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I can't sing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't pick up his traits on that (laughs).
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother play an instrument or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  She actually sung, though.  She could sing in the choir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At church.
Speaker 1: Now, what about your grandmother; what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Christine.
Speaker 1: And do you know what she did for a living?
Speaker 2: She was pretty much a housewife.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And now, was your mother from south Memphis, too?  I mean, did she grow up in south Memphis?
Speaker 1: She grew up in south Memphis, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she still live (sic) in south Memphis.  She say she's not moving.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did your mother talk about growing up much to you?  Did she have stories?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she had stories but, you know, I think my mother was more of a homebody as a young kid.  She didn't do much outside the house. But she was really smart in school growing up.
Speaker 2: Now, did she have a chance to go to college or anything?
Speaker 1: No.  She didn't never make it to college, because she got married to my dad and started having kids.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Did she come from a large family?
Speaker 1: No.  It was--well, I guess you could say that.  She had four brothers and one sister.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's medium size, I guess, in those days.
Speaker 1: Right.  Sure.
Story_ID: 33811
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, let me go to your father's side, and can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And does he have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, he doesn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 1919 also.  And his place of birth is Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is he from the south side of Memphis, too?
Speaker 2: He was from the Memphis area.  I don't recall what part, but he is from Memphis originally.
Speaker 1: Now, how far back can you trace your father's side?
Speaker 2: We tried to do that, because, you know, I know all my uncles on my father's side, and it was all boys; he had no sisters.  So I got opportunity to know all of them.  Unfortunately, all those have passed away.  My dad, I didn't really get to know him as well as kids, you know, get to know their dad because unfortunately, my dad passed away when I was nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother raised all of us from there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a truck driver.  Drive an 18-wheeler for a company called F and W Express.  He also fought in World War II.  So did all my uncles on his side.  He fought in Europe in World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about your grandfather and grandmother; were they from Memphis or did they come up from Mississippi or another part of Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Oh, they came up from, probably, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And migrated to Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was your grandfather a veteran, as far as you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, because like I said, I never had an opportunity to meet him.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that your father shared about World War II?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't have to share any stories.  He reacted to stories.  He was really--you know, back in the day, they call it shell shocked; you know, when you got the horrors of, you know, combat.  So he was a light sleeper, he'd always jump when someone came around; but that was a reaction.  But I mean, he was a great guy, you know, from the time I was born up until I was nine years old, you know, I really liked--loved, you know, loved my dad.  He was always there for us and always kept us going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any evidence that he was a member of the Red Ball Express or anything?  Since he drove a truck, I just try relate to it, but--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about that.  No.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't talk about what he actually did in the war?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or what kind of job he had?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that he was a platoon sergeant in the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, usually, people that have seen the horrors of combat usually don't tend to speak about what they did in combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because some of them can be memories that they don't want to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So he was officially known as known to being shell shocked?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there are no stories that have passed down.  Now, your father--did he--you say he was born in Memphis so he grew up in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Right.  Sure.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: You know, my mother and my dad, if I recall, they met in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they knew each other since high school.
Speaker 1: All right.  Were they going to South Side High School, the same one that you went to?
Speaker 2: No.  They went to Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Which is probably one of the oldest African-American high schools in Memphis.
Story_ID: 33812
Speaker 1: That's right.  So--Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and dispositions, and the way they look, the way they walk, talk, acted, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My dad [Nathaniel Kent] for several reasons:  One, I actually look like his twin.  I mean, if you put a picture up to me, you know, up against me and him right now, you would say, "Man," you know, "which one of ya'll are Nathaniel, which one ya'll are Carlton?"  And my dad was very, very focused as a person.  I mean, he was focused on everything.  You know, when he was going out to make things happen, things happened; and I think that I picked that up from him.  That's the trait I have.  You know, when I go out to make things happen, it will happen.  And that's the traits that I think I picked up from my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, can you name your brothers and sisters and put yourself in the order?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My--well, I have two step-brothers and sisters from my dad's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you name them?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Evan Kent, he's the oldest; Lucille Kent; and Nathaniel Kent, Jr.; Patricia Kent; Ronald Kent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then myself.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Carolyn Kent and Harold Kent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's eight.  Should be eight.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you're towards the bottom group.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the youngest group.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 33813
Speaker 1: When you were growing up were some of the others already out of the house?
Speaker 2: No.  When I was growing up everybody was still in the house.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you had a large--pretty large household?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You had to be at the dinner table or you'd miss out (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  In retrospect, I guess it's not that--it's a pretty good size group, but it's not the largest I've--I've heard of even bigger families than that or interviewed people that came from bigger ones.  Now, you grew up on the South Side.  Can you--well, was this a predominantly African-American neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was.  Yep.  But in my junior of high school, that's when they started the bussing.  So we got other people of different nationalities at our high school, which was great.  I mean, you know, it actually showed you the other side that there is a world out there.  So, it was good because I, you know, I start connecting with people from different races that was--I mean, it was a learning experience for me starting from--well, actually it started from sophomore up to, through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, did you grow up in the same house the whole--
Speaker 2: No.  But it was two blocks away, you know.  And that's the way it was in our neighborhood; nobody ever moved no more than two blocks away from their previous home, so.  When I was born, I was born at a place called, where it was a street, and I still remember my address; 672 Walker Avenue in Memphis, and it was right behind a famous movie theater called the 'Ritz Show Theatre,' is what they used to call it back in the day.  And then when I was, like, in the sixth grade or seventh grade we moved two blocks on a street called Ray (ph. splg.) Street, 1173 was the address, and I stayed there until the day that I joined the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I got real early--when my dad [Nathaniel Kent] allowed me to drive his car when I was, like, six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was pretty neat.
Story_ID: 33814
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, we always ask this question:  Can you give us some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights growing up, I was, you know, as far as sights, I was a big--big into sports.  So for me growing up, I mean, sports was my pastime.  Not only sports; I believe in being, like, a real physical guy, so we used to roughhouse all the time; I mean, box and things like that.  Some of the smells, my dad [Nathaniel Kent] smoked.  So tobacco smoke was one of those things that I recall even from two or three years old, probably, because back then, nobody really thought of secondhand smoke, so people would smoke around you.  I mean, they wouldn't think twice.  The other thing I remember is being I the kitchen waiting on my mom [Helen Banister Kent] to finish making a meal and she was a great cook, so I can remember the smells of the different foods, you know, that she made in the kitchen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other sights and sounds and smells?  What about sounds?  You didn't mention any sounds.
Speaker 2: Sounds?  Yeah, because we lived right on the corner where they had a club, you know, behind us where the second house; they had a club right behind us, and I remember the sounds of the jukebox and all the loud partying throughout the night when I was trying to sleep.  I remember that.  And we could hear everybody walking in and out from that club going to their car throughout the night.
Speaker 1: Now, did you kind of live near a street over from an entertainment complex, because, you know, because you got the 'Ritz,' I mean the--yeah, what was it, the 'Ritz Theater'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the 'Ritz.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, the 'Ritz Theater.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They a 'Ritz,' and I don't know if you ever heard of it, but it's a place called 'Four-Way Grill' in Memphis [Tennessee]; supposed to be really famous, and that was like a restaurant/bar.  Then next to it you had a 24-hour place called the "Harlem House."  It was a restaurant.  So, yeah, I mean, it was a busy corner where we lived.  I mean it really was.  I mean, you had a packaged store--well, liquor store, couple of liquor stores on that corner.  So, that's where people came and get their drink on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like it almost like--now, this is in south Memphis, but I know Memphis has a large black population.  Would this be considered, like, one of the major streets about--I mean, what street--
Speaker 2: Mississippi.  Mississippi was the major street that ran in a place called--another street that intersected it was major, was Maclamore (ph. splg.).  So where all the action was, was either on Mississippi and Walker, or Mississippi and Maclamore, in the area where we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that's where they had everything; the clubs, the grocery stores, the liquor stores; had a record shop there called 'Boss, Ugly Bob.'  And he was a famous guy as far as record-selling.
Speaker 1: "Boss, Ugly Bob."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Have you ever heard of 'Stax Recording'?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: We lived right down the street from there.  So we used to see people like Isaac Hayes, Al Greene, Rufus Thomas, Carla Thomas, in and out of--coming out of Stax all the time.  That was good staying in that neighborhood also because of 'Stax Recording.'
Story_ID: 33815
Speaker 1: Rufus Thomas.  It sounds like the kind of neighborhood--wouldn't there be a lot of beauty shops and barbershops?
Speaker 2: It was there, all that.
Speaker 1: Pool hall--
Speaker 2: Every corner.  And I grew up shooting pool because the pool hall was just right--probably about 500 feet from my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, I would imagine lots of churches, too.
Speaker 2: Church on every corner.  When you have a church, you have a liquor store (laughs).  You're right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  So, what was the office of a black newspaper on this street too?
Speaker 2: "Memphis Press-Scimitar."
Speaker 1: Okay.  There we go.
Speaker 2: And it's still a newspaper in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Scimitar.  Like a--
Speaker 2: "Memphis Press Scimitar"--
Speaker 1: Like those curved swords that the Arabs use, the scimitar?
Speaker 2: Right.  Sure.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Memphis Press Scimitar.  Okay.  So this is like, well, is this--was there a comparable place on the north side of Memphis, I mean, a location where this same kind of activities--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  North Side, you know, it didn't have the 'Stax Recording,' it didn't have--but, I mean, but it had everything else.  It was identical to what you see on south Memphis, you seen on the North Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we had friends on the North Side we visit quite often.
Speaker 1: I know, some cities the black population is contained in part of town or, you know, but Memphis, you had black people on the South Side of the city.
Speaker 2: And South Side, North Side.
Speaker 1: North Side.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And the east was pretty much, I mean, it wasn't that many blacks on the east at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the West Side of Memphis?
Speaker 2: The West Side is Arkansas.  West Memphis, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's at the river.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the river is right there.
Speaker 1: There's no such thing as--
Speaker 2: You know, so the West Side, if you want to--see, that was Downtown really, and you didn't have any living areas, but now you do.  I mean, they built up on the river, the Mississippi River and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like in Chicago, when I hear a movie they say the East Side of Chicago, I say, what are they talking about.  No one talks about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's the Southeast Side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  So, it sounds like you're in a neighborhood with a lot of going on.  Now, did they bring the large stage shows?  I suppose they did--did they do the big shows at the--what's the theatre, the 'Ritz'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they did.  As a matter of fact, James Brown came to the 'Ritz' a couple of times and performed on stage.  And when they didn't have the entertainers there, they also showed movies.  So that was a pastime for us.  And it's funny as I think back to those days, do you remember the Pet Milk, the cans?  With that coupon on Pet Milk can, you could get into the 'Ritz Theatre' free if you showed that you had bought a can of Pet Milk (laughs), which was pretty amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, would they have, like, special matinees for kids on Saturdays or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a matter of fact, our house was right behind it, like I said.  We didn't have to go in unless we wanted to see the faces in the movie because we could hear everything on the backside.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we could just stand right there on our front porch, and we could hear the movie going.
Speaker 1: That may not be too tantalizing to do without seeing.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  We actually went in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had matinees for kids.
Speaker 1: But the music must have been--must been good for music though, say, if there's a big stage show.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you couldn't afford to go to that, you could hear it.
Speaker 2: Oh, you could hear it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, sounds like an exciting neighborhood, a lot going on.  Now, what--was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was.  I mean, we didn't have a choice.  And our mom made us go to church.  Every Sunday we was (sic) on that front pew.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Well, we started off at a church called First Baptist Missionary--well, New Heart Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  New Heart, like your heart, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  New Heart is where I grew up going to church up until I was probably about fifteen [years old], and then we went to New Salem Missionary Baptist Church.
Story_ID: 33816
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did you have any special role in the church when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as a kid I wouldn't say a special role, but I as in the choir (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would it be the youth choir?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because, you know, they have like a--they have certain youth activities in church--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I was deeply involved in the youth choir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I thought I could hold a note, but you never know.
Speaker 1: Now, this was a relatively large church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was--New Heart Missionary Baptist Church had a large congre-.  Well, not really big, I mean, because everybody knew each other in church.  So it was, I would say, probably about a hundred people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's not bad, but that's not what you call a large--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Especially by today's standards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep.  It was about 100, 150 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school at a place called Walker Elementary in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I loved school.
Speaker 1: And did you--
Speaker 2: I loved it because I was able to horseplay and do everything in school.  I mean, I don't think it was the schoolwork I liked (laughs).  But it was all my friends.
Speaker 1: So you liked the socialization?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved the socialization of school, from elementary all the way through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Socializing in school.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject at all.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I actually, I was real big into math.  I loved match and I loved English.  I loved history, so that was the three major ones.
Speaker 1: Now, was your school all black when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yep, up until the point where I got to high school and bussing starting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, were most of the teachers black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, actually in elementary it was, but then when I got to junior high and high school we had a large amount of other races and nationalities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, one of my favorite teachers, he was white.  His name was Mr. Edge.
Speaker 1: Was that in--
Speaker 2: History teacher in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I still carry a bible that he presented to me after I actually graduated from boot camp at the, you know, in the Marine Corps.  So, I have a lot of respect for him.  Unfortunately, he passed away years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now what about in elementary school.  Did you have a favorite teacher there?
Speaker 2: To be honest with you, I can't recall any of my elementary teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But if you ask me about junior high and high school, I can remember them.
Story_ID: 33817
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at the junior high level, now did you work growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, yeah.  Worked from the time I was ten years old.  Started working at a corner grocery store at ten and worked from that day on until I joined the Marine Corps.  You had to work in our house.  You had to do something other than just go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked at the corner grocery store.  Did you keep that job all the way through?
Speaker 2: Up until I was about 14.  Then I started working at the Holiday Inn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is the Holiday Inn downtown in Memphis?
Speaker 2: It was in Midtown.  We had several ones, but I worked in the one in Midtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now were you ever involved in the Boy Scouts or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was involved in a boys club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a boys club that sponsored different sports such as boxing--it was named St. Thomas Boys Club.  And it really kept us going after hours.  So, I mean, they got us into boxing; we had different types of sports teams; basketball, volleyball.  And Father Ben, he was a great guy too.  He actually ran that center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was he--was this a Catholic boys club?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was for anybody.  I mean, it was for the neighborhood, but it was ran by a Catholic Church called St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  That makes sense, St. Thomas Boys Club.  So did you box?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that your favorite sport?
Speaker 2: I loved basketball the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've always been a runner.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did you run sprints or--
Speaker 2: Sprints, short distance.
Speaker 1: All right.  So all these activities, you know, sports activities, and the job, and the going to school, and church, that would keep you pretty busy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it kept me really busy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It kept me out of trouble for the most part, but I still (laughs) was out there just like every other young kid; had to test certain things.
Story_ID: 33818
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said you liked to socialize in school.  Did you get in trouble a lot or did you--?
Speaker 2: I did.  I got in trouble quite a bit.  As a matter of fact, I got suspended from school in my junior high.
Speaker 1: Junior High.  Oh, what's the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Lincoln Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's on the South Side too?
Speaker 2: South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened?  What's the story about you getting suspended?
Speaker 2: The story behind it, the teacher told me to sit down, and I was standing up in class talking and, I mean, this was at the beginning of the class when the class first started.  You know, the bell had run for all of us to sit down, and I was talking to one of my friends and the teacher said, "Carlton, sit down," like that.  I said, "Hey, man, you don't talk to me like that."  He said, "I talk to you anyway I want to, now sit down."  I said, "Come back here and make me sit down."  And he said, "You're out of here.  Get."  I said, "Okay."  But that wasn't nice when my mom bought me back to school, because she--and she really embarrassed me that day (laughs).  She pretty much bought me back by my ear, so (laughs).
Speaker 1: So, now, what were you thinking about when you--
Speaker 2: I was just one of those kids, just really cocky.  But I didn't do that too many more times after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't suspended for very long.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, she actually bought me back the next day.
Speaker 1: How were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: Grades were always good. And that was funny because all the friends hung out with me, they didn't have great grades.  And don't ask me how I got great grades.  I guess that's part of my mother's genes, because she was very smart in school.
Speaker 1: Did you have to study hard?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I played a lot in school.  I can pick up a book and just pick up things like that, usually in high school and in junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did they have, like, organized sports in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, but I mean it's nothing like today.  You know, today a lot of the middle schools don't have it, but back then, I mean, we had all the sports they had in junior high similar to what they had in high school; track and field, basketball, football.  I mean, we had all those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play on any of the teams?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I played on basketball and track.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you liked basketball the best, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I imagine you were a starter then on the team or were you?  I mean, were you--?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, that's funny you said that because I didn't focus the way I should have done on the team, so I was more of a backup player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Second stringer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were on the team?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--okay.  So, junior high school, that's seventh grade, right?
Speaker 2: Yep, seventh through the ninth.
Speaker 1: And you were about 12, so that would be 1967 or so?
Speaker 2: Right.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, actually it was 19--because I was born in '57 [1957], so.
Speaker 1: '57 [1957], okay.  '57 [1957] so.  Yeah.  '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  Yep.
Speaker 1: Right. Right.
Story_ID: 33819
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, did you--now you were in, I guess, still in junior high school when Dr. King came to Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was in junior high school when he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So that--yeah, '68 [1968] he was assassinated, and do you remember the garbage strike and all of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember everything.  I remember the riots, because it was--our neighborhood was burning down pretty bad during that time.
Speaker 1: So there were riots after Dr. King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Huge.  I remember those like it was yesterday.
Speaker 1: So in relationship to--now was the "Lorraine" on the north side of town or the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the "Lorraine" right on downtown, South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, downtown is considered somewhat South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the hotel was on the South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did people think?  I mean, you know, I know they're angry.  I mean a lot--
Speaker 2: Angry and shocked.  They thought that it was one of those things where, you know, it was going to set them back years, you know, after he was assassinated.  But it was more anger and shock, you know, from a lot of people in Memphis.  I know it was a shock to everybody, you know, when we heard that, you know, that he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever get a chance to meet Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Not personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Or any of the civil rights workers--
Speaker 2: No, not--
Speaker 1: --in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Not personally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did people--was it a topic of discussion in the household; I mean, what the civil rights workers were doing and the--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Actually, my mom educated us on everything.  So she talked about, you know, it was the right thing to do, you know, for them to strike, you know, to earn their rights and honor.  So my mom talked about it around the house quite often.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: About the Civil Rights Movement overall.  I mean, she thought it was the right thing to do as long as it was nonviolent.  I mean, my mom was a very nonviolent-type person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, now, was your Reverend involved in it at all at the---?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Our pastor of the church was involved with the Civil Rights Movement.  He was marching, he was doing everything.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Pastor James.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Reverend James.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33820
Speaker 1: All right.  So, in high school, now you enter high school, and is that in '68 [1968]--I mean, I don't mean '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, I graduated in '75 [1975], so I entered high school in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972].  All right.
Speaker 2: Or '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Yeah, because you had already gone to junior high school so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: you just had a couple years to go.  So you're at South Side High School, right?  And by this time, they had started a bussing experiment, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They starting bussing during my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: So which way was bussing going?  Were there people being bused to your school or were they--
Speaker 2: They was being bused to and away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was certain areas in my neighborhood.  It was a certain line on that street.  If you was on the south side of that line, you didn't get bused.  If you were on the north side of that street, you were bused.  So ours fell on the south side, so I did have an opportunity to get bused.  I stayed within my high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So most of the people that came there, you mentioned different races, but were there any other people other than white people that were bused over?
Speaker 2: We had Hispanics that was bused over also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had a mixture of everybody there, but the majority was white that was bused.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And were there any--did it all happen smoothly or were there--
Speaker 2: At our high school, but I don't think all high schools--I don't recall hearing that it was--it didn't go smoothly, but I don't think all high schools went smoothly.  I think the North Side, if I recall, might have had some issues.  But our school, we had some strong--a strong principal by the name of Mr. Johnson.  He didn't play around.  He actually carried a cowbell around in his hand, and that guy, he would get physical with you if you wanted to get physical; big guy.  So we didn't have issues with busing, none whatsoever with Mr. Johnson.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened with the cowbell?  What was that for?
Speaker 2: The cowbell is when he caught somebody doing something he would ring the cowbell for other teachers to come out so they could apprehend the individuals.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  So he would muster the rest of the teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd muster the rest of the teachers with that cowbell.  So, you know, it wasn't just him going up against five kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teachers just come out in mass.  So, I mean, the guy was a tough principal.  He kind of remind me of the movie, I don't recall the name, but I think it was Samuel L. Jackson played in it, I think.
Speaker 1: I think so, about the--
Speaker 2: Joe, a principal in--it was up in New Jersey?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I think it was Morgan Freeman that played that part.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  It was Morgan Freeman.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he reminded me of him so much of the movie.  Because, see, I mean, the guy didn't take anything from anyone.  But during the bussing period, I ended up being friends with a lot of the white students.  As a matter of fact, one of them I still remember, Terry Fortrain (ph. splg.) was his name.  He was--hung out with me all the time.  So, I mean, we--that was the best thing happen for outside of the school.
Story_ID: 33821
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were saying you liked math in high school.  Did you get a chance to--now, did they have you all tracked in those who were going to college versus those who were going to take the general course or the business course or--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We didn't have that in our school.  Now, when you say track, you mean track for--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, either college prep or for general education or for business.
Speaker 2: No, no.  We didn't have that back in that time.
Speaker 1: A lot of school had track like that.  So did you take--were you allowed to take the higher math courses or did you have (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Algebra and stuff we had, yeah.  I was allowed to take algebra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only those students that was good in math could move up to algebra. You know, you have what they call Algebra I and II.  Don't ask me what the difference was because it was the same to me.  But you could move up to those courses, if you were good at math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how high did you get in math?
Speaker 2: Algebra II.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the way to the top.
Speaker 1: Now, did you take chemistry?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I--no, I didn't touch that.
Speaker 1: Biology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I took biology in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a requirement, you know, in our high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a favorite high school teacher?
Speaker 2: Mr. Edge.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the one you said, a Mr. Edge, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Just like the edge of a--you know.  And he taught--?
Speaker 2: He taught history.
Speaker 1: History.  Okay.
Speaker 2: American History.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.
Speaker 2: He ended up being like a mentor to me, you know.  He was a white teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of things would he tell you and what, you know?
Speaker 2: I mean, he talked to me like, you know, like, he was my dad most of the time.  I mean, he used to talk to me about life, and that's what I liked about him.  You know, to be honest with you, I think from my run-in, when I got suspended, I think I learned from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were suspended when you were about 12, 13?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 14.
Speaker 1: Fourteen?
Speaker 2: Probably 14.
Speaker 1: Fourteen, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your father had passed when you were nine.
Speaker 2: Nine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Were any other role models around you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: My uncle.  My uncles.  Every one of my uncles was a role model to me on my mom's side and my dad's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, a good thing, every one of them fought in the war.  So, I mean, they, you know, they could talk about that all day if they had to, but they were just great, great people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33822
Speaker 1: All right.  So were you thinking about joining the military when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I took Army ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] because it was a requirement in the tenth grade.  After I took Army ROTC, I thought about the military.  But what really made me focus on joining the Marine Corps was--it was a recruiter that came to our high school by the name of Gunnery Sergeant Adams.  And that's the first time that I had an opportunity to talk to a Marine.  And, you know, Marines have the best looking uniforms.  You know, I'm not saying that because I am a United States Marine.  They truly do.  Their dress blues are just the sharpest uniform that you'll see in any branch of service.  So, he came to our high school; and all the recruiters used to come there because they want us to join their branch of service.  So they come out, they talk to us, and, you know, they tell us all the benefits they have in their services; they talk about college, money; you know, and back then, I mean, kids say, "Okay.  College?  Okay.  That's great.  Money?  I can get money?"  But Gunnery Sergeant Adams wasn't one of those.  He wasn't a man of too many words.  He'll let the Army recruiter, Air Force, Navy recruiter, all of them talk to us; and then when they would leave, he'll say, "Come over here.  Gather around me."  And he would talk to us about just growing up and being a man.  He never promised us money, college.  He'd say--as a matter of fact, he even threw this out to us one day, and this is what made me say, "No, guy.  You ain't going to challenge me like this."  He threw this out, he'd say, "As a matter of fact, I don't think any of you all," it was a group of us, "could ever earn the title to be a United States Marine.  It's a challenge none of ya'll could do."  Now, I don't know if he was working us to get us all pumped up.  I say--you know, I was thinking to myself after hearing the guy said that, I said, "Okay.  I can prove to you that I can make it in the corps."  So he said, "Okay."  And he took me to see my mom, and my mom initially wasn't too good with that, me joining the Marine Corps.  But he was a smooth-talking guy, and he convinced my mom eventually, and that was, you know, I signed the paper and joined.  But he was--he was really a role model.  He was a Vietnam, highly-decorated Vietnam veteran.  And to this day, me and him keep in touch.  You know, he retired as a Gunnery Sergeant.  But we talk all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we've heard from other Marines this week and one of the stories they tell is the recruiter challenging them to, you know, not touch on a whole of crew of them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that they probably can't cut it, so don't even worry about it.  And then somebody says, "Well, I can do it."  (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that's exactly what I did.  I said--and when I got down to the Marine Corps boot camp, I started having second thoughts (laughs), but it's no way I was going to go back a failure.
Speaker 1: So this is 19--?
Speaker 2: '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: December '75 [1975] I went through boot camp.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, this is--the U.S. is officially out of Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Yes, a year before I joined.
Speaker 1: They left in '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They left in and, I mean, they'll be other troubles ahead, but U.S. was out of Vietnam, which was something that, you know--.  Did you watch the war on television?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, did you keep up with the news and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a matter of fact, a close friend of ours was killed in Vietnam, so I mean, it hit home for us.  He actually grew up with one of my older brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did it give you second thoughts?
Speaker 2: No.  It really didn't.  I mean, I--you know, I was one of those kids that always was up for a challenge, and if that meant going to war and dying, I was up for that.  It didn't give me second thoughts at all.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a risk, you know.  You think about you're risking your life.
Speaker 2: Well, I was one of those kids who liked to live dangerously anyway (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you feel was going to be the reward of taking that risk?
Speaker 2: Taking the risk is earning that title that the Gunnery Sergeant said I couldn't earn.  And that's the title of being a United States Marine, because Marines--and that's what everybody was telling me.  When I signed those papers to join boot camp, they said, "Do you know what the Marines do?  They're the first in to combat; they're the first to fight.  Do you really want to do that?"  I said, "Hey, you know, that's my focus right now.  If that mean that I'm the first going to fight and die, I would do that."
Story_ID: 33823
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this is the last--no.  Nixon resigned in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Yep, '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So Gerald Ford is the president, and things have calmed down, there's a little lull right in here.  So was there anything special about high school graduation at all?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--the special part I remember was "Earth, Wind and Fire," the song.  We song it as we walked down the aisle, the whole graduating class.
Speaker 1: Now which one was it?
Speaker 2: "That's The Way Of The World."
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Did you get any honors at graduation?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't get any.  We didn't--for some reason, you only had one person in the high school that was recognized with honors.  They didn't have a laundry list of people, but you had your grade point average, but you weren't recognized at the graduation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, at the time that you joined the Marine Corps, did you have brothers that were involved in the military?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother, Evan, was in the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So.  Okay.  Now, all right.  Boot camp.  This is--just kind of tell us, now you arrived in--
Speaker 2: Parris Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Parris Island.  This is in the summer, right?
Speaker 2: No, in the winter.
Speaker 1: Oh.  In the winter.
Speaker 2: It was December.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  So did you graduate in the fall?
Speaker 2: I graduated in March.
Speaker 1: In March.
Speaker 2: In the spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was 13 weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated in March, but you had like all summer to prepare for boot camp?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the Gunnery Sergeant, he insured that I was ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With physical fitness, because I was already a physically fit guy.  I was a very small guy, too, to be honest with you, when I went to boot camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I only weighed, like, 120 pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is Parris Island.  Well, tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can tell you--those memories are going to be with me for the rest of my life.  And I remember all my Drill Instructors like it was yesterday, by name and everything; but, as we entered the front gate--well, actually, let me back up.  You fly into a place called Charleston, South Carolina, and that was to pickup point where the buses pick up all the recruits at nighttime.  Now, this was a psychological warfare thing that the Marine Corps was good at doing to recruits.  They pick you up at night so you won't see exactly where you're going.  So you go down these dark roads all the way up to the front gate, and the gate guard is at the front gate.  And I knew something was wrong when the gate guard started laughing when we got to the gate, and he waved us through.  So we go, drive about three or four miles to where the drill instructor was going to pick us up.  So they stopped the bus in front of what we call the "barracks."  That's the living area, what we call the squad base.  And we were going to live in there for the first week or so.  So the drill instructor get (sic) on the bus, stand up by the bus driver, and look (sic) at everyone in the face and say (sic), "Look,  maggots, you got about a heartbeat to get off the bus when I tell you to get off the bus," and he gave us a whole spiel after that.  Then he say (sic) "Get off the bus."  And everybody, running over each other, diving to get off the bus.  You know, we had our bags with us.  And it's yellow footprints that you have to stand on once you get off the bus, and you got to stand, at what we call, the "position of attention," which they teach you all that, you know, once you get off the bus.  And if you ever break that "position of attention," you was in trouble.  So it was cold too.  I mean, I didn't understand Parris Island getting as cold, but it did.  I mean, South Carolina, during that time of year, it could get very cold.  So they had us strip down in all our--well, strip down, take our jackets off, dump our bags; and then the next thing we do, we go and we get our haircuts, shaved bald.  And then they start getting us through the medical process, shots, things like that to get us healthy.  And then we go through there for about the first three or four days, and then, that's when our original drill instructor that's going to be with us for those 13 weeks, hey come and pick us up.  And that's when all the, what I call, hell breaks out.
Story_ID: 33824
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about hell.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the drill instructors come there they pick us up; and again, this is nighttime.  They were--you know, Marines are really good at doing everything at night for some reason.  So we were tired.  We had been up for, like, four days just constantly doing things to get us prepped to--for our drill instructors to pick us up.  So they take us over to squad bay, we, you know, they get us into the showers.  Now, this is--you learn very fast.  You don't use the restroom, you don't drink water, you don't think anything without asking the drill instructor first.  You don't move.  You stand at attention until the drill instructors tell you to do anything differently.  So as they got us in the squad bay, they got this line that goes down on both sides of the squad bay where we got footlockers, you got all that.  So when they get us in the squad bay, the drill instructors give us--well, the senior drill instructor is the senior guy of this whole drill instructor team, and it was three drill instructors, counting the senior drill instructor.  So he gives us a spiel that he's going to be our mother, he's going to be our father, he's going to take care of us for the next 13 weeks; you don't breathe, you don't eat, you don't do this, you don't do that until you ask us; and if you do it any other way, you're going to have hell to pay.  So the senior drill instructor tells the drill instructors "Turn 2."  "Turn 2" means that when hell break out.  So they had these big soapy trash--big trash cans with hot soapy water, so they threw it down through the middle of the squad bay.  The footlockers, they had us dump all our gear in to the footlockers; all our shaving gear, cleaning gear, everything; to the footlockers, they started turning the footlockers over with all our gear in it.  And we had bunks, you had a top bunk and bottom bunk.  So they took the mattresses off of them.  I mean, they just tore up the whole squad bay.  So, you know what we had to do?  Clean the whole squad bay.  That took hours to unscrew the squad bay.  And then it's late at night, so you're getting into that early morning.  So you finally get a chance to go to sleep, like, 1 a.m. in the morning, just to get woken back up by the drill instructors the next day.  And, now, imagine this too; when you go to sleep, you sleep at attention throughout the night.  And if you didn't sleep at attention, we had recruits what we used to call "Fire Watchers."  That was to--we rotated every four hours and we'll walk around the squad bay to make sure everybody was sleeping at attention.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you sleep at attention?  Do you--
Speaker 2: You sleep at attention just like (laughs)--
Speaker 1: You lay down and--
Speaker 2: You lay down just like if you were standing at attention, you lay at attention.
Speaker 1: And you sleep at attention?
Speaker 2: And you sleep at attention.
Speaker 1: And every night, prior to us going to sleep, the drill instructors used to make us count off, and then we sung the Marines hymn every night, then they would tell you to get in the rack, attack.  And when they say attack, you jump in the rack and you jump at attention in the rack.  Then they say, "Goodnight, Chesty Puller."  That was one of our famous Marine heroes, Chesty Puller.  So you used to say, "Goodnight, Chesty Puller, wherever you are." (laughs).  And then the lights go off, and then they say, "Sleep."  The drill instructors say sleep.  So the Fire Watchers walk around at night, and if you weren't at the position of attention, you got woken up.  They say, "Get at attention."  And then the next day the same thing happened, a day after day where the drill instructors came in--and this happened, like, the first week of training--this was the breakdown period, you know, where they got you out of your whole way of life that you'd had been--they build you up as a team because they want to get you out of, you know, the areas--like me, I came from South Memphis, I had a different attitude; you got people from New York, down in Georgia.  So they wanted to get you out of your mindset that you had grew for the last 17, 18 years and put you into the Marine Corps mindset as working as a team.  So that every morning for the first week, they would come down, wake us up.  When the lights come on, you better be on that line at attention, and then you count off so they make sure all the recruits are there.  You count off one by one.  And then this hot, soapy water, trash cans come back down through the squad bay, and you clean it up again.  Then you go to--then they march you to eat in the morning, and the crazy thing about that, the first week when we grab our trays to go through the chow line, the drill instructor would tell you what to get and what not to get.  So you didn't have much food on your plate.  So for the first week when we sit down to take a bite, at each meal, breakfast, lunch, and dinner, they'll let the food get on your lips, and then they'll tell you, "You're done.  Get out."  And I'm like, "whoa."  I mean, that's a breaking period.  And we had some recruits, that first week they were done.  They were done.  So that's how they start building the team.
Story_ID: 33825
Speaker 1: Now, what's the penalty for breaking at that point?
Speaker 2: Incentive training.  They got what they call incentive training where they can make you do push-ups; flutter kicks; side straddle hops, where we, back in the back we call mountain climbers where you get on your hands and you bring your knees up under your arm.  And they can just have you doing exercises like that for a while if you break.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if that didn't break you, then they had what they call a "correctional custody platoon."  CCP, what we call the motivation platoon back in boot camp where they sent you there.  And the only thing you do all day was crawl through mud, sand, iron rifles, running, physical all day.  And if that didn't motivate you, then you had a problem (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you couldn't quit and just say, "All right, I'm going back home," at this point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could, but the drill instructors--you know, the good thing about the Drill Instructors?  They will give you every opportunity to earn the title.  But they're not going to cakewalk you through it.  You're going to have to earn it.  But at the end of the day if you didn't cut out to make it, you were gone back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: You would go back.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, when you started out--now, this is, like, you're walking us through the whole thing, you know, pretty much, so.  All right.  So this is like, are we in the second week now or where are we?
Speaker 2: Well, we're in the, yeah, the second week, we can go through the second week.  But the process of boot camp, the first few days was the forming days.  That's when you get the haircuts; they screen you, you know;, make sure you were medically ready to start training.  The second week is when the drill instructors pick you up, and that starts what they call the process of making a marine, which the process is what I just told you the first week.  The second week, you know, you start--I mean, you start with drill, because drill--what I mean by drill marching with rifles, because, you know, believe it or not, drill builds teamwork, discipline, motivation; and it builds all that.  People don't understand that, but doing close-ordered drill builds a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did your kit consist of in terms of your--what kind of clothes did you have to wear?
Speaker 2: You're talking about uniform?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We wore called sateens back then.  That was the green uniforms, the solid green with boots, the sateen cap, what we covering in the Marine Corps.  You had an old green field jacket that don't exist anymore.  It supposedly kept you warm and dry, but no, it was all cotton, so things--when it rained and it was cold, it didn't keep you either dry or warm.  You had--we had the (cotcher's?) belt with the two canteens you kept water in, and you had your rifle.  You had your rifle that you kept with you.  I mean, your rifle was like your girlfriend.  I mean, you kept it with you 24 hours a day.  When you were sleeping it would be locked in a rack that was behind  your bunk.
Speaker 1: So these were like M-16s?
Speaker 2: M-16s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had already transitioned from the M-14, most of the--they carried M-14 up until Vietnam time, and then, you know, everybody was carrying the '16 when I went to boot camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  M-16 is like a semiautomatic rifle?
Speaker 2: It is.  It is.  Semiautomatic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can do automatic on that too.  And you can do burst, which you can fire like a three-to five-round burst with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did you have to, at some point, when you got it, did you have to take it apart and put it back together?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, that was one of the first classes you got; how to field-strip is what they call it, and clean it.  And you did that, repetition, all the time, because they want you to get into the mental mindset that this rifle is going to save your life in war, so you take care of this rifle as if it was like your girlfriend, and this rifle never leave your sight.  So they taught you how to field-strip it.  As a matter of fact, we went through field-stripping drills all the time.  If you messed up, then you get what I told you, is the incentive training that teach you, "you're going to learn how to field-strip your rifle."  So you did that constantly throughout.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How fast could a marine, like, disassemble and reassemble an M-16?  Or do they measure it like that?
Speaker 2: Well, completely, yes.  Yes.  Because in order to graduate, we got stations that you got to go through to make sure that you understand everything that you have been through in boot camp.  So some of--one of those stations that you had to go through and you had to complete, and field-strip is the rifle.  So, I don't recall what the timeframe was, but I think it was, like, under a minute.  So you got to be pretty fast.
Speaker 1: To disassemble it or--
Speaker 2: Disassemble and assemble.
Speaker 1: --and put it back together.
Speaker 2: And assemble.
Speaker 1: In a minute.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the hand guards--the upper hand guards, the right and left hand guards, the lower part of the rifle, the magazine well and the bolt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What, you know, what we call the bolt carrier group.
Story_ID: 33826
Speaker 1: So did you need tools to do this?
Speaker 2: No.  That's hands.  You don't have tools (laughs).  You use your hands on all that.  You know, because, everything that you do with your rifle, I mean, you could do it with your hands.  You don't need tools to break it down.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So what else?  What else happens?
Speaker 2: Also, you're going to--you're going to end up being a pretty good shooter in the Marine Corps.  Two weeks of the boot camp, of training, is all about marksmanship.  If you never shot a weapon, you going to be pretty good at the end of those two weeks.  Because the first week, it's just the basic fundamentals of marksmanship; the trigger control, breathing techniques, sighting in.  I mean, you name it, all the basic fundamentals of marksmanship you learn during the first week.  The second week is when you go out and you actually take rounds and you shoot at a target from the 200 yard line, 300 yard line, and the 500 yard line.  And you have to qualify.  That is one of the requirements.  You have qualify with your rifle; either a marksman, that's the lowest shooter; sharpshooter is the second highest; and then expert is the highest you can do.  You have to do that in order to graduate as a United States Marine.  So you learn that in boot camp.  So that's two weeks of the training.  And then you also learn history.  I mean, that's a huge, huge in the Marine Corps, is history and legacy, because if you don't know the people that came before and what they've done to uphold the honor of the Marine Corps, then you're going to lose something.  So they teach you a lot about history so you'll know that you have a high standard to hold to some of these Marines that actually came before you, to uphold their legacy.  So history, they teach a lot of history; a lot of drill; and you have to swim.  You got to be able to qualify as a swimmer to graduate from boot camp.  You cannot leave boot camp until you, you know, until you make that requirement.
Speaker 1: Now did you know how to swim when you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Because that was part of our pastime in my neighborhood in the summer, because some of the schools would open up swimming pools around the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was a pretty good swimmer.
Speaker 1: I know of one of the topics of discussion in the last Olympic Games was the lack of black participants in the swim competition, and they were asking, you know, someone on NBC about it, you know, and they were saying that a lot of black communities don't have pools, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: You know, kids don't learn.
Speaker 2: But, exactly.  You know, today they do not, but back when I was growing up, that was some of our summer pastime, was to swim.  And you only had one way to learn how to swim; they would throw you in the pool.  And that's the way I learned.  You know, my brothers, joking around with me and threw me in the pool.
Speaker 1: So you either learn or--
Speaker 2: Or you drown.  Well, they wouldn't let you drown (laughs), but that was a way to learn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you already knew how to swim, obviously, you already a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: But swimming is--yeah, you could know how to swim in boot camp, but you also got to know how to swim with combat equipment.  See, that's totally different than just going out and swimming.  So that's--that's one of the challenges of boot camp, swimming, to actually qualify with all your combat equipment.
Story_ID: 33827
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how large a group were you in?  About what was your--
Speaker 2: We start off in boot camp, I think we had, like, close to 80 to 90 recruits.  And we graduated probably 60.
Speaker 1: So you lost about 30?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We lost about 30 recruits.
Speaker 1: And do you have any idea what happened to them?
Speaker 2: Injuries, failing the physical fitness test, did not qualify with their rifles, or they just quit.  They automatically just said I'm not doing this anymore.
Speaker 1: Were there any overweight guys?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We had--and that's another great thing about boot camp.  And it's amazing.  Some of the recruits that I went through boot camp, they were way overweight.  When they left there, they were losing anywhere from 50 to 100 pounds over a three-month period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So some of the overweight guys made it.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah  Oh, yeah.  A lot of them make it.  But you always know the overweight of recruits because the Drill Sergeants spray red stripes on their physical fitness uniform, and that let them know that, you know, like you keep an eye on them because this person is not healthy as far as running right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if a guy is overweight and they try to make him do what the other guys do in terms of running, of course, they're not going to be able to keep up.
Speaker 2: But, they still are required to do that.  But, yeah, they don't keep up.  But the amazing thing, by the middle of the training cycle, say, sixth, seventh week, most of them are able to keep up because they've lost a lot of weight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Large number of pounds.
Speaker 1: I guess if the drill instructor is determining what you eat, you're going to lose weight too (laughs).
Speaker 2: Well, see, that's the thing.  We call them diet recruits--well, that's what the drill instructors call them; diet recruits, the ones who's overweight.  And they didn't hardly get anything on their plate.  So, yeah.  They lost weight.
Speaker 1: So they had to have a lot of determination, because hard to not eat when you're used to eating a lot of food.
Speaker 2: Plus it's hard when you don't eat a lot of food when you're constantly doing training, you know, because you need that food to keep you going.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had to really fight the urge to eat.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or have something to eat.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there's no such thing as snacks, I guess, in boot camp?
Speaker 2: Well, you can try to steal some snacks out of the--out of what we call the mess hall, and some recruits been caught with food, coming out of the mess hall, in their pockets, and they have hell to pay with the drill instructors when they get caught.
Story_ID: 33828
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I heard they tell you--you said yourself, they tell you when you can go to the bathroom and when you can't.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's amazing how you have to request permission.  You know, you got to request permission to make a head call.  That's what we call the bathroom.  And then the drill instructor used to sometimes say no.  And you're standing on line, like, shaking because you really got to go, and the drill instructor just say no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a regular time during the day that everybody is supposed to go?
Speaker 2: Usually it was once you wake up in the morning, you go; once you get back from any mean, you go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that doesn't happen all the time.  It's only if the drill instructor feels like you should go.
Speaker 1: But in the middle of the night if you have to, you don't go.
Speaker 2: You can--you're not supposed--well, you can go, but most of the time the Fire Watcher would tell you no.  That's the other recruits (list?)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay.  So the other recruits are the Fire Watcher, and they watch you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when did they get a chance to sleep, these other recruits?
Speaker 2: No, see, you just take like a couple of hours throughout the night, and you just--well, you rotate the watches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Say, if it was me and another recruit did two hours, then we would wake up two other recruits to take over from us for two hours.  So you just rotated the time as the Fire Watcher.  We just walk around the squad bay.
Speaker 1: But there had to be somebody doing that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All the time during the night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It had to be two recruits that was up as we call Fire Watcher.
Speaker 1: Now, now did the D.I, like, live in the same facility?
Speaker 2: They stayed in what we call the duty hut for the drill instructor.  It's a room.  It's in the same squad bay area.  I mean, it's right next--the drill sergeant can raise their blinds and see the whole squad bay from their room.  And that room usually have two bunks for the drill instructor.  And a Drill Instructor is with recruits twenty four hours a day; even when they're sleeping, it's a Drill Instructor there in the squad base sleeping in their duty hut.  So you never get away from the Drill Instructor for thirteen weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the hardest part for you?
Speaker 2: The hardest part for me is, I couldn't do my own thing anymore.  That was tough for me.  I mean, I was so used to doing things that I wanted to do.  Now, I'm being told when to eat, when to sleep, when to drink, when to do anything.  And that was the toughest part for me, it really was.  And, you know, one of my drill instructors was from Memphis [Tennessee].  And when he found out I was from Memphis, he just harassed me all the time.
Speaker 1: So he made it worst rather than--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  He did.  I mean, he made it a lot worst.  You know, he said, "Oh, so you're from Memphis, huh?  You think you're tough?"  He used to get up on me all the time.  You know, like, he was--seemed like he wanted me to try to challenge him, but I wasn't that stupid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what you see on television in these movies, even like the old movie, the D.I. [drill instructor] with Jack Webb--
Speaker 2: Jack Webb, yeah.
Speaker 1: --walks right up and he screams in the guy's face, and, you know, Gomer Pyle, he was the comedy show (unclear)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, a drill instructor is in your face all the time.  I mean, they're making you move fast, they're making you do things that you thought you would never do.  And that's the great thing about it, because you to your limits.  And, you know, as I look back now, I'm like, man, you know, I never thought I would--I could ever do that.  But the drill instructors, that's they're job to push you to the limits, because in combat, you're going to be pushed to your limits.
Story_ID: 33829
Speaker 1: Now when you're in basic training, do you know when the end is coming?  Do you know how long it's supposed to last or do they tell you?
Speaker 2: As far as?
Speaker 1: The whole period of basic training.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  You know when you're supposed to graduate.  Now, you know because you have a date prior to you going into boot camp where they say, "This is your graduation day."  So you already know, but some recruits don't make it to that graduation day.  Say if they get injured, if they fail the PLT, if they do not qualify with their rifle or other things that's going to drop them back a couple of weeks, they don't graduate on that date.  They get dropped back a couple of weeks.
Speaker 1: So they have to go through it with another group?
Speaker 2: Yep, another group during that timeframe.
Speaker 1: What kind of injuries would people sustain in training?
Speaker 2: A lot of lower extremity injuries that they would suffer.
Speaker 1: The legs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, legs.  You know, because of all the pounding.  I mean, it was a lot of that.  Marching.  Hitting the heels running.  And a lot of kids wasn't used to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what was graduation like?
Speaker 2: It was a proud moment for me.  Especially when that drill instructor said, "Dismissed."  Then I know that I had earned the title of a United States Marine.  I mean, it was the proudest moment that I had in the Marine Corps other than serving in combat.
Speaker 1: And that's the ceremony like?
Speaker 2: It's huge.  Families come.  You know, you have the opportunity to march pass a bunch of family members, senior leaders in the, you know, in the Marine Corps, and then, you know, you see all your friends that you've been with for 13 weeks that you consider a family now, and ya'll go different, you know, different directions.  I mean, but it was, it's just a proud moment when they tell you that you earn title of a United States Marine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is 1975 and--
Speaker 2: Well, '76 [1976] is when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this would be in, what, in March or--what--?
Speaker 2: March of '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 33830
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  So, where were you deployed afterwards?
Speaker 2: When I first went overseas it was over in Hawaii.  It was called "First Marine Expedition."  Well, "First Marine Brigade" at that time.  That was the name of the unit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And back then, as you know, the war wasn't going on.  Vietnam was over, and for about ten years after that, or fifteen years, it was--we had little squirmishes here and there, but it was no war, so.  We used to deploy from units in the Marine Corps during that time on ships, go to places like the Philippines, Thailand; and we hit different ports as we deployed with the Navy.  And I did that when I first went over to Hawaii.  And then after I left Hawaii, I got orders to embassy duty, as you know, you know, we talked about earlier.  I went to what they call MSG School, which is, they teach you about embassy duty.  And that was at Henderson Hall in Arlington Virginia.  Then from there I went to my first embassy, was in Kinshasa, Zaire.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, could you have imagined that you would be in Zaire (laughs)?
Speaker 2: No.  I never would.  You know, I tell people when I was graduating from MSG School, I told people where I was going.  Some of them say, "Where is that?"  Or some say, "Are you kidding me," because I used to tell them, "Hey, it's the Congo.  I'm going to Africa."  You know, and they like "What?  You're going to Africa?"  And you know, I could not believe I was going to Africa.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a place that had been made popular by the Ali-Foreman fight--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --which occurred in, was that, seventy--?
Speaker 2: '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: --Five.  Right.
Speaker 2: "Rumble in the Jungle."
Speaker 1: "Rumble in the Jungle," right.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, they still had posters up of Ali and Foreman when I was there in 1978.  I mean, throughout the city they still had these big posters up of Ali and Foreman, which was amazing.
Speaker 1: Now, what rank were you when you went over there?
Speaker 2: When I initially went there, I as a young corporal, which is E-4 by pay grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, the Marines were there with--as embassy--
Speaker 2: Guarding the embassy.
Speaker 1: Guarding the embassy.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And we were there--and that was--the Marines is the only branch of service that actually serve in embassies to guard the embassies.  And that was a great thing, because, you know, you learn so much about the diplomatic side of the United States, the State Department side, and that opened up my eyes to a whole new look about the State Department, about the diplomatic side, you know, what they go through.  I learned so much in Zaire, and my second embassy was Panama, because you do a total of 33 months on the program when I was there.  So you did--you split it.  You do, like, 15, 16 at one embassy, 16 months; and then you do 15 or 16 months at the next embassy.
Story_ID: 33831
Speaker 1: Now, on the last roll I didn't ask you about who your mentors were by name in boot camp.  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My Senior Drill Instructor, Staff Sergeant (Abby?), was, you know, was one of the ones that considered a mentor; and Corporal Puller, which was another drill instructor we had.  I considered him a mentor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a D.I. [drill instructor] doesn't have to be a Sergeant.  It could be a Corporal?
Speaker 2: Yeah--well, back in that day it would be a Corporal, but today you only have Sergeants going out as drill instructors.  You don't have any Corporals any more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: You know, so back--when I went through, you could see a lot of corporals as drill instructors.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, these would be young guys?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Very young.  I mean, 20, 21 years old.
Speaker 1: And I could just imagine what it would be like to be told everything to do by a twenty-one-year-old.  That would have to be--
Speaker 2: But you understood that they have went through some things because they had been the Marine Corps for at least three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everybody looks at the drill instructor, I mean, no matter how young you are they seem very old to you (laughs) as a drill instructor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now.  All right.  So you were telling us about the tour of duty at the embassy, the U.S. Embassy in Zaire, Kinshasa, Zaire.  Is there a good story about Kinshasa, Zaire, you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I could--man, I could share a lot of stories.  I don't know if I want to make all of them public, but (laughs), I can share a lot of stories.  I mean, one of the good stories is, just going out in the jungle and seeing the wildlife, you know, out there in Zaire.  I mean, it's a lot of wildlife that you see on the Tarzan movies and things like that; but you see it up close and personal, you be like, "Wow," you know.
Speaker 1: So what did you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: On safaris.  I mean, you go on those, you see every animal that you pretty much see in the movies in Africa.  You name it, you seen it.
Speaker 1: Lions?
Speaker 2: Monkeys, lions, I mean--
Speaker 1: Elephants?
Speaker 2: Elephants.  I mean, you see them all.  Snakes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Zaire's got--there was even a rumor that there were like almost prehistoric kind of snakes and things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, they have a lot of wildlife.  And they come right up on you.  I mean, that's the thing about it.  And just getting on a ferry riding down the Congo River is another amazing thing.  Because where we were, we were in Kinshasa; they had another Consulate in a place called Brazzaville, Congo.  So you just have to get on the ferry to go from Kinshasa to Brazzaville, where we had some more, you know, Marines guarding the Consulate.
Speaker 1: Now, Zaire is known from African studies as a huge country.  And I don't think people here realize how big Africa is, but did you have a sense of that size when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, the African continent itself?
Speaker 1: Well, the just the country Zaire.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Zaire spreads.  I mean, it is huge. And it's no way you're going to cover all of Zaire if you travel.  I mean, it's no way you're going to do that, because it run all the way from--all the way down to a country called Angola, Tanzania's right next to it, and it's another country to the west of it.  I mean, it's huge, though.  I mean, Zaire is a huge country.
Speaker 1: Now, Mobutu Sese Seko was the president then, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who was our ambassador?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Ambassador Cutler was the ambassador back then.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is this an African-American?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this is 1978.  So you were there for fifteen months.
Speaker 2: Up until the early '80--1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33832
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: You went to the Philippines?
Speaker 1: Panama.
Speaker 2: Panama.  Okay.  Panama.  Now, what was Panama like?
Speaker 1: Panama was--it was different than Zaire in a sense.  You know, they had the ocean.  I mean, Zaire had a river--well, the town of Kinshasa had a river; but Panama--one of the biggest difference, you go from a French-speaking country to a Spanish-speaking country.  So prior to me going to Zaire, I went to the Foreign Service Institute in D.C. to learn French, which, that's the language that they speak in Zaire, because it's an old Belgium colony.  But then I had to rethink from French to Spanish when I got to Panama, and I had to start taking courses at the embassy to learn Spanish.  But the personality of people was pretty much the same to me.  I mean, it was a different language.  And like the Zairians, was great people.  They would give you the shirt off their back.  In Panama, same thing, similar.  I mean, once you got to be friends there with the locals, they would give you the shirt off their back also.  Panama was a more nightlife than Zaire.  I mean, they had clubs all over Panama.  So we ran the clubs quite a bit as young Marines.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, some of my friends ended up getting married to Panamanians, you know, once they got off embassy duty.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.  So did you have any long-term relationship with a Panamanian yourself?
Speaker 1: Short-term.
Speaker 2: Short-term.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep. Short-term relationship with her.  Even in Zaire, I had a short-term, because I was concentrating on my childhood sweetheart, which me and her been knowing each other since the seventh grade back in Memphis, so.  I mean, my focus was, you know, like, eventually going back and, you know, being with her.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 33833
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  Okay.  Now, in '81 [1981], you come back to the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're at Fort Benning [Columbus, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Fort Benning.  I went to jump school.
Speaker 1: Airborne school.
Speaker 2: Airborne school in Benning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I forgot to mention that.  Now, in '79 [1979], there's the hostage crisis in Iran, which involved the U.S. Embassy.
Speaker 2: Right.  Some of my friends was part of that hostage--well, some guys I went to school with was part of that hostage crisis over in Iran.  As a matter of fact, they was captives of that hostage crisis.
Speaker 1: That's when the Ayatollah Khomeini was--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.  And the security at the embassies, we were very focused, especially after that incident.  In Panama, now, they was protesting quite a bit at the U.S. Embassy.  So we was out there every day, you know, protecting the embassy, and we took that very serious, because they was protesting the Canal Zone, which they wanted to take back from the United States at that time.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  And was the president of Panama then, was he in some contention with the U.S. on some issue?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't recall his name, but he was.  Yeah.  And Noriega took over from him, and we went in and overthrown Noriega after that.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  You know, the "Little Pineapple," they called him.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Exactly, because he was round.
Speaker 1: In Zaire, I guess, the major problem would be the rule of Mobutu Sese Seko being so oppressive that there were a lot of rebels, I guess, in Zaire, that may or may not do something.  Did you have training about what to--was there any sense of--
Speaker 2: Well, when I was there, the president of Zaire, Mobutu, ruled with an iron fist.  So there's no way the rebels was going to start anything.  I mean, I didn't hear rebels during that time.  And it was a shame because, you know, Mobutu Sese Seko was one of the richest presidents in the world--well, richest person.  But what kind of got me about the president of Zaire, you know, Mobutu, was his people was dying on the street from starvation, and I witnessed that every day; and he was living with steak and lobster each day, and he was living in all these different palaces and, you know, whatever you want to call them.  But he was living very large.  And he didn't really care about the people of Zaire.
Speaker 1: Now, did he appear at the U.S. Embassy very often or did he ever?
Speaker 2: No, no.  He never same to the embassy.  But I know, you know, that him and the Ambassador would always visit, but he would visit out at his place.  He never came to the embassy.  I don't even think he ever left his place, you know, the president.
Story_ID: 33834
Speaker 1: That's what I sort of heard about.  Okay.  So, Panama, you were at--okay.  So back in--we had you in '81 [1981], Fort Benning to airborne school to jump school.  Now, so was this a training that you decided to take or did they decided?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, it's a long story behind that.  In the Marine Corps, you have what they call, it's Enlistment, where, you know, you could enlist from three to four years; and this was the end of my Enlistment when I got off embassy duty.  And they said, "What would you like to do if you were to stay in the Marine Corps and reenlist?"  So they started naming all these different jobs they had.  And one of them was for me to go to jump school.  And that's when I said, "Jump school?  Really?  I'll be jumping out of airplanes?"  I said, "I'm all about that."  So I reenlisted for another four years to do that.  So, that's when they sent me to jump school, and no matter what branch of service you are, the only airborne school is ran by the United States Army.  So I went down to Fort Benning, Georgia.  The course was, like, three and a half to four weeks.  It was very challenging at that time, because you have what they call ground week, where you got to do these swing land training; teach you how to fall, you know, before you get up in the airplane.  You got what they call tower week, where they hook you up, take you up on a 250-foot tower and, they teach you how to jump from a high altitude and teach you how to land.  Then, the last week is when you actually go out and do the jumps out of the plane.  You have to do five jumps to graduate.  That's a requirement.  One of them is a night jump that you have to do in full combat equipment.  The reason it was kind challenging for the Marines and the Navy, because they always, the U.S. Army, always focused on playing games with the Marines and the Navy because they had what they call a "gig pit."  And this whole pit had nothing but sawdust in it.  And that's where, if you messed up on a swing land training exercise or something, they would make you get in the gig pit, and you'd do all the incentive training, like I told you about boot camp.  But this ain't boot camp anymore.  I mean, you already earned that title, but they make you get in the gig pit, and you have to do all these different exercises.  And that's the Army Instructor making the Marines.  So when one Marine used to mess up, they make one Marine get in the gig pit; all the Marines used to run, even if we didn't do anything wrong, we ran over in the gig pit just to be with our fellow Marine; or the Navy, they used to make them do it also.  So, I mean, it was a challenging course for three and a half weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there really hostility between the Army and the Marines?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's always hostility.  Well, I wouldn't say hostility.  It is competiveness.
Speaker 1: Competition.
Speaker 2: Yeah, competition is what it's about.  But not hostile to the point where--
Speaker 1: But enough to add some tension?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's some tension there, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Always tension (laughs).
Story_ID: 33835
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you do after jump school?
Speaker 2: After school, I got stationed at a base called Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, where I was a Platoon Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were promoted to Sergeant.
Speaker 2: I promoted to Sergeant and Staff Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was that part of the deal to stay in the Marines?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That wasn't part of the deal.
Speaker 1: Were you already a Sergeant?
Speaker 2: I was a Sergeant, but I as selected for Staff Sergeant to reenlisting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So when I reported to Camp Lejeune, I was promoted to Staff Sergeant, because I as already selected for that rank.  And embassy duty, see, that's what we--we got certain duties what we call special duties.  And the cream of the crop go to these special duties.  And one of those special duties is guarding embassies.  So when I went to guard embassy, that kind of put me at the top of the list as far as promotion process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what made you a special Marine in terms of your selection for that kind of duty?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, you have to be recommended by our chain of command.  What I mean by the chain of command, by your leadership.  That's the first thing.  Then, secondly, you have to be screened through your records to make sure that you qualify.  And on embassy duty, it's a requirement that you be able to get a top secret clearance to guard embassies.  So, as long as you meet--and you have to be physically fit, and you have to be mentally fit.  So you go through all that screening process with your leadership, and if they make the recommendation for you to go out on embassy duty then you go out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it's a selection process--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --within--
Speaker 2: Other Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Marine Corps.  Okay.  All right.  So, now.  Okay.  Now, at Camp Lejeune, you're a Staff Sergeant.  Now, what were your duties at camp Lejeune?
Speaker 2: I was a Platoon Sergeant.  That means that I was responsible for the training, the discipline, and the deployment of that platoon in case something happened and we had to deploy.  And I reported to the Platoon Commander, which was a Second Lieutenant.
Story_ID: 33836
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're Platoon, while in camp.  Now you had a--did you have, like, a daily regimen of things to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  We had a training schedule.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a daily schedule from the time we get up to the time that they get off in the evening.  Now, this was nothing like boot camp.  Once you earn the title of Marine, during your time in the evening, that's your time unless you got some training going.  And we used to have night jumps and things like that, so sometime we would carry over way until late at night with training.  But, for the most part, people had families.  I mean, you had people that would take off at the end of the day from the unit and go home to their families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So families lived on base?
Speaker 2: Right.  Lived on base, families lived off base.  Me and Liz, we had gotten married at that time.  So, I, you know, I had a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what would be a typical day for a Marine in your platoon?
Speaker 2: Typical day, first get up in the morning; we'd do some serious physical fitness training for about three hours; from there, then we go train with weapons.  We'd do training with parachutes; in the afternoon, we do classes with History, Custom, Courtesy, Safety.  I mean, that was a typical day where you trained for combat.  And that could go on anywhere from eight to sixteen hours a day, based on the training schedule; based on the requirements doing the night, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is all to keep the Marine sharp?
Speaker 2: Right.  Sharp and ready for combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for, you know, deployment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when something happens, an expeditionary force is sent, you can hit the ground.
Speaker 2: Hit the ground running.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what capacity did your platoon have, I mean, in terms of--did they have a specialty in terms of weaponry?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean, we had every weapon; you know, you had the machinegun, M-60; you had what we call the 50-Cal.  Your personal weapon were (sic) the M-16.  If you were a certain rank, you carried what they called a 9.mm pistol.  If you was (sic) Staff Sergeant or above you carried a 9.mm pistol.  But you had every weapon that you name.  So, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your platoon was part of a larger group of--
Speaker 2: A company.  See, you got a company, and you got five platoons in a company usually; and the company--let me break this down to you how the structure work.  The company have (sic), like, five platoons, and then over the company you have the battalion.  And the battalion have five companies with five platoons.  And it just keep going up, and then the battalion, the next step is a regimental unit.  And that regiment have (sic) five battalions.  And it just keeps going up higher and higher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we support the higher headquarters over us, which was the battalion.
Story_ID: 33837
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '83 [1983], a couple of things happened.  One thing was--that really involved Marines--probably more than two; but the two major things, I think, that the Marine Headquarters in Beirut was bombed.
Speaker 2: Yep.  A lot of Marines, you know, deployed to Camp Lejeune [North Carolina].  Part of my platoon deployed there; and, unfortunately, in '83 [1983], I couldn't deploy with them because I got orders to be a drill instructor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in '83 [1983] is when I went to San Diego to be a drill instructor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  '83 [1983] is also when, I think, the U.S. invaded Grenada--I mean, the Marine Corps invaded, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To rescue some students.  Okay.  So you went to San Diego to be a drill instructor in '83 [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I asked for Parris Island because that's where I went to boot camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, for some reason, the Marine Corps sent me from the East Coast to the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't have no problem with that.  It's a lot of sunshine out there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So here we are in San Diego and you're a D.I. [drill instructor] Now, did you enjoy being a D.I.?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  As a matter of fact, I mean, that was one of my goals, to be a drill instructor as a Marine, because I wanted to be just like my Senior Drill Instructor, Staff Sergeant (Abby?).
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us an example of what you would tell a new recruit?  I mean your message to the new recruits.
Speaker 2: (laughs).  Some words I can't use.
Speaker 1: All right.  If you can paraphrase some of it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Paraphrase it?  "You will not talk, you will not eat, you will not sleep, you will not do anything unless I told you; is that understanding, Recruits?"  Then a recruit will say, "Yes, sir."  "Okay.  When I tell you to get on the road," what I mean by get on the road, that mean go out to squad bay and you form the platoon and you wait on me to get down there.  So I say, "When I say get on the road, you better move like a flash; you understand, Recruits?"  Recruits say, "Yes, sir," and "Move."  And they better be out the door.  I mean, I can go on with a lot of phrases.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  But, you basically, you know, replicated what happened.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you always explain to recruits what are you doing.  I mean, that's the good thing about a drill instructor.  They always explain what they're doing most of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a purpose for it.  You don't think it's a purpose for it while you're going through training, but at the end of training, you can see how all that pay off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you were a D.I. for a--until, was it until 1985?
Speaker 2: '85 [1985], then I got orders to Okinawa [Japan] to be a Platoon Sergeant again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're promoted a Gunnery Sergeant, it says here.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I got promoted on the Drill Field.  I got promoted ahead of my time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what does it mean to be a Gunnery Sergeant?
Speaker 2: It means a lot.  I mean, that means that you--you have a lot more, you know, responsibility as a Marine Staff NCO.  Staff NCO, what I mean by, that's a Staff Non-Commission Officer, and it start from the rank of Staff Sergeant, go all the way up to Sergeant Major.  So the Gunnery Sergeant usually is a--a Gunnery Sergeant makes things happen in the Marine Corps.  That's like, if you want to say middle management.  But the Gunnery Sergeant makes things happen for every unit.  So, when I was a Platoon Sergeant, then I was a Company Gunnery Sergeant also.  So the Company Gunnery Sergeant is the guy that train the company, it's the individual that feed the company, it's the individual that gets ammo [ammunition] for the company, it's the individual that makes sure that they are ready to deploy.  The Company Gunnery Sergeant makes sure that the squad bays are squared away.  The Company Gunnery Sergeant makes sure that people are taken care of for as far as medical, things like that.  I mean, it's just a laundry list that the "Gunny" do.  Well, we call them "Gunny" for short.  Gunnery Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33838
Speaker 1: So, a typical chain of command would be, say I'm a Marine General, and I say I want all of the Marines to move to, I don't know, some other town or whatever; then I would tell--
Speaker 2: No.  What would happen, it'll come down through the chain of command, all the way down to the Company level, which usually Company Commander is a Captain; and then the Captain also have a Senior Enlisted [Officer] serving with them called a First Sergeant, the rank of a First Sergeant.  Then up under the First Sergeant, you got the Company Gunnery Sergeant; that's the next level in the company.  So the Company Gunnery Sergeant is the next Senior Enlisted in the company.  But the First Sergeant is more working with the Company Commander, and if they don't deal with the everyday training and things like that of the Company, the Company Gunnery Sergeant and the Company Executive Officer, which Executive Officer falls up under the Company Commander; that's the two that do the day-to-day training, and the equipment, and things like that with the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so the Company Gunnery Sergeant, that's the person--that is the go-to person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they supervise all the Platoon Sergeants, which you can have, like, four of them--four or five based on the unit of the Company.
Speaker 1: So, you're operating as a Gunnery Sergeant on a Company level.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then your Platoon Sergeants--
Speaker 2: It's usually a Staff Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Staff Sergeant.  Okay.  Yeah. Staff Sergeants.
Speaker 2: Or now, these days, I mean it could be Sergeants.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay. All right.  Okay.  So in May of '85 [1985], you were transferred to the Third Air Delivery Platoon, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that's when I told you I was a Platoon Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Wait a minute.  I'm going, like, they're reversed, aren't they?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Because Gunnery is next.  Okay, so.  You went from Gunnery Sergeant, I guess, to Hawaii, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just told you a portion of when I was a Company Gunny, Company Gunnery Sergeant.  And that's where I--I kind of jumped ahead of you, really.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Because I told you what I did as a Company Gunnery Sergeant also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So were in Hawaii for a couple of years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Two and a half years.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a nice duty (laughs).
Speaker 2: We deployed a lot of training off the island.  I mean, we did a lot of training in an area called Pohakuloa Training Area.  That's on a big island, because we couldn't shoot much on the island where the base was.  So we had to go and deploy.  We went to the Philippines, you know, Korea; places like that.  I mean, we did a lot of great training.  I mean, we were getting ready for war.  And that's another thing happened to me.  When I left that unit, I was Instructor over at the NCO School, which is the Non-Commissioned Officer School, and we developed young NCOs, you know, into the rank.  But after I left from being a Company Gunny, I went to NCO [Non-Commissioned officer] School, and I left the NCO School, departed and went to Pensacola to be an Instructor.  As soon as I departed from that, that's when my company, the same company where I was a Company Gunnery Sergeant, had trained, they deployed to Desert Shield/Desert Storm.  So I missed that one.  And I was hurt that my company went to combat and I didn't.
Story_ID: 33839
Speaker 1: So this was in 1990?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the war against Saddam Hussein, claiming that this would be the mother of all wars and all that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  That was him.  It wasn't the mother of his war, but it was a quick one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So this is when George W--Herbert Walker Bush was president.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And so, this is the U.S., you know, defeated the Iraqis, but they did not--we did not hit the ground and try to occupy (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, no.  We didn't occupy Iraq that time.  Well, that's when they went in--the Iraqis went into Kuwait and took it over.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So we pushed them out of Kuwait.
Speaker 1: That was basically the action.
Speaker 2: Right.  That was the action.  We did not go onto Iraqi soil.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were in Pensacola?
Speaker 2: Training in Aviation Officer Candidate School.  I got orders there because I as a drill instructor previously.  So that's a requirement.  To go to that job, you had to have served as a drill instructor previously, and that's what I did.  I don't know if you've ever seen the movie "Officer and a Gentleman"?  That's exactly what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a Lou Gossett, [Jr.] you know (laughs).
Speaker 1: Lou Gossett, [Jr.] (laughs)?
Speaker 2: I did that for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 33840
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you finished the training in Pensacola [Florida] for the Marines Aviation and Training Support Group--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I was selected for First Sergeant, and I got orders to Okinawa to be a Company First Sergeant with the Fourth Marine Regiment; which the First Sergeant, like I explained to you earlier, the First Sergeant work hand-in-hand with the Company Commander, and they oversee the Company.  As far as discipline training, they are responsible, in other words, for everything that happen within that Company that they oversee.  So as a First Sergeant, I was the Company First Sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what's a typical day for you like as a Company First Sergeant?
Speaker 2: Typical day?
Speaker 1: Mm-mm.
Speaker 2: Get up in the morning; form the Company; the Company "Gunny" [Gunnery Sergeant]--turn it over to the Company "Gunny;" and we do our physical training, initially, in the morning; and then from there--because a First Sergeant deal with the discipline problems.  That's one job I didn't like as a First Sergeant.  So most of my day was taking care of family issues, trying to solve them for these Marines.
Speaker 1: So these are domestic issues?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, domestic marital issues.  I mean, you deal with chaplains to try to, you know, to try to assist the Marines and their family.  You deal with disciplinary actions.  If a Marine has to be punished, you are the initial person that they see before they go to the Company Commander for their punishment for something that they did; a violation or what we call a "Uniform Code of Military Justice."  The First Sergeant also, he accounted for every Marine.  I mean, as far as accountability.  You turn in what we call a ["Monitor?] Report," and the First Sergeant is responsible to make sure every Marine is, you know, is accounted for during that "Monitor Report."  First Sergeant assists the Company "Gunny" in everyday training.  So, I mean, the First Sergeant has their hands full.  I mean, most of the First Sergeant time is spent--let me just shoot it to you straight:  Problem-solving--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the Marines in their Company.
Story_ID: 33841
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in '94 [1994], we were--in the early '90s [1990s], the early of the Clinton Administration, they started talking about the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" and all that.  And also, were there any women in the Marines?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We had women for many, many, many years in the Marines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, Kelly [?] is one of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in '94 [1994], the women in all branches of the U.S.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Because, you know, what they say about the Marines, it'll make you a man.  That's why (laughs).
Speaker 2: (laughs).  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But, you know, we have had female Marines in the Marine Corps for years, and they have done great things.  Even in combat, they are leading Marines in combat.  So women, women have always done great things in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you're right.  I mean, if you hear it from outside of the Marine Corps, you know, you wouldn't think that it's a lot of women in the Marine Corps, but it is.  I mean, it's a lot of women in the Marine Corps, and they're doing great things for the Marine Corps right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now one of the issues that's popped up recently--in fact, it's popped up over and over--is the treatment of women in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Sexual assaults.
Speaker 1: Yes, sexual assaults and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You got a guy who's trained to be gung ho, and now, you know, and what does he do, you know?  I mean--or how do you control that or control that aggression and focus it, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I look at it this way:  It should be a zero-tolerance for sexual assault.  I have two daughters, and I take it personal when I, you know, when I hear about that, because it is the wrong to do because a Marine is a Marine.  I mean, it doesn't matter if it's a female Marine or male Marine, all of them should be treated fairly, they should be treated equally and dignity.  And when they sexual assault a female Marine or even a male Marine is sexual assaulted, that's not treating it with dignity, and there should be a zero tolerance for that.  And that's what the Marine Corps have said for years and years.  But it's still happening, and when that happens and someone is found to be guilty of sexual assault, then they should be held accountable for their actions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33842
Speaker 1: The Marine Corps, like the other branches of the Armed Forces and the rest of the country, you know, had racial tensions at one time on a high level.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have to deal with racial issues as a First Sergeant?
Speaker 2: By that time, the serious racial issues was in the Marine Corps in the '70s [1970s], like the early-'70s [1970s], mid-'70s [1970s].  But as a First Sergeant, no, I didn't--I mean, racial tension--you know, some of them would pop up and you deal with them; but it was nothing like it was in the '70s [1970s], nothing like that.  But it was some serious racial tensions in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean openly.  I mean, they was having riots on bases in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: You know, from racial tensions.
Speaker 1: Were there any when you joined?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, initially, when I got out there in, like, '76 [1976], they had some racial tensions, but we had a Commandant came in named General [Louis Hugh] Wilson, [Jr.] and he said, "Enough is enough."  And that was in, like, '76 [1976]; and he said, "This will not be tolerated.  This is the Marine Corps.  We shouldn't have these issues."  So what he did, it was a short discharge process for people who messed up.  He said, "Just walk them to the gate and the discharge will catch up with them later; if you have these types of actions, to include drugs.  It was a lot of drug use in the Marine Corps back in those days, I mean, serious drug use.  So, he say, "No more.  If they're found to be guilty, walk them to the gate and the discharge will catch up with them later."
Speaker 1: Now, did the drug use abuse, does it have its origins in Vietnam or was it something that was already--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Vietnam possibly could have caused it.  I wasn't back in the day, but.
Speaker 1: Or it exacerbated it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think it did, because you know it was over there.  I mean, the drugs was, you know, open over there and, you know, you could probably get it, you know, whenever you wanted it.
Speaker 1: So, they had to deal with that as an issue, I guess, to, you know, which--and then the issues raised in the Clinton Administration, I mentioned at first, "Don't ask, don't tell."
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Don't ask, don't tell."
Speaker 1: The soldiers, so they said they just instructed them don't say anything--don't ask them about it, and don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You couldn't ask them.  Well, actually, you know, when President Clinton--like the policy just changed.  It's no more "Don't ask, don't tell."  I mean, you can be openly.  So when President Clinton came in, he wanted to change the policy to the way it was changed today, that you can be openly.  But he compromised because he got a lot of pushback.  So he compromised; he said, "Okay, we'll come up with a policy, 'Don't ask, don't tell.'"  So nobody could ask somebody if they was a homosexual or gay, and that person don't have to tell you.  So that's the way that policy was.
Speaker 1: I think I believe before then you would just be summarily dismissed for being gay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, somebody could probably walk up and say, "Yeah, you, are you gay?"
Speaker 1: And then the guy would answer (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Would have to be discharged if they admit to it.  And when President Clinton came in he said, "You can't ask anybody if they're gay."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I think I was reading in an interview you did with "Leatherneck," that you had said that there was a poll taken of Marines, and they really didn't want to let "Don't ask, don't tell" go; but since it's changed, that's going to be the policy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, the President--I mean, our Commander-in-Chief say something happened?  It's going to happen.  I mean, that's what we do in the military.  We follow orders, you know.  So, yeah.  I mean, if he change the policy, we're going to execute it.
Story_ID: 33843
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So now in, let's see.  Okay.  Now in'97 [1997] you were transferred to the Marine Corps Recruit Depot in San Diego.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was a Battalion Sergeant Major of the Recruit Training, so I was responsible for the oversee of all the Drill Instructors in the battalion.  So it goes back to, I was overseeing the training; but for the most part, my job as a Battalion Sergeant Major was, to be honest with you, was to keep Drill Instructors out of trouble (laughs).  So you got to be very active as a Battalion Sergeant Major.  You got to be all over.  Wherever they were training recruits, you'd better be visible to the recruits and the Drill Instructor as a Battalion Sergeant Major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what kinds of trouble would you guys be liable to get into?
Speaker 2: I mean, numerous things.  I mean, it could be physical abuse to, you know, to a recruit.  I mean, it could be many, many things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, because it's a lot of stress level for a Drill Instructor.  And, I mean, Drill Instructors are with recruits 24 hours a day.  If they got families, you know what?  When they come in, it's early in the morning.  They won't see their families because it's like 4:35 in the morning.  When they get done at the end of the day, it's 10 or 11 at night, so they won't see their family, especially if they got small school kids.  Those kids are going to be sleep, when they leave and when they come home.  So that builds a lot of stress.  And then when you have to go repetition over and over again to tell a recruit, "Recruit, do this," and they still don't do it the right way; you tell them again, they still--that's a lot of frustration.  So the Battalion Sergeant Major is somewhat the person that's supposed to be out there overseeing to make sure the Drill Instructor understand that they don't need to--you know, if a recruit is constantly doing the wrong thing, then we need to find a way to insure that that recruit is recycled back, or that recruit just have to leave boot camp.  And that recruit won't earn the title.  So the Battalion Sergeant Major got to be the buffer between the recruits and the Drill Instructors, and also how to be the buffer between the Drill Instructor and the Senior Leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That makes sense.  So in--now, '99 [1999] you were assigned as Sergeant Major recruiting--training sergeants.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That's the same thing.  That was just a step up.  I went from the battalion--I was with the Battalion for a year, and then the Sergeant Major that had the Regiment; you remember the structure I told you?  You got the Company, you got the Battalion, you got the Regiment, then you got the Division; you know, that's how it goes?  So the next step up of recruit training, the highest level of the recruit training environment is a Regiment.  So the Sergeant Major that was the Sergeant Major of the recruit training the Regiment, he received orders to another duty station, and they asked me to move up to the Regiment; so I moved up to the next senior position as a Sergeant Major.  See, the Sergeant Major can go up many levels as a Sergeant Major.  Like, I spent 17, 18 years as a Sergeant Major.  So I worked many jobs as a Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, and one of those jobs was doing the same thing, but I was just doing it at a high level making sure that I was--you know, that the Drill Instructors was doing the right thing.  I was advising the Senior Leadership and--but, it was just at a different level from the Battalion to the Regiment.
Story_ID: 33844
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So two--.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In 2001.
Speaker 1: One, I guess, yeah.  This is, you were transferred to Marine Forces-Europe.  Fleet Marine Force-Europe in Stuttgart.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Stuttgart, Germany, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was a really great experience for me, because I had never worked in what we call a "joint arena."  That's with all the different branches of service.  So the Marine Forces-Europe, we were responsible for 93 countries where the Marines was either stationed or they was training or they were deployed to combat, like Kosovo or Bosnia; places like that.  So, it was my responsibility as the Sergeant Major of the Marine Forces-Europe is to visit these Marines in all those countries.  So I was pretty busy.  And it was my duty as the Sergeant Major of the Marine Forces-Europe, is to come back and advise the Commanding General, which was a Three-Star General, on any issues that we may have, you know, things like that.
Speaker 1: Sounds like it's almost like an Inspector General on some level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Pretty--well, it's the Sergeant Major's job to insure that Marines are trained, they're taken care of, they're families are taken care of; you know, because all that ties into making Marines ready for combat.  And that should be the Sergeant Major's main focus; is to prepare Marines for combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when September 11th, 2001--
Speaker 2: I remember that like it was yesterday.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in Germany at the time?
Speaker 2: I was stationed in Germany, but I as in South Africa, Cape Town.  Because one of my jobs as the Sergeant Major of the Marine Forces-Europe was to go out to these other countries and train up their enlisted services.  We were in a partnership with African countries, and we were in a partnership with countries from Europe to train up their enlisted force, because their enlisted force was not at the level where they should be.  So we were responsible--part of our duties there was to go out and insure that we train up their enlisted force to be better leaders, you know.  So I was in Cape Town.  We'd just got there for a conference, and we were going to talk to the Senior Leadership of South Africa of how we were going to come in and train up the South African Army.  And we got there that night.  I woke the next day, turned on the T.V. in the hotel, and I thought I was dreaming, because hear 911 had happened; I mean, you know, the Pentagon had been hit; you know, up in New York had been, the towers.  I'm like, come on now.  Is this for real?  You know, you never thought it could happen in the United States.  So I remember that like it was yesterday.  I was right in Cape Town, because we had to cancel all our training that we were going to do with the South Africans at that time.
Story_ID: 33845
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you redeployed someplace right away (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We went back to Stuttgart [Germany], but we were all over it.  Like I say, we had 92, 93 countries we were responsible for.  So we were all over the place.  So I don't recall where we went to from there.  The reason I recall about Cape Town, because it was the day that 911 happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, it was soon after that that the United States deployed troops to Afghanistan.  And then in 2003 to Iraq.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So were you part of the force that went into Iraq?
Speaker 2: No, not initially.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I as the one--I as part of force in 2000--beginning of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was still in Europe at that time when they initially went in.  But we supported some of the operations from Europe, because people would transit throughout the area over in Europe to head to Iraq.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So in 2004--oh.  You were transferred to the Marine--First Marine--
Speaker 2: Expeditionary Force, which is the largest fighting force in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is Camp Pendleton.
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: How many men were in that force?
Speaker 2: In the Marine Expeditionary Force?  It varies.  It could be anywhere from 30,000 up into combat; Kelly, we had over there with us, in Fallujah [Iraq] we had 40-something thousand counting the NATO forces.  Yeah, yeah.  We had close to 40-something thousand.
Story_ID: 33846
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, the First Marine is a Marine Air-Ground Task Force, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, Marine Air-Ground Task Force mean that we can support ourselves.  We don't need any support from anybody else.  We got our own air, we got our own combat support; so that's what that mean.  And they support the ground forces.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So now, this is the unit that led the push into Fallujah [Iraq], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  Now, you--this is one of the, I guess, the most acted actions in the war in Iraq.
Speaker 2: In Iraq it is.  And it's a valid reason why it's the most notable, because those young men and women fought with gallantry.  I mean, they fought, and they were focused.  And, unfortunately, we had a lot that sacrificed; paid the ultimate sacrifice.  But that battle for Fallujah, the first battle for Fallujah, the Marines was in the process--the Marines with other services that was attached to the Marines, in a place called Al Anbar Province; that's the western part of Iraq.  The first Fallujah initially happened.  And it was cut off in April of 2004, and we were so close to taking the city then.  But at that time, we got the word that it was, you know, we had to come out of the city because it was a lot of politics being played.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the, I guess, the tactical significance of Fallujah in the first place?  Why was it so important?
Speaker 2: It was important because that's where--the insurgents made it important because they say, "This is our city, and this is where we live and nobody's going to come in here and take it."  So it was significant for us to--for them to understand and for the Iraqi people to understand that we're here to take care of you; and at the same time, we're going to move out the insurgents.  But the insurgents the one made that one of their--strategic places, because that's where they say that we were never going to get them out of that city.  That was they city, Fallujah.  And it was a lot of them in there.
Speaker 1: Was this the stronghold of the bad party--the Sunni Movement (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, it -- it was just not only Sunni.  They were from over the Middle East that came into that city.  And they came in to fight against the United States.  That was their only purpose for being there.  So, yeah, I mean.  It was a serious stronghold.  And when we initially went in there and we pulled back out, we could have took the city initially; but we were told to move out, so we did.  So what end up happening is, that gave them the opportunity to built Fallujah back up.  When I say "them," that's the insurgency or the fanatics.  That gave them the opportunity to build back up from April to November when we went back in there.  So that's about six months.  So, yeah, they were ready.  I mean, they had everything in there, you know, that they were focusing on to fight us with.  So, when we start building up plans to go back in there, we understood that it was going to be a fierce battle; harsh combat, because it was the enemy that was focused on, at all cost, they were ready to die.  And we knew that.  But we was trying to minimize casualties through our tactical plans.
Speaker 1: I think you were telling me before we started, Fallujah is a place where the "Black Water Soldiers For Hire" were, like--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: were (unclear)
Speaker 2: And that was the four Americans that was hung off the side of the bridge.  That's the reason why we went in there for the first Fallujah fight.  And we were asked to move out because of that.  Yes, that was the Fallujah place where the Black Water employees, the Americans, were hung off the side of the bridge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what happened?  Were you able to--you were able to take it eventually, but--
Speaker 2: Oh, took it, but it was a bloody fight when we took it.  Lot of harsh--house-to-house.  It was so vicious and so fierce that when they walk into a house, the enemy was dug in.  I mean, they was--I mean, you had anything from--you know, from automatic weapons the enemy fired on Marines to, you know, to grenades.  I mean you name it.  I mean they had booby traps.  They were drugged out.  I mean, they were on drugs, so they was there to die.
Story_ID: 33847
Speaker 1: So what was the Marine policy on the civilian population that lived there?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  We made sure that we minimized any civilian casualties.  We wanted zero.  But, you know, you cannot be realistic thinking that you're going to go into combat and get zero casualties as far as the innocent civilians.  You know, because enemy is going to make them a casualty.  They're going to use them in some way to make us look bad.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the casualty rate for the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: It was very large.  Do you remember, Kelly?  But it was very large casualty for that short period of time of war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So how long did the fighting last in Fallujah?
Speaker 2: It lasted from November up until--the most fiercest of the combat probably lasted from November until the middle part of December.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So about a month.
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, but we were still doing Operations in pockets of insurgents for, like, two months or three months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the toughest part of that fight?
Speaker 2: The toughest part for me is losing all those young, great men and women.  I mean, that's the toughest part for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I assume they were people that you knew were killed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now how long were in Iraq?
Speaker 2: It was like 12 months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you--what are your thoughts about those 12 months that you were there?
Speaker 2: That was one of the best, you know, the best experiences of my life is to go to combat and serve with the great men and women, you know, that you witnessed over in combat.  I mean, it's just amazing.  I can remember prior to this Iraq War starting or what we call OIF [Iraq: Operation Iraqi Freedom], OEF [Afghanistan: Operation Enduring Freedom].  We always--people that had been in the service for a long time, they was questioning these young men and women that came in after 9/11, say are they up for the task.  I mean, this is the "joystick" generation."  "The only thing they do is just sit in front of the T.V. these days."  "They're not focused on anything else."  They have proved everybody wrong that thought like that, because they are the same men and women that has fought since the beginning of the United States in previous wars; the same men and women that's living up to this great legacy of the Marine Corps, that have been around since 1775.  So the best joy of watching those young men and women over in Iraq for me was to see how they lived up to the great legacy of our corps.
Story_ID: 33848
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what happened when you came back?
Speaker 2: Came back and I was still a Sergeant Major of the I MEF [I Marine Expeditionary Force], which was really great.  So, we were just waiting on the next call.  I mean, if they tell us to go to war in other places, we were going to pack up and we were going to go, because I MEF got a pretty good reputation as being a war-fighting organization. So we went through day-to-day training, things like that, just to get ready for the next war; and then I was planning on, you know, retiring in 2008.  But in 2007, I end up--well, let me backtrack.  2007, the beginning of 2007 or the end of 2006, I get a call from Headquarters Marine Corps, the Commandant of the Marine Corps Office, and they saying that I had an interview from the board--that the Commandant had the task to find the next Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  So the board set up the time to talk to me in my office on the phone at Camp Pendleton [California].  And it was a board process trying to find the next Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, and the way the--this is--the board process to be the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is a very good process, it's a long process; because what you do, unless you say that you don't want to be--you know, you don't want the job, you automatically are put into the board process where they look at your records.  And the Commandant tests General Officers on this board is--the senior board member is a Three-Star General, which is pretty senior.  And they go through the whole process and they narrow it down to, like, four or five people.  And I was blessed to be one of those four or five finalists that it narrowed to, to be interviewed with the Commandant of the Marine Corps, which was General James Conway at that time.  So, me and my wife came back to D.C., and I was interviewed for the job; and the funny thing about it, in 2003 I was interviewed for the same job from the previous Commandant General [Michael W.] Hagee at that time, and I had orders to go out to I MEF as a Sergeant Major, and I knew that they were going to go to combat.  And General Hagee, during my interview, I was one of the four finalists, five finalists, at that time, and General Hagey asked me, "Well, what's your thoughts of being a Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps"?  Any Marine would want to be the Sergeant.  I mean, that's just an honor to even be thought of to come back and be interviewed to be the Sergeant.  So I told General Hagee, at that time, I said, "Well, General Hagee, do you want my honest opinion?"  And he said, "Yes."  I said, "I would rather go to I MEF and, you know, stay in the Operating Forces and go to combat."  And, General Hagey, he blessed my thought, because I wasn't selected for the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 33849
Speaker 1: We were just talking off-camera about the value of Public Affairs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It is a value, Public Affairs.  And I realized that during the Battle of Fallujah.  We had a great Public Affairs Office.  And they did great things because the insurgent was always trying to get the word out to make us look like that we were doing things that we shouldn't have been doing to the local populous.  But what our Public Affairs Office did, they embedded all these reporters from around the world, came in for that battle, for that second Battle of Fallujah.  So they embedded these reporters into the units that was going to be doing the fighting.  So they could see firsthand what was going on in the city during the fighting, which was, they got a great story out about the second Battle of Fallujah; so, hats off to our Public Affairs Office.
Speaker 1: I just have--this is a question I have watching--just watching the coverage of what's going on in Iraq and knowing a little bit of history.  I had a undergraduate course on the History of the Middle East, and I just--every conflict that I read about forty years ago in school was going on in--the Sunni versus the Shiites, the Kurds versus the-- you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, and the list just goes on.
Speaker 1: --everybody was against each other.  Arabs versus, you know, Pharisees; and, you know, you got--.  So, I mean, what--did you ever--was there ever or did you ever feel that somebody over was glad that you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I mean, all the time.  I mean, every time we went out, we--those great--they had a great--the Iraqi people really, honestly, are really great people.  And they appreciated us.  But you got to treat them like you treat anybody.  You got to treat them right.  I mean, you can't treat them as second-class citizens because they're not.  And they knew if you were sincere about the way that you approached them.  We had a General that was attached to us.  He was an Iraqi General and end up being the Minister of Defense for Iraq.  His name was General Abdul Qadir.  But when I first met him, we bonded right away.  I mean, he was really a great guy.  He was sincere, and I knew he was sincere.  So, you know, the Commander General during the second Battle for Fallujah name was General Sadler, and him and General Abdul Qadir bonded.  So that just made our job easy, because we had bonded at the top.  So the Iraqi military that was fighting the city with us bonded with our U.S. Forces in the city.  So that just may have--you know, so they knew we were there for a great cause.  And that made our job easy.
Story_ID: 33850
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 2007, you're nominated to become the 16th Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And succeeding Sergeant Major John L. Estrada.
Speaker 2: Estrada, yes.  African-American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, well, now, this is the second time you'd been interviewed for this position, right?  And so what happened this second time?
Speaker 2: The second time when I went in, I flat out--and quite naturally, I as planning on, you know, retiring in 2008; that was the plan.  But, when I got the call I was totally shocked, to be honest with you.  I thought I had passed up on my only chance, but I was okay not being the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, because I had felt that, I mean, it was just an honor to be able to serve with all these Marines over my--back then it was 31 years or so.  So I was just honored to be able to do that.  So, you know, being a Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps would have been an honor, but I was okay, you know, retiring in 2008.  So when I got the call, I felt I was truly blessed at that time to be a second time around.  And, plus, I was blessed because the Commandant at that time, General [James] Conway, was also the Commanding General when I was the I MEF [I Marine Expeditionary Force] Sergeant Major; so we had a common bond, and we knew each other, and my wife [Elizabeth Kent] knew his wife very well.  So that was--we were blessed on that part.  But it was no guarantee during the interview that I was going to be the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps or he was going to pick me, and I knew that that.  So when I walked in, I mean, during the interview process, I mean, it went very well.  About a week later, I get a call from his office saying, "Hey, are you available because the Commandant and his wife is flying out to California and they want to take ya'll out to dinner?"  So I thought to myself, I said, "Okay.  It's a couple of things here: one, I'm going home 2008 and I'm okay with that or he's going to ask me to be the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps," you know, me and my wife, Liz.  And when he came out there, we went to dinner; had a great dinner, and he looked at my wife (laughs), because spouses run the household, and we already know that.  We can pretend like we're in charge, but we're not.  So he looked at Liz and he said, "Liz, what do you think about coming back to [Washington] D.C., you know, and joining us?"  And I'm, like, "Wow."  So, I mean, that was--that was a great night for us, and it was a great tour being a Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, because instead of doing it at those levels, taking care of Marines, Sailors, and families at the level I just told you about; Battalion, you know, you go to Regiment, you go to Division, you go to MEF; now, I have an opportunity to take care of Marines throughout the whole Marine Corps and Sailors and their family.  And my wife, Liz, she's a great teammate of mine.  And she love families, so it was just a joy for us for four and a half years to go around the Marine Corps and talk to Marines, Sailors, families, and see what their issues are.  And the Commandant, we traveled around together with him and his wife.  The present Commandant that's serving right now, General [James F.] Amos and his wife, and Liz; I spent nine months once the previous Commandant, the 34th Commandant transitioned, the 35th Commandant, he asked me to stay on.  So I stayed on for nine months with him, and it was an honor to serve with him also, because both of them are superb leaders and they care about people, and that's what makes it special.
Story_ID: 33851
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me take a chance here and guess the election of Barack Obama was a big day for you.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was huge.  It was huge.  It really was.
Speaker 1: At his inauguration on January 20th, 2009, now you were featured on the roster, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: At the Commander's-in-Chief Ball.
Speaker 2: I was on stage standing, like, three feet behind him.  And I'm like, "Okay.  This is a young kid from South Memphis [Tennessee].  Would I ever thought I'd be standing on the stage with the President or the Commander-in-Chief?  Never in my million years."  So I mean, this was, like, wow.  I mean, I'm standing right behind him and he's pointing to us, talking about us.  And we got the Senior Enlisted from all the services here.  I mean, that was a night to remember.  It really was.  And I've sat down with him in his office one-on-one, and he's just--he's very down to earth, and he asked me, honestly, about our service.  And I told him, honestly, about our services.  So he is--him and his wife, the First Lady [Michelle Obama], are very good people, great people.  And they care about people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my wife, Liz [Elizabeth Kent], have sit in the office with the First Lady also and talk about families of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what would you say as you look back at your career in the Marine Corps?  What would you consider to be the highlight of your career?
Speaker 2: That is real easy for me.  If you would've said the two highlights, I could highlight two.  But you asked me what was the highlight.
Speaker 1: Well, how about two then (laughs).  I'll let you do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One is earning the title of a United States Marine.  That was my first highlight.  Then the second highlight was going to combat, serving with these great men and women.  That was the two highlights of my career.  Now if you would have said the third, I would have said being a Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, because that gave me an opportunity to take care of people.
Speaker 1: So you are--let's get this straight.  You are the 16th--
Speaker 2: Sixteenth.
Speaker 1: --Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.  The 16th in the whole history of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Whole history since 1775.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's an honor, really.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We're on number 17 right now with Sergeant Major Mike Barrett.
Story_ID: 33852
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question:  When you consider everything that you've done to this point, what, today, would you consider to be your legacy, I guess, in the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Well, I just hope people look at my legacy and say that guy or that Marine cared about people; cared about taking care of people; cared about making sure people and--well, cared about the Marines, Sailors and their family.  I just hope my legacy go down as saying, "When I grow up, I want to be just like Sergeant Major Kent, because he led by example.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just hope that's the way my legacy is.
Speaker 1: And, if you look back on everything that's happened to you from this point; from being a kid in South Memphis to becoming the 16th Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, is there any major thing that you'd do different if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  I'll be honest with you.  I mean, I got a great family, great wife [Elizabeth Kent], great kids.  I mean, you know, you could always think back and say, "What if I would have did something different.?"  But I am a firm believer that you have a destiny in life, and what happens to you in life, it's a reason why it happen; I mean good or bad, it's a reason.  So I could not go back and say if I would've--I wish I could've did something differently, because I'm a firm believer, God put you in places for reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother get a chance to see you become the 16th Sergeant Major?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  And she had never flew on a plane.  That was her first time flying on a plane to come see me being posted as the 16th--it was--it was a proud moment for me to see my mom there.  And my recruiter that put me in boot camp was there.  So that was--that was a great time for me.
Story_ID: 33853
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, we always ask this question too:  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: I have quite a few, but I'm going to give you a few.  I mean, one is:  Our education process in our community, because of the dropout rates.  I am very concerned about that.  We need to go back to the teachers and the parents working together.  And, you know, because as I was coming up, probably the same for you coming up, the parents were very involved in the education process.  And the teachers and the parents always talked to each other, and they were communicating with each other.  So, we need to go back to where we have teachers that care what the students do and not just let them graduate for a number, but make them work for that grade.  And that is--that is one of my hopes; that we can go back to that.  Another thing is just the crime, you know, in the inner cities.  I mean, we got to figure out how we can fix the crime in the inner cities.  More jobs is the key too.  You know, when people work they feel like that they are accomplishing something.  So they're not probably going to go out and do things that's criminal.  So we got to put jobs back into those inner cities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us something about your family.  You have children, right?
Speaker 2: Two great daughters.  I mean, the oldest one is married.  Her husband, he is an engineer, a great young man.  They just moved from San Diego [California]--well, I wouldn't just--a couple of years ago, moved out here close to us.  My youngest daughter, she was in San Diego, and she moved out here.  So we got all our family in this area, which is great, because we had been, you know, me and my wife [Elizabeth Kent] had been overseas while they was going to college in San Diego.  We came here, so we had left them in other places.  So now it's great to get the whole family together.  My youngest daughter is doing her passion, which is good.  She actually work with wounded warriors, right here at Quantico [Virginia].  So that's her passion; is to work with wounded warriors, to make sure that they are taken care of.  So she's in heaven right now because this was her goal for a while, to work with wounded warriors, and that's where her passion is, so she's very happy.  And my wife, she's a federal worker.  And she's doing great, and she's always supported me.  You know, without her I wouldn't be where I am today, because she kept me straight.
Story_ID: 33854
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just on the subject of wounded warriors, do you think that--what would you ideally like to see happen to the veterans, all these veterans that are coming back here from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan?
Speaker 2: What I'd like to see, to be honest with you, it'll be great if when service members are transitioned from the military, if they transitioned one day, I would like to see them placed in a job the very next day; or whenever they wanted to go to work, a job was there for them.  Because as you know, the unemployment rate for veterans is very high right now.  And as we draw down in this war, we're going to have more veterans transitioning.  And we're drawing down over in combat right now.  So as they draw down, they're going to transition out of the military.  So we need to make sure that we take care of them.  We have a moral obligation to take care of these great veterans because they have sacrificed so much over the last eleven, twelve years of this war, that we owe them that.  I mean, I can't speak enough on that, that we have a moral obligation to take care of them.  I just want to make sure, whatever their focus, is or their goals that we're there to assist them.  If it's going to college, if it's going to a trade school to pick up a trade, if it's going right into a job; I mean, we just need to assist them in making that happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think the way things are going now with returning veterans that it's working; I mean, the transition is working?
Speaker 2: I think transition is working to a certain extent.  But to take a skill set is--some skills in the military, like infantry.  I don't think a lot of employers understand how to transition infantry resume into civilian resume.  And that is one of my concerns, transitioning those great skills that they pick up in the military.  Infantrymen pick up great skills.  Leadership.  I mean, you name it.  They pick up great skills that will transition over to the civilian world.  But I think some of the employers don't understand those transitions on a resume from skills and work experience in the military over.  And that's one of my biggest concerns, when they go out and they start interviewing with resumes and jobs that the civilian employers understand that they do have great skill sets they can transition over to your workforce.
Story_ID: 33855
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, would you recommend the Marine Corps for your children or for young adults today?
Speaker 2: Oh, easily.  I, you know, I'll be honest with you.  My daughters, I never twisted their arm and said, "You're going to join the military."  I left that up to them.  They didn't join the military.  They have been around the Marine Corps all their life.  And I was okay with that.  But I think--I would recommend, like, if my daughter would have came to me and said, "Dad, you know, I really want to join the military or the Marine Corps," I would have pushed them that way.  But that wasn't their focus.  They wanted to go to college and do other things.  But I recommend highly if anybody came to me and said, "What do you think about me joining," because the military just show you a whole new way of life, a way of thinking.  I mean, it got me out of my way of thinking, coming of South Memphis [Tennessee].  It showed me a whole new world out there.  And, I mean, it show you how to build a team, how to be part of something bigger than yourself.  Because the military make you understand that it's not about you.  It's about something bigger than you.  It's about those people to your left and right that's depending on you.  So, yes, I would make that recommendation to anyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I think we covered quite a bit here (laughs).  No.  You know, it's just been great having you out here, and thank you for taking the time out to come out and do this.  And hopefully, I can touch somebody out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different:  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  As just a normal person just trying to do the right things for the right reasons.  And that's how I would like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
