Story_ID: 226928
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, and I am the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and there are no observers.  Good afternoon.  Could I get you to state your whole name and to spell it, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Geraldine Rhodes Kennedy.  Do you want me to spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes, please.
Speaker 2: G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E, Rhodes, R-H-O-D-E-S, Kennedy, K-E-N-N-E-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Where were you born?
Speaker 2: Union, North Carolina.  It's now Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Today is September 20, 2007.  Can you tell us what the location of this interview is?
Speaker 2: It's the Cotton Club [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And what city is that located in?
Speaker 2: New York.
Speaker 1: Harlem, New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, New York, Manhattan, New York [New York].
Speaker 1: What's your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Speaker 1: And what was your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of them, a lot of jobs.  I worked at Actors' Equity [Association] at one time.  I was a barmaid for a long, long time.
Story_ID: 226929
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish, what we call our People magazine questions.  So, I'll just ask the question and you say whatever comes to mind.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Italian.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Bermuda.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?  And if you do, will you share it with us?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 226930
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your earliest memory is?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory?
Speaker 1: Yes, of your childhood.
Speaker 2: My childhood?  Oh, honey, I don't remember.  I don't really, really remember it; there's so many, you know.
Speaker 1: When you were living in--you said it was Union, North Carolina [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, I was--
Speaker 1: Prior to--
Speaker 2: I was born in Union, and my mother [Viola Williams] moved to Youngstown, Ohio.  My sister and my mother moved to Youngstown, Ohio when I was four, and then I grew up in Youngstown, Ohio until I was eighteen.
Story_ID: 226931
Speaker 1: And what was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Viola Williams.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us where she was from?
Speaker 2: She was from Union, North Carolina [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And did she ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My mother was a singer.  She went to school in Florida.  I can't, see, I can't remember--
Speaker 1: Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Bethune College, she went to Bethune[-Cookman] College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  She graduated from Bethune.  And she, she was in music.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And she sang, in fact she sang just about all over the world.  She had a concert at Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] with Reverend [Adam Clayton] Powell [Sr.].  Not [Reverend Adam Clayton] Powell [Jr.].  His father.  It was back in the day.
Story_ID: 226932
Speaker 1: And what about your father?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Albus Rhodes was my father's name.  And then I have a stepfather.  Because my mother [Viola Williams], when she moved to--they were divorced, and she moved to Youngstown, Ohio.  And she met Carl, James Carl Williams.  And she got married to him and had five children.
Speaker 1: And this is your stepfather, James Carl?
Speaker 2: My stepfather.
Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of where James Carl is from?
Speaker 2: Pass Christian, Mississippi, that's where he was from.
Speaker 1: And did he tell you any stories about his--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --upbringing?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't have a, he didn't have a good--he was an orphan.  So, he didn't have such good memories.
Speaker 1: And so you didn't have any contact with his parents?
Speaker 2: Not at--at all.
Story_ID: 226933
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about your mother's [Viola Williams] parents?
Speaker 2: They died when I was young, so I never had a chance to be with them.  I remember that my grandfather used to have a motorcycle.  And I remember that I used to ride in the sidecar on his motorcycle, that's all I remember.
Speaker 1: Your mother's father?
Speaker 2: My mother's father, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: His name was Papa Charlie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Papa Charlie?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have any sense of what Papa Charlie had done during his life--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --before you met him for that brief period of time?
Speaker 2: No, because he died young.  And my grandma died young, too.  So, not really.
Story_ID: 226934
Speaker 1: And then what about your father [Albus Rhodes]?  Were you in contact with his parents at all?  Did you visit them?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Story_ID: 226935
Speaker 1: And did you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and four sisters.
Speaker 1: Could you name them in descending order?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister just died in May.  Her name was Florez [K.] Sledge, that's Sister Sledge's mom.
Speaker 1: Florence?
Speaker 2: Florez, F-L-O-R-E-Z; that was her name, Sledge.
Speaker 1: And so that was your oldest sister.  And who's the next youngest sibling?
Speaker 2: My brother, it would be Donald, he was next.  And then my sister, Edna and my sister Norma, and Marian.
Speaker 1: How's Marian spelled?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-I-A-N.  And Kenneth.  And then I had an adopted brother.  His name was, he had initials, L.Z. Smith, that's my adopted brother.  So all in all we had, it was eight children.
Story_ID: 226936
Speaker 1: Eight of you guys [siblings] together.  And so were you all together living in Youngstown, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which is where you were basically raised?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we were all together until Flo [Florez K. Sledge] left.  She was the oldest, and she left and she moved to New York [New York].  And then when I got of age, I did not want to be a doctor or a lawyer.  I didn't want to do none of that.  I wanted to get out of Youngstown, Ohio, because I hated it, because it was dirty.  It was a steel mill town, and all you had was cinder and grit all the time.  The people were wonderful, but I couldn't stand the place.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what it was like at your house when you were a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had a wonderful house.  We were very poor, but we had a lot, a lot of fun.  My mom [Viola Williams] and dad [stepfather, James Carl Williams], we just had a lot of fun.  We had all the kids from the block always at my mama's house.
Speaker 1: And was your mom home with you most of the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was home, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you describe your house?  What kind of--what were houses in Youngstown, Ohio like?
Speaker 2: Like upstairs and downstairs, you know, the regular thing, with a living room and dining room, you know, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: And what did--
Speaker 2: It was a house of joy.
Speaker 1: Could you describe your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--my neighborhood--you know, with the houses.  It was nothing like New York, you know, nothing like here [New York, New York].  It's like, like it would be like in Long Island [New York] with the houses and yards and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And how did you spend holidays?  What were the most important holidays at your house when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Christmas, Easter, Mother's Day.  Mom's Day was a real day, because we did everything for Mom, you know.  She had a tremendous day on Mother's Day.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a couple of examples of things that you might do for your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, we put on a play.  We cooked dinner.  And she had nothing to do--nothing; not anything to do except sit.  She'd go to church and come back and sit and we'd put on plays and all kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the plays that you put on?
Speaker 2: No, we did our own plays.
Speaker 1: Just a bit about what they were about.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It's, you know, I'm two years older than baseball now.  I don't remember that much about things.  (Laughter) But I just know we had a joyful home.
Speaker 1: What was joyful about it?
Speaker 2: Because we had all--we were poor, but we had a whole lot of love and respect, which is so important.
Story_ID: 226937
Speaker 1: Well, today, what sights and smells and sounds remind you of home when you were growing up, if you would encounter them now?
Speaker 2: There's nothing--I didn't like Youngstown [Ohio], so nothing reminds me of home.  I've only been back there once since I left.  So, that's how much I disliked it.  So I don't really want--you know, it's one of those places I just hated.  Not the people, it was the place itself, you know.
Story_ID: 226938
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the school, but I graduated from Youngstown--East High [School] in Youngstown [Ohio], yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you were at East High, did you have any sense of what you wanted to do with your life?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: Did you intend to go to college, or did you intend--
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to get out of Youngstown, and that's exactly what I did, okay.  I'm being honest, I did not like it.  When I came here [New York, New York], my sister [Florez K. Sledge] had a child [Norma Carol Blackmon].  And I got a job and we lived together, you know, and everything was fine.
Speaker 1: So, about what year did you move to Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I moved here in 1956.
Speaker 1: So, can you just give me a sense of how did Harlem strike you when you first arrived?
Speaker 2: Exciting; vibrant, very vibrant.  See, because Youngstown was gritty.  Because it had the steel mills and all, it spewed cinder all the time, you know.  Anywhere, everything you saw was like cinder.  So when you came here, you saw the people were vibrant, and the places were vibrant.  Everything was vibrant, so--
Speaker 1: And had there been any entertainment or nightlife in Youngstown when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but I didn't--
Speaker 1: You weren't really interested?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't have any tremendous clubs that you could go to in Youngstown, you know.  So, no, I didn't.
Speaker 1: So, since you were living with your sister, did you do some babysitting for her?
Speaker 2: All the time, yes.  Yeah, because she worked, my sister had two jobs; she worked two jobs.  And so I would come home from work and go pick up Carol, her name was Carol.  And it's like it got to a point that every time a young fellow came to say hello to me, she called me Mama.  She made sure--yeah, she made sure--she broke up all the relationships, yeah.
Story_ID: 226939
Speaker 1: So, what was one of your--what was your first job when you came to Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: My first job?
Speaker 1: Or what's one that you did when you--early in your time here?
Speaker 2: I worked at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] in the box office when I first came.  I didn't stay that long, but I was there.
Speaker 1: Where was that located?
Speaker 2: On 25th Street.
Speaker 1: Do you mind spelling that?
Speaker 2: The Apollo Theater.
Speaker 1: The Apollo?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought you said Potter.
Speaker 2: No, the Apollo Theater.
Speaker 1: So, your first, one of your first jobs was working at the Apollo?
Speaker 2: In the box office, yes.
Speaker 1: And do you remember any of the people who came to perform while you were selling tickets there?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: When you were working there, did you get an opportunity to see some of the shows that came to the Apollo?
Speaker 2: Of course, yes, yeah.  But that's when they had, it was just starting to--they didn't have chorus girls anymore then.  They just had regular shows like Count Basie or Duke Ellington, that kind of show.
Story_ID: 226940
Speaker 1: And prior to this period, there had been chorus girls?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how, how did they perform?  What was their routine like?
Speaker 2: Well, they did--oh, the chorus girls?  Like--
Speaker 1: I don't necessarily mean their dances.  But you're saying that there were no longer chorus girls.  So, I was wondering what the lifestyle was like.
Speaker 2: They no longer performed at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].  They had a strike I think in 1936.  And after that--
Speaker 1: And what did they strike for?
Speaker 2: Wages, I guess wages and days off.  Because the chorus girls back in that day, they worked seven days a week, and I think five and six shows a day.  And they also did rehearsal, twice at night time--in the morning, whenever they could rehearse.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: But they worked seven days a week.  And when they did have the strike, they got one day off. And I think they were paid, I think they got a ten dollar raise or something like that.
Speaker 1: Well, what--
Speaker 2: But prior to that, they had no days off.
Speaker 1: They were working every day?
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: And were people falling out and fainting from that type of schedule?  Or--
Speaker 2: No, they'd never fall out.  They were a hardy stock, you know, they were tremendous.  In fact, I have some of the chorus girls now.  They're now in their eighties and nineties, you know.  But, no, they didn't pass out from it.
Speaker 1: And where did you come into contact with chorus girls in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I had a--I got a job at the--God--the Palm Cafe [New York, New York], and I met [Edna] 'Yak' Taylor.  Yak Taylor was a dancer.  She had been a dancer and a chorus girl.  And she used to sit to talk to me and tell me all about, you know, the chorus girls and the shows that they did and the places they went.  And I got interested.  And I also realized at that time, once they retired, you never heard anything else about them.  And if they died, they really didn't hear anything about them, you know.  So that's--I started watching and listening and thinking how important it was for them to get some sort of recognition.  But it took me a long, long time to be able to do what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Could you share with us a little bit, or some of the stories that Yak Taylor told you about being a chorus girl?  Do you remember any of what she said?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a tremendous dancer.  She was--they used to talk about standing in the wings and stealing dance steps.  The costumes--it was just, she just talked about everything, you know.
Speaker 1: And can you name some of the other venues where chorus girls would perform in Harlem, or in the New York area?
Speaker 2: Well, they performed at--Cleo [Hayes] performed at the Cotton Club [New York, New York], which was on Lenox Avenue, not here.  And then they had Connie's Inn [New York, New York].  They had Smalls [Jazz Club, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Where's Connie's Inn?
Speaker 2: Well, that--
Speaker 1: Well, where was it?  I apologize.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I don't know exactly where that was, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you said Smalls, Connie's--
Speaker 2: Connie's Inn, the Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York], the Cotton Club.  Those were some of the venues, yeah.
Speaker 1: And was that a good living for them?  Was it something that they really enjoyed?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a living, you know; it was a living.
Speaker 1: And were most of them trained dancers or--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I know Bertye Lou [Wood] said she wasn't a trained dancer.  Cleo wasn't a trained dancer, but some of them were.
Story_ID: 226941
Speaker 1: And did they tour outside of New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Bertye Lou [Wood] and Cleo [Hayes] was, when [Naval Station] Pearl Harbor [Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Hawaii] was bombed, they went on USO [United Service Organizations] tours.  And you know, they went, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they tell you a little bit about those tours?  Did they tell you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was racist, yeah, the same thing.
Speaker 1: --anything about encountering Jim Crow?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Cleo used to tell you about, on the train, how if they got--if they was on a train and white people came on, they had a sign that said "Coloreds," and they would move the sign, and you know, take the space.
Speaker 1: So, you, as a black person would need to move back?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Cleo, one day she said she got mad, and she took the sign.  She took it home with her.
Story_ID: 226942
Speaker 1: And what caused the fact that eventually there were no jobs?  Like, what made the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] turn to a format where they were no longer using chorus girls?
Speaker 2: I guess because of the cost of, you know, the costumes and the big bands.  It's a whole lot of things--the economy, really.  I think that's what happened.  And so most of them had to go out and get jobs.
Speaker 1: And what kind of jobs did they take--
Speaker 2: Well, like--
Speaker 1: --that were different?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them worked in bars.  Cleo [Hayes] worked in a bar.  Bertye Lou [Wood] and [HistoryMaker] Elaine [Ellis] had different jobs.  Marion [Coles] worked at Gert's [ph.] clothing store.  So, different jobs.  But they had to work, because they had families; so they had to work.
Story_ID: 226943
Speaker 1: So, you said it took a while before you were able to do what you wanted with the chorus girls, and try to provide them with an opportunity for recognition.
Speaker 2: It took years--
Speaker 1: How many years?
Speaker 2: --only because I didn't know what I was doing.  But I knew what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: What did you want to do?
Speaker 2: I wanted to make sure they had a legacy.  Because you have so many of the women that were in the business, in show business, and you don't hear anything about them.  Once they retire, you hear absolutely nothing about them.  You take Ginger Rogers, for example.  The only time you hear about Ginger Rogers is if she's in an old movie on television, okay.  Eleanor Powell, she's one of the greatest dancers of all, you never hear about her at all.  You had Juliet Prowse, not too long ago, but you don't hear about her.  You had Tondelayo Levy.  Tondelayo Levy was a black dancer.  She had her own bar down on 52nd Street on Broadway [New York, New York].  You don't hear anything about her, she died.  The Brown Twins [Vivian Brown and Hilda Brown], they were in 'Stormy Weather.'  You don't hear anything about them, because they died.  So, I wanted to keep a legacy.  I wanted people, especially young people, to know that women did have a life; women did do something.  It's important for young people to know that women had a life.  They did things other than wash the floors and cook the food.  So, that's what was important to me.
Speaker 1: So, did you have any idea about what you would like to do in order to create that legacy?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And when did you--
Speaker 2: I had to play it by ear.  What I did was--that's when I--the first thing I ever did is when I did the show at the [Lieutenant Joseph P.] Kennedy [Community] Center [New York, New York].  And that was a--it was a benefit; it was a senior citizen benefit.  We wanted to get a van for the shut-ins, and we did a benefit to raise funds.  And that's when I met Chickie Martin and [HistoryMaker] Ludie Jones, and we put on a show.  And that's how the Swinging Seniors was opened up.
Speaker 1: So this group, Swinging Singers--Seniors--
Speaker 2: Seniors, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Are these women who you knew from your days working at the Apollo [Theater] in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No.  I met some--a young man named Frazier [ph.] lived in the same building with Chickie Martin.  And I was telling him what I wanted to do, and he called her, and she in turn called Ruby Riley, Juanita Boisseau, Myrtle Hawkins, and they got together, and we put the show--that's how we put the show on.
Speaker 1: And the show was at Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, the Kennedy Center--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, the Kennedy Center.
Speaker 2: --here on 135th Street [sic. 134th Street], yeah.
Speaker 1: On 135th Street.  And you had some shut-in seniors.  And who else was a part of the audience?
Speaker 2: Oh, honey, we had a tremendous audience.  Because most of the people thought that the ladies weren't going to be able to dance anymore.  So, they really showed them they could still do it.  And I think the ladies didn't think they could do it, either.  So, it was a tremendous affair.
Speaker 1: And so after you put on the show with the Swinging Seniors, did you do any additional shows?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  After that, that's how the Swinging Seniors was born, because they liked the idea of doing the show so much.  We did the shows to help raise--the first time that we did it, we didn't raise that much money.  But by doing shows, we were able to accomplish the goal.
Speaker 1: And did you donate the money, or did you use the money to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we donated the money to the--
Speaker 1: --continue the program?
Speaker 2: To the senior citizen program.  That's where the money was, that's what it was for, to buy a van for them so that they would be able to do things they wanted to do.
Speaker 1: And during this time, are you working as a manager?
Speaker 2: No.  At this time I was working at the Red Rooster [New York, New York], a bar at the Red Rooster, that's where I was working then.
Speaker 1: And how often, so how often were you doing shows, fundraiser shows with the Swinging Seniors?
Speaker 2: Oh, we--see, one of the things is the people were, they were seniors, okay.  The dancers were seniors, and so you really didn't do that many shows that often.  Because it was fun for them, and it was something to do.  And it was--so we didn't do, you know, shows that often.
Story_ID: 226944
Speaker 1: How, then, did you come up with the idea of the Silver Belles?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to--I had to go to Europe as a road manager for my nieces.  So, I went on tour with them.  And when I came back, you know, I wanted to do, I wanted to keep doing what I was doing.  And so one of my friends, Bertye Lou Wood, I was talking to her about it.  And she got the, she got the ladies for me.  And we had a meeting and then we got together and got the Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: And, the members of the Silver Belles, they had danced together before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all friends, but years ago.  Well, they hadn't danced together for almost forty or fifty years since they had danced anywhere, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: And did you need to convince anyone to come aboard?
Speaker 2: Not really, because they really wanted to do it.  I think it was in their blood, and they really wanted to do it.  Bertye Lou said that she wasn't going to--she would join, but she wasn't going to dance.  But she was the first one up on stage.  So, yes.
Speaker 1: And what kind of music did the, do the Silver Belles choose to dance to?
Speaker 2: The big band sound.  Count Basie music, Duke Ellington music, you know, the big band sound.
Speaker 1: And is that music usually live or--
Speaker 2: No, we had--it was always live.  Yeah, when we did the first show down at the Latin Quarter [New York, New York], we had Grover Mitchell's big band.  We also did a show with The Cadillacs on the bill, okay.  So, we did Atlantic City [New Jersey], and Sister Sledge was headlining and we did a show with them.
Speaker 1: And Sister Sledge--I was going to actually ask you some additional questions about that.  Is that group related to you?
Speaker 2: It was my nieces, my sister's [Florez K. Sledge] children.
Speaker 1: And so when you went on that European tour, you were--
Speaker 2: Working for the--
Speaker 1: --the European manager for Sister Sledge?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then later you combined the Silver Belles and the Sister Sledge performance?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.  No, when I came back, I did not want to be a road manager anymore, okay.  I'd lost my identity, so I wanted to be my own thing; I wanted to do my own thing.  So when I came back, I got the Silver Belles together, and I started doing shows with them.  And we did Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] with Cab Calloway.  We did Lena Horne's eightieth birthday.  We did Dan Rather's '48 Hours with Dan Rather.'  We did quite a few things, yeah.
Speaker 1: What about the program that you did with President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton?
Speaker 2: Well, that was Equity Cares [Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS], yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And Clinton was there.
Speaker 1: What is Equity Cares?
Speaker 2: Equity Cares is for AIDS [autoimmune deficiency syndrome].  They were doing a show, a thing for AIDS.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So in all of these instances, you are raising money?
Speaker 1: Well, see, the purpose of the Silver Belles is to raise funds.  They don't work that often, but they want to do something, especially for kids, okay.  So that was the purpose of them coming out of retirement and having fun, and being able to, you know, raise funds for different things.
Speaker 2: Now, you mentioned several names.  But can you give us perhaps a list of the Silver Belles?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Bertye Lou Wood, [HistoryMaker] Elaine Ellis, Cleo Hayes, Harriet Browne, Hazel Walker Rogers, Ruby Riley, [HistoryMaker] Fay Ray.  These were all of--we only have four left, but these were all of the ladies that we had.
Story_ID: 226945
Speaker 1: I really wish there was--first of all, it's not even about the kids with the baggy pants.  The people that are on the stage--you know what I'm saying--they're getting ready to entertain you.  Why can't they look like The Temptations used to look, okay?  Or, I mean, people, they have that respect for you if you're dressed up, in order to show--you know.
Speaker 2: That's a good point.
Speaker 1: But they come on stage now with holes in the knees.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Looking raggedy.
Speaker 2: They--you know, and they look stink, look like they haven't--didn't have a bath.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Stink.
Speaker 2: No, they do.  They look like they haven't had a bath.
Speaker 1: I'm just saying I haven't heard that term in a long time (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 226946
Speaker 1: My mother [Viola Williams] loved music, but she loved opera.  And I remember she coming to New York [New York] to visit with me, and she wanted to go to the opera.  So, naturally, I took her to the opera.  I took her out to dinner first.  But I had to--she wore an evening gown, okay, and I had to wear an evening gown.  I had to be dressed up for real to go see the opera.  When I go to the opera, people had on dungarees, you know.  But this is the way she--how it had to be.  And I think it should be the same way now.  I think people should really get dressed to go out.  Why would you want to look the same way all the time?
Speaker 2: Well, did you find that when you first moved to Harlem [New York, New York] that people dressed to go out?
Speaker 1: Oh, they dressed to go out, oh, yes.  Oh, people really dressed.  The men were sharp and the women were sharper.  Oh, no, they did.  And the younger generation don't think about dressing, you know.  I don't know why, but they look the same all the time.  Don't you want to look different?
Speaker 2: And what about entertainers?  Did you find that entertainers--
Speaker 1: They used to--oh, they dressed.
Speaker 2: --would also dress up?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh yes.  Oh, yes, they looked sharp.  They were really sharp, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And did you feel like they did that dressing for the audience?  Like, was it a part of the presentation?
Speaker 1: I think so.  It should have been.  If it wasn't, it should have been a part of the presentation, yes.  And it should be part of the presentation now, you know.  Again, why would you want to look the same all the time?  Like you're getting ready to go into the garden.
Story_ID: 226947
Speaker 1: Will you share with us, if you can remember any, some anecdotes about some of the original Silver Belles?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well, [HistoryMaker] Elaine [Ellis], when we first got together, Elaine quit every week.  Every week she called me up, and every week she quit.  And every week I had to tell her, "Okay, I'll see you on Monday when we get to rehearsal."  Bertye Lou [Wood] would forget her teeth.  And we were doing Lena Horne's eightieth birthday, and the car came to pick us up.  And I had to turn around and look and say something to Bertye Lou, and she had no teeth at all, none at all.   And so she said that she wouldn't smile, that she would be alright.  Well, we had to back to the house and get the teeth, because it was something to behold--all dressed up with no teeth, okay.  So that's--and we had so much fun.  We loved--and we're like family, so we love each other.  We did all--everything together, yeah.
Story_ID: 226948
Speaker 1: Do you think that dancing with the Silver Belles extended the lifetime of the women who were members?
Speaker 2: Of course, of course, it--they did, yes.  And it does extend--because they have something to do, you know.  I just, actually, I just put on a fashion show in June up at the Jewish center [The New Jewish Home, New York, New York] here on 106th Street.  They have a daycare center, and I got up there and I went and I put on a show from the 1920s to the hip hop of 2000.  And it was out of sight, okay.  And all of them were clients; all of them were the real patients.  The women that were in the wheelchairs--people that were in wheelchairs, I dressed them up with hats and beads and gloves.  And the ones that could, that was ambulatory--one, I had a flapper, and one lady got dressed up as a flapper.  I had one man from the 1970s.  He was John Travolta, so he came in in all white.  He was fabulous, okay.  It was really nice.  And they had a wonderful time, because they were--people were looking at them; people were paying attention to them.  So I'm going to do that again at another center.  I'm going to try to be able to do that at another center, or more centers, because that's something they need--to be looked at, you know, and they were.  I had one lady, I think she was ninety-some years old, and she came in in all cream white, and she was on her cane.  And when we did rehearsal, my girl was walking so fast and turned so fast, I said, "Oh, Jesus, we're getting ready to lose her, she's going to fall."  But she didn't want to walk with that cane.  She wanted to put that cane down.  So what we had to do was dress the cane up, so that she could deal with the cane.  But she was excited about being able to do this.  And so, yes, they, you know, it's good for them.  It's good for all of us.
Speaker 1: And so you've had the same success and experience with the Silver Belles?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they express what they like best about it?
Speaker 2: The dancing, and being able to be out there, you know, being able to do something, you know.  I know [HistoryMaker] Elaine [Ellis] had a stroke recently, about a year, two years ago.  And one nurse--she got depressed.  She was depressed because she wasn't able--let me tell you.  Elaine lived in Jamaica [New York, New York], and she came all the way into New York to come rehearse here at the Cotton Club [New York, New York] on Mondays.  And that was two hours coming and two hours going back.
Speaker 1: That's Jamaica, Queens [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Jamaica, Queens.  And she had a one bedroom apartment, she was on her own living by herself.  And when she had the stroke, we got her into the city here in New York, in Manhattan [New York, New York].  And naturally you would be depressed, because you were accustomed to having space.  You were accustomed to riding on the subway or doing a lot of things--going onstage and dancing and getting applause.  And all of a sudden, you don't have that anymore.  And some nurse told her--she wrote her a letter and said that she was contemplating suicide.  And they took her to the psychiatrist, and he gave her all of twenty minutes of his time.  And then he gave her some, I call psychedelic pills and a wheelchair, okay.  So when I found out, I said, "Oh, no.  You're not going to take those pills, that's number one.  And you're definitely not going to ride in a wheelchair, that's out."  So, when it was time for her to have her next meeting with the psychiatrist, I sent all of the material with her to the psychiatrist, because he didn't know anything about her.  And so they were beginning to make her into a vegetable.  And that's what they do to old folks, okay.  And I'm old folks, so I know what I'm talking about.  They give you--they give them pills and a wheelchair, and they get to be a vegetable.  They need to be active, really active--have things for them to do, other than the things that they're doing.
Story_ID: 226949
Speaker 1: When you have performances and shows with the Silver Belles, who does the outfits?  Who makes their costumes?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've been fortunate enough to have people that help me get the costumes.  They help me buy the material, and they help me with the costumes.  And we were fortunate, again, because Mr. [John] Beatty allow us to--we do all of the rehearsals here, so we put the shows on here.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Beatty owns and operates the Cotton Club [New York, New York] today?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what about hair and makeup?  Do the Silver Belles take care of their own hair and makeup?
Speaker 2: Yes, they do, yeah, yeah.  And sometimes somebody comes in and will help you with makeup, you know, but they normally do their own makeup.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about a show.  You said there was live music.  And then what does the show consist of?  How many numbers are there?
Speaker 2: It all depends on the kind of show that you're having.  It will have the chorus; it will have the Silver Belles.  Then, it will have a specialty dancer.  It will have all kinds of, you know, things--
Story_ID: 226950
Speaker 1: But no, seriously, this is what they do, they really do, with seniors.  If you, if they get sick and they've been active all of their lives, and all of a sudden you're not active anymore, you would definitely have to be depressed, you know.  If they were young, they would be depressed.  So, to give them those pills, psychedelic pills that they give them--and also they invariably end up in the wheelchair.
Speaker 2: So, would you say that participation in the Silver Belles has meant that those members stayed ambulatory--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --pretty much, unless it was impossible.
Speaker 1: Bertye Lou [Wood] danced at ninety-five at [The] Town Hall [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: And didn't someone, one member, fall down the subway stairs?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Cleo [Hayes].
Speaker 2: And have rehab--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and get right back out on the stage?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's Cleo, and she's now ninety-four.  She's still dancing.  So, this is what's so important.  That's what important, to have some of the same life that they had, you know, before.
Speaker 2: And perhaps to take away from that assumption that as an older person, you don't have life anymore.
Speaker 1: And this is why young people don't respect them, because they feel that they can't do anything.  And when young people come and see the Silver Belles dancing, they get--in fact, we did the amateur thing at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].  And they had the ladies come in, come out in evening gowns, and then come back out.  And then they'd get back out and they were kicking, they were dancing.  And the kids got absolutely wild, because here they are in their seventies and eighties, and they were kicking the way they were.  And when we got out from backstage, outside people were asking for autographs, because, you know, it was exciting to them.  So, but people don't do that with old folks today, you know.  They don't--when you get past--honey, don't get past forty, because they don't want you no more, okay.  Did you know that?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.  I won't get past forty.  I'll get to thirty-nine, and I'll hold (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'll be easy.
Speaker 1: No, seriously.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: They don't even have--when you start getting around forty or forty-five or fifty, they don't even have designer clothes for you to wear, you know.  Because they don't realize that people like my age, we have the money; we know how to spend, we know how to do things.  But they don't have anything for me to, you know.  They don't have clothes for me.  So, we're missing out on a lot.
Speaker 2: So, we really need a perception shift.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: With regard to seniors.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, because they know how to spend.  Because right now they don't spend, because they don't have any place to spend, because they don't have anything for them.
Story_ID: 226951
Speaker 1: Presently, what are the Silver Belles doing?
Speaker 2: Well, we just did this documentary.  So, we've been doing a lot of question and answer with the documentary.
Speaker 1: With 'Been Rich All My Life'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And one of my sort of catchy questions was, does the Silver Belles make you and the women involved feel like you've been rich all your life?
Speaker 2: We have--before the Silver Belles, before the documentary, we were rich.  And we were rich all our lives, yeah.  I was rich when I was born, you know.  Mom [Viola Williams]--we didn't have any money, but we had love and a lot of respect and a lot of fun.  So, I've been rich all my life.
Story_ID: 226952
Speaker 1: You mentioned to Curtis [ph.], the manager, that you were scheduling a reunion session between the first generation of Silver Belles and the second generation.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to get a second generation of Silver Belles.  And I have asked some of the premier dancers to be a Silver Belle, and they said yes they would.  And so, I want to keep the tradition going.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us who some of those dancers would be?
Speaker 2: Karen Callaway [Williams], Diane Walker, [Jacqueline] Jacqui Malone.  I can't--I have a list, so these are the ones I can remember.
Speaker 1: And you said these were premier dancers.  What type of dancing did they do?
Speaker 2: Taps, tap dancing.
Speaker 1: Tap dancing?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: Karen Callaway was on Broadway in that Irish thing.
Speaker 1: The Irish show?
Speaker 2: What's the name?
Speaker 1: 'Riverdance'?
Speaker 2: 'Riverdance.'  She was in 'Riverdance;' I couldn't remember.
Speaker 1: No one can remember the--(laughter).  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: They were--but it was a tremendous show.  But Karen was there, you know.  They did the--the difference with the jig and the tap, you know.
Speaker 1: Very below the waist kind of dancing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now with the Silver Belles, are the Silver Belles a tap group?
Speaker 2: They were tap or modern, you know.
Speaker 1: They've done both?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, what is the purpose of the event that you're having in March between these new Silver Belles, or hope to be?
Speaker 2: Well, in March, what we want to do is we want to introduce the general public to the second generation of Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: And is that going to be here at the Cotton Club [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: At the Cotton Club, yes.
Speaker 1: And what kind of show are you planning?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're having a buffet and a show, yeah.  And music--I think, I don't know, I think it might be Jazzberry Jam, I'm not sure.  Jazzberry Jam is a group of women musicians.
Speaker 1: Who will play the big band sound?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 226953
Speaker 1: Just a couple more questions about the documentary, 'Been Rich All My Life'.  How did you get hooked up with Heather Lyn MacDonald, the producer?
Speaker 2: Well, Heather Lyn MacDonald got hooked up with me.  We--there was an article written in the paper by Sherry North [ph.] in the [The New York] Times.  She wrote an article on the Silver Belles, and Heather read about it and she got in touch with me.  And it took quite a while.
Speaker 1: And how did you feel about the idea of doing a documentary?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was wonderful, only because people write books about different things.  And books are an opinion, okay, on what they saw or heard or thought.  This was visual, and they were talking--you know, doing it themselves.  So that's why it was really important.  And I'm, you know, I was glad to do it.
Speaker 1: And did you feel like that contributed to your mission, which is to create a legacy for the Silver Belles?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it did.
Speaker 1: For chorus girls in general, and for these particular--?
Speaker 2: No, chorus girls--chorus girls.  Because, again--not only just chorus girls--female dancers.
Speaker 1: Dancers.
Speaker 2: Because they don't, they really--they almost become extinct.  Once they die, you don't hear anything about them.  Well, you don't hear anything about them when they retire.  But when they die, you really don't hear anything about them unless--the funeral.
Speaker 1: You're guaranteed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not to have continuing coverage.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 226954
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Swinging Seniors.  We did a show in 1980 at the [Lieutenant Joseph P.] Kennedy [Community] Center [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you describe, do you know who the persons are?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, that's [HistoryMaker] Ludie Jones.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: That's Lyle Smith.
Speaker 2: Maybe you should add that each person is a Swinging Senior.
Speaker 1: A Swinging Senior.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  A Swinging Senior.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Kitty Wilson [Katherine Wilson], a singer for the Swinging Seniors.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Ready? Ruby Riley of the Swinging Seniors.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Tempy Fletcher of the Swinging Seniors.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Myrtle Hawkins of the Swinging Seniors.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Okay, Club Harlem [New York, New York] with Juanita Boisseau, Chickie Martin, and Ludie Jones.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that starting left to right?
Speaker 1: Left to right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.  Next.
Speaker 1: Club Harlem, left to right, Ruby Riley, Myrtle Hawkins, Thelma Prince, and Juanita Boisseau.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: The Silver Belles.  Harriet Browne, Hazel Walker Rogers, Marion Coles, Cleo Hayes, [HistoryMaker] Elaine Ellis, Bertye Lou Wood, from left to right.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Marion Coles at the Latin Quarter [New York, New York].  Marion Coles, Hazel Walker Rogers, and Bertye Lou Wood.  The bottom, Norma Miller, comedian.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And is this the same venue?
Speaker 1: No, this is, I said the Latin Quarter [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, no, but then Norma Miller, was it the same thing?
Speaker 1: It's the same, yeah, when you see--that's the same, Norma Miller at the Latin Quarter.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Equity Cares AIDS [sic. Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS] at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].  Left to right, [HistoryMaker] Geraldine Rhodes Kennedy, Bertye Lou Wood, and President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton.  I don't know the man's name in the back.  At the bottom--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, hold on one second.  Let's do the top one--
Speaker 1: Again?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Apollo Theater, Equity Care AIDS.  Geraldine Rhodes Kennedy, Bertye Lou Wood, and President Clinton.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Left to right?
Speaker 1: Left to right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And then--
Speaker 1: The bottom?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The bottom.
Speaker 1: Left to right, Bertye Lou Wood, Marion Coles, Cleo Hayes, Mercedes Ellington, President Clinton, Elaine Ellis.
Speaker 2: And the bottom, [HistoryMaker] Fay Ray.
Speaker 1: Atlantis Casino [Hotel, Atlantic City, New Jersey], Sister Sledge.  Left to right, Debra Sledge, Joni Sledge, Kim Sledge, and Kathy Sledge.
Speaker 2: The bottom picture is Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: The Silver Belles, Fay Ray when she was young.
Speaker 2: Hazel Walker Rogers, Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: Harriet Browne, Silver Belles.
Speaker 2: Bertye Lou Woods, Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: Elaine Ellis of the Silver Belles.
Speaker 2: Cleo Hayes of the Silver Belles.
Speaker 1: Marion Coles of the Silver Belles.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, do you want to say something?
Speaker 1: Okay, she's our artistic director.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you read what it says on the picture?
Speaker 1: Well-- "Best wishes."
Speaker 2: "Best in life always, Mama, from your Marion."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nineteen--
Speaker 2: --Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And again, if you want to tell us who this is.
Speaker 2: Okay, left to right, the Silver Belles.  Bertye Lou Wood, Cleo Hayes, Marion Coles, Fay Ray, Elaine Ellis, Geri Rhodes Kennedy, and in the center is Karen Callaway Williams.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Letter from [First Lady] Barbara Bush.
Speaker 1: And which benefit is she responding to?  It says a reunion in tribute to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was a reunion and a tribute to the chorus girls in 1990 down at the Marriott.  And the benefit, it benefitted the Mother Hale's kids.
Speaker 1: The Hale House [Mother Hale Learning Center; Sheltering Arms Children & Family Services, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the Hale House.
