Story_ID: 158115
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Barbara Kitchen[s].  Could you, sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Willie David Kitchens Junior. That's W-I-L-L-I-E, D-A-V-I-D, K-I-T-C-H-E-N-S, J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now is there a story behind the name Kitchens?
Speaker 2: In speaking with my dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] he said, of course, it came from the slave owner that owned them.  Because there are some white Kitchens in Georgia where they were born and raised.  And of course, by his father being sharecroppers on the plantation they just believe that's where the name came from, from the slave-owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place?
Speaker 2: January 6, 1956, and I was born here in Chattanooga, Tennessee, Hamilton County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: July 27, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're here at my studio--recording studio, Up Above Studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I got this out of sequence but briefly what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician and singer performing arts director.  I did a little bit of it all minister of music, so I'm involved in music and performing arts.
Speaker 1: Right, in the church as well now you're also a member of The Impressions?
Speaker 2: Member of The Impressions, yes.
Speaker 1: A new member?
Speaker 2: New member.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158116
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are seven, I mean I'm sorry, five (laughter) People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: And they all--they only a require short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Soul Food (laughter), and that's all kind of greens and so forth but yes I just consider Soul Food things that I grew up on light greens collard greens.  And so that's to me when you say favorite food it's hard for me to say one of em I just love so much I love eating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Soul Food.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Gulf Shores [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes. If he hung out there we ought to be able to at least hang in there.
Story_ID: 158117
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lena Pearl Wise.  Lena L-E-N-A, P-E-A-R-L, W-I-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 17, 1929, she was born in Sandersville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, as far back is probably my great uncle.  Yeah, that's far back, back to my great uncle.  Uncle Will Uncle Will is the--Wilson, Will Wilson [ph.] they call him Will Wilson that's far as I can go back.  And he, of course, lived in Sandersville, Sparta, I mean Sparta, Georgia he lived in Sparta.
Speaker 1: Okay, you, you knew your Uncle Will?
Speaker 2: Yeah I knew him.
Speaker 1: I'm not talking about just the ones you know but how far back can you trace, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, well back to my mother's mother.  I can remember far as I not know, but I can remember the stories of my, my mother's mother so that's far back as I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay well what are some of the stories attached to your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Oh my mother would always say that her mother was always cooking and always making them of course, cleanup.  She was very strict about them doing their chores.  My mother, of course, did not finish high school. But she had, of course, them working at a very young age because that's what they had to do in order to make ends meet.  I remember those stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay are there any others stories about any ancestors on that side.  I mean that is there's their a traditional that they were slaves or free or what?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, they all worked the plantations.  I heard so many stories about them working on the plantation picking cotton.  Actually, you know, feeding the chickens and the, you know, just taking care of the pigs and all of those things.  So I think they were just basically again sharecroppers and taking care of the land of their--I guess their masters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, terms of sharecropping being I landlord I guess but do they are there any stories about any ancestors, coming out of slavery during the time?
Speaker 2: Not so much--
Speaker 1: We should be a couple of generations further back when your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Okay. Not so much that I can remember of any of them coming out.  No, I can't recall any of the stories, but I'm sure there were some but I just I can't recall any of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158118
Speaker 1: Any musicians on this side of the family that are (unclear)?
Speaker 2: On my mother's [Lena Pearl Wise] side?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yes. I had seven uncles that were musicians, played guitars and keyboards.  Well, there were pianos then, of course, and the organs so yes they were very instrumental with music.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what are some of the names of them can you?
Speaker 2: Hubert Wilson [ph.], Robert Mills [ph.], Jesse Bowens [ph.], can't quite think of anybody right off the bat from that point I can't think of anybody else.
Speaker 1: Chances are music would be in your family for generations.
Speaker 2: Yes, of course, I believe that's, that's a big part of their getting together they would all sit around and play music from the women especially on my dad's side.  But we're, we had since we talking about mother's side, but yes, I think music was a big part of what we did in our pasttime.
Story_ID: 158119
Speaker 1: Okay, now so your mother [Lena Pearl Wise] grew up in kind of a sharecropping situation?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to school. She did not finish, of course, high school.  I think she stopped--her telling me in the seventh grade and they had to go to work but yes she did she did go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did she talk about growing up from what I if I'm not mistaken I believe Sandersville [Georgia] is, is where Elijah Muhammad grew up.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: His biography is filled with horror stories of race relations in Sandersville.  Did she have any bad stories about going up in Sandersville?
Speaker 2: I think the one thing I can remember my mama talking about is if you didn't do what you were supposed to do getting whippings.  Now, who did the whipping I'm, I'm not sure, but she would always relate that.  You know, when we were young if you didn't do as you were told you would get a, and they would say the word beating.  You know, so I don't know if she was really focusing on parents or if there--she was focusing on the slavers or the slave owners.  So but she just talked many days about that and about a lot of work that they did that's all.  I used to hear just, you know, picking cotton working up from sundown I mean sunup to sundown.  And, and that's what I use to relate the country to where they stayed.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did she leave Sandersville?
Speaker 2: She left there--it had to be in '50 [1950], 1950 because two of my sisters was already born and the rest of us was born here in Chattanooga [Tennessee].  So my sister after that was born in '50 [1950].  So she was born here evidently in that year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now had she met your father [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, they all moved here.
Speaker 2: They--yeah they moved here together, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so they decided to move together to Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes. My dad decided to move here because, of course, there was no jobs there for him.
Story_ID: 158120
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of work did he [Kitchens' father, Willie Kitchens, Sr.] do when he moved here?
Speaker 2: He worked for DuPont, he came in--my mother's [Lena Pearl Wise] brother moved here first and he got a job with DuPont.  And he sent word back to my mom and my dad that he could come up there, and they moved in with him, and he got him a job with DuPont.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you give us your fathers for name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Willie David Kitchens Junior I mean senior fixen to give my name senior, W-I-L-L-I-E, D-A-V-I-D, K-I-T-C-H-E-N-S, S-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 22, 1927, in Sandersville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay and what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well I know basically back to his mother and father being again working for their masters and slaves hearing him talk about that, and they called him Uncle Will.  They called my daddy's daddy Uncle Will, and he basically was a strong, determined man short in stature, but they said he was very strong could handle those horses and mules.  And they said to be such a little man said he was very, very strong I used to hear them say that all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, you know, you were explaining a little bit before we started.  That your grandfather was able to, he was fairly successful at sharecropping he was able to get a house out of it?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right when I think they worked it.  Worked enough to that the slave owner or the master of the shares of crops gave him the house that they were living in.
Speaker 1: Okay so was, was their property, you know, other than just the house?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was property I think at first it might've been about two acres that they had that they lived on and it kind of spreaded out from that point.  The sister, my dad's sister [Millie Ann Renfroe (ph.)] who had about 370-some odd acres when it was all said and done, but she worked and paid for that, those acres.
Story_ID: 158121
Speaker 1: So did you father [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] talk about growing up? I mean, and did he have a chance to go to school down there?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in school. My dad stopped in the sixth grade.  He talked about a lot of times having to, to work to make ends meet again.  And how he would, you know, be out, you know, minding the field, working the lumberyard, cutting the trees.  And of course, again picking cotton and all of that which was the only jobs that I think he basically talks about them having.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so he found out about--how old was he when he found out about the job with DuPont?
Speaker 2: My dad moved here he was twenty-two years old again like I said my, my mother's [Lena Pearl Wise] brother moved here first.  And then he wrote back home and told them that if they moved up they could stay with him, and he could get him a job at DuPont.
Story_ID: 158122
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Lena Pearl Wise and Willie David Kitchens, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they were all, from what they tell me, they all lived--my mother lived like maybe ten miles away from where they lived.  But they were all in the same area and he--they went to school together and he said he used to go up to their house and visit, you know, coming from school.  I guess that's where it all started from (laughter), and it's all history I guess from that point.  Yeah, they I think it was probably during school because, you know, they all went to the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158123
Speaker 1: I know from seeing a picture and hear you talking before we started, that your father's [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] a musician as well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he plays guitar and sings, right?
Speaker 2: He plays guitar, organ and sings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he plays for the church and, in fact, that's what gave me a big boost in what I'm doing now he was the he was fire behind me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are there other members of this family that, that are musicians to on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, of course, his sister, in fact, his sister taught him to play guitar.  The one that I was talking about had the 300 acres of land or more she was a guitar, player.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Millie Ann Renfroe [ph.].  In fact, she passed away she was 102 years old when she passed away about two or three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, 102 years old and so she played the guitar?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What kind of music did she specialize in?
Speaker 2: Christian music, gospel music that's basically was there forte what they did all the time, and she again taught him, and he get interested in the music or the guitar because of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your father basically play in a gospel setting as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes he played in a gospel group here in Chattanooga [Tennessee].  I think there was a couple of groups he, he played around here with but the main group that he played with was the Five Sons of Calvary which was a very well known in this city.  And also, you know, around the states.  Because they traveled around and sang, he was a guitar, player.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so this group--did, did they ever make any records?
Speaker 2: Yes they made records, in fact, they sang with some of the biggest artists there are like Shirley Caesar and the Swan Silvertones, the [Gospel] Keynotes.  They sung with a lot of major artists, in fact, I use to go watch them on shows with these guys.  And they were just as good as they were really they were good.
Speaker 1: Now these names, you know, for those black people that grew up in the north even and especially down here. Late at night if you turn the AM radio on it was the only kind we had in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you turned down the dial you get a station called WLAC [Nashville, Tennessee] out of I think it either Nashville [Tennessee] or Gallatin [Tennessee] I'm not sure.  But WLAC a guy name Hossman [Bill "Hoss" Allen] I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right I remember.
Speaker 1: Would talk about, you know, the gospel package and he have a soul package, blues package he would sell you through the mail (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And a lot of people around the country would get their black records.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When you (unclear) give your money to WLAC (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, yeah I've heard that name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Randy's record shop.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah in Gallatin, Tennessee (simultaneous) right.
Speaker 2: I've heard that name mentioned several times by my dad [, and there was something about Nashville to now I don't know how that tied in as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: WLAC is in Nashville (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And its store is in Gallatin.
Speaker 2: Okay that's what it was okay yeah, of course, that was the biggest outlet they had (laughter) at that time it was good.
Speaker 1: Right, right late at night that's where we were we were here Randy's record shop and that, you know, gospel package and all that stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so did your father teach you how to play?
Speaker 2: Of course, he was a inspiration I always wanted to play guitar.  And he sat me down for the first time put his big old guitar in my hand and I could barely reach over to play it.  But he would show me a little chord, and things to play, and that inspired me to take it from there.
Story_ID: 158124
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you describe your parents' [Willie Kitchens, Sr. and Lena Pearl Wise] personalities and tell us who you think you take after?
Speaker 2: Probably take more after my dad because he's a mild, meek guy he doesn't get angry real quick.  He talks very soft, and it takes a lot to get him angry.  My mother, she will let it (laughter) out on you.  So I think I take a little bit more after him I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but most people say, "you look like your mom," but yeah, but I think I, I take his personality.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have musicians on both sides of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So it's kind of hard to avoid becoming a music player I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I really love--I think I fell in love with music when I was very young just seeing my dad 'cause they practiced at the house all the time.  And so that made it even more but, you know, like you said, had musicians on both sides of the family.
Story_ID: 158125
Speaker 1: Now tell, now we always ask this question what's your first memory of childhood?  Your earliest memory of childhood, what's the first thing that you remember or do you have a first memory?
Speaker 2: Well playing out in the yards when, when I was maybe probably five orsix years old.  We used to just play in the yard and rolled tires and things like that that's my earliest I think I could remember just playing.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the--tell us what your neighborhood looked like and tell us what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well we lived up on what they called a hill and on that hill that was a lot of what we called alleys.  You know, houses were close together, and I can remember running through some of those houses to the alley.  And back there in, in that alley there were rows of houses what we call shotgun houses.  Some sold liquor, and moonshine and I can remember hearing music, coming out of those house like from jukeboxes.  And, and the laughter and the, you know sometimes the fusing and the cursing.  And so on that hill it was a lot of close-knit families.  And, and relationships there but there was also a lot of, you know, a lot of a lot of things going on that probably wasn't good for us at that time.  But, you know, we were there in it but yeah that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the hill did it have a name?
Speaker 2: Well we called it the Baldwin Street Hill, Baldwin Street, 22nd Street [Chattanooga, Tennessee].  That's, that's was the main streets there 22nd and Baldwin.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would--that was behind where you lived?
Speaker 2: No that was that was the street we live on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That the whole hill it covered all of that from 22nd to Baldwin, and there was another street I can't think of that ran back toward the alley.  And it wasn't a big street maybe a car or two could go down that street, so I'm not sure what the name of the street was.  But that was considered the hill. That was the hill.
Story_ID: 158126
Speaker 1: Okay, now in Chattanooga [Tennessee], I mean, how many--how much of the population is black in Chattanooga?
Speaker 2: Probably--
Speaker 1: At least in those days, I mean, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, probably 30, 40 percent black. Probably that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were most of the people concentrated in one neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes exactly probably the south side of Chattanooga was the most--I guess that would be the most where most blacks would hang out.  And live actually didn't live on the east side, west side nor the north.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there--did--I know of some--I know when I was a kid growing up.  In the South, a lot of times the black community the streets weren't paved in black the community were paved on the white side, I mean was that was that pretty much the pattern.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly no, no paved streets dirt.  I can remember when they first paved the streets man we thought we was in high cotton (laughter) man.  Yeah, but it was that way it was just dirt, dirt streets.
Speaker 1: How old were you when they paved the streets?
Speaker 2: I might have been about twelve, twelve years old. I can remember streets being paved at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158127
Speaker 1: So what were you like when you were a little kid?  And what did you like to do, you know, as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Well I always loved, you know, playing with, you know, playing basketball and things like that.  So I, I think shooting marbles, rolling tires, you know, we played stickball.  You know, playing a little baseball and things like that.  So those were the kind of games that we basically concentrated on and that kicking cans.  And, I mean hide and seek things that normally I guess kids would do them when they didn't have, you know, money or anything that they could do.  They just, you know, play what was available to em, and that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Howard High School [later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee] probably one of the oldest high schools in, in Chattanooga [Tennessee] for blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, Howard High School now covered high school and grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes I went to Howard from the first to the twelfth grade it doesn't anymore but, but then yeah, it was from the first to the twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is was there only like one school for the black community in Chattanooga or was there more, was there more (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well as I got older yeah there was other schools elementary schools in other areas.  Of course, we began to spread out a little bit more so yeah there were other schools.  But that was the predominate school that most blacks wanted to go to between Howard and another school called Riverside [High School, Chattanooga, Tennessee].  But the south side-- Riverside was located over on the east side of town and Howard on the south side of town.  So, yes that was the most predominate school at that time.
Speaker 1: So Howard High School, did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes 'cause you have a favorite teacher, so you have a favorite yes.  I loved English. I loved spelling those were probably my strong points English and spelling.
Speaker 1: Okay who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Ms. Swofford [ph.] (laughter) I loved going to her room.  She was real strict, but she was a pretty lady.  I mean, very pretty everybody I think loved her (laughter) at least all the guys anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's interesting a lot of people have stories similar, similar stories in school.  So, so was it a very big school?
Speaker 2: Well I think it was considering as many people that we had because I mean, you didn't have any, of course, any other school in that area.  So everybody had to go to that school, so I guess it did seem like it was pretty big. You know, and it still stands today, of course, remodeled now but it, yes it's a pretty good size school.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is---when you were going to school had they desegregated the schools in Chattanooga yet?
Speaker 2: That happened when I got in middle school when I was elementary, you know, it was all blacks at Howard School.  But when I got in middle school then, they started kind of integrating whites to the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158128
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright, so now was there a music program at Howard High School [later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was music, we had music, choir. Unfortunately, I wasn't in any of them.  I don't know it was something about the choir I, I couldn't go along with too much.  I mean I had to take the class but, you know, the extra-curricular far as joining the choir and things like that I wasn't in it but I did take music class I did.
Speaker 2: Okay did you find that useful?
Speaker 1: Yes, of course, in fact, the, the teacher would always try to encourage me after hearing me sing to do that because I could lead the class I could pretty much keep my tune.  And she would put me and say listen to him.  So yeah it was very useful I guess it started me being somewhat a leader at that time because everybody had to follow behind me, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158129
Speaker 1: Now did you sing a lot at church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I sang, I mean, of course in the congregation.  And we had a--what they call a Rosebud Choir at the church I attended.
Speaker 1: What, what's the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Greater Friendship Missionary Baptist Church, had a Rosebud Choir that I was a part of.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the Rosebud Choir.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now what is I don't know who's the right time to answer this, but I guess it's no time like the present.  What's the difference in a regular Baptist Church and a Missionary Baptist Church? You all ways see that--
Speaker 2: The Missionary Baptist Church is focused, focuses on missions, you know, in the city out of the city you know, you know, out of the country.  Where I think regular Baptists more so concentrate on baptism even though, you know, we all does--both of them do baptism.  But the missionary church kind of focus on missions foreign missions as well as homeland.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright so churches right in the community same community that you lived in?
Speaker 2: No we had the bus would pick us up, and it would be located on the east side of town we catch the bus every Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to go cross town and go to church?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay now was your father [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] involved in this church was the whole family involved in this church?
Speaker 2: No just me and my sisters.  My dad at that time I was in the Rosebud Choir he and my mother [Lena Pearl Wise] separated. And then they divorced so my dad was going to another church.  And my mom was not going to church very much at all but she would diligently make us get up and go (laughter) every Sunday morning, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were there any other family members at the Greater Friendship Church?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just you and your sisters?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158130
Speaker 1: And how many of your--in your family--is it just you and a sister is there--are there more?
Speaker 2: It's me and five sisters.
Speaker 1: Five sisters? Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And you're the--are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm next to the youngest I have a sister one year younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all of you stayed with your mother [Lena Pearl Wise]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was about ten years old about ten being in the Rosebud Choir until I was about fourteen about fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you see your father [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would see my, my father because he would still come and get me.  And, you know, when they had programs, and they would go sing he would call me and say you want to go with me to a singing.  I'd go with him to a singing.  So he never lost contact with me at all. 'Cause I think he knew I loved to be around him and the music.  So he would always call me and, you know, say, "Well you want to go with me?" And so he'd come by and pick me up.
Story_ID: 158131
Speaker 1: Okay, now how old were you when your father [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] started showing you how to play the guitar?
Speaker 2: I was about seven years old, seven or eight when I could remember him putting that guitar in my lap.  In fact, I used to sneak and, and play it when he was not at home.  I'd go in and open up the case and grab it and try to play a little bit of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you play a little bit?
Speaker 2: No considering I would just be strumming and getting blisters on my finger.  And couldn't do anything with it but just to know that I could go to it and get it, it was, you know, that was enough for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you remember the first thing you learn how to play?
Speaker 2: I believe what he taught me was--it was just a chord I think it was just a chord.  It wasn't a song it was like a chord here, and then he would tell me this is the first and this is the second and this is the fourth.  And I would learn things like that, so it wasn't actually a song.  But actually when I heard a sound that sound like a chord I went, man, I knew it was getting there it was getting there, so that was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long was it before you started actually playing the guitar, you know, in public?
Speaker 2: Well after my dad left I think I got a little bit more intense with it.  My mom [Lena Pearl Wise] bought me a guitar and then I got together with my sisters, and we formed a group and we started singing.  And I start playing guitar, I kind of surprised my dad.  We had a gentleman, a older gentleman lived across the street from us named Mr. Curtis [ph.].  And I would always go over when my dad wasn't around.  Of course, I went over to watch him play, and he would sit me down sometimes and, and show me a few things.  And I took off from there and formed my own little family group.  And so my dad would then sometimes have us to sing on the programs with them, so that's where I start playing actually myself.  Start playing guitar.
Story_ID: 158132
Speaker 1: Now in the meantime, now was--did you play a lot of recorded music around the house?  You listen to the radio or play records?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would try to, of course, imitate what I heard.  'Cause I wasn't reading music, so I would always try to imitate my dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] first of all.  Because, you know, of course, I got so used to his sound.   But then I would listen to other artist like, like Swan Silvertones and, and just different other on the radio and try to imitate them as well.  Then I began to write and try to produce my own style, you know, songs and so forth with my sisters.  They used to say I used to worry them to death with those old songs, you know, (laughter) but I use to try to do my own songs as well.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now what musicians did you admire the most on, on the radio?
Speaker 2: I tell you, and he still is today, just listening to people like Stevie Wonder, a lot of gospel artist.  You know, Shirley Cesar, the Swan Silvertones, they had Brooklyn Allstars all of those guys I use to admire listening to them.  And of course, my dads' them group the Five Sons [of Calvary] those were number one to me.  I don't care who else would come along, they was number one to me.  So, if that's a little biased, then I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well that makes sense.
Story_ID: 158133
Speaker 1: Did you experience any of the reverberations of the Civil Rights Movement, you know, in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?  Was Chattanooga going through anything when you were coming along in terms of--
Speaker 2: I can't remember. I don't remember any of that for is, you know, reflection on me.  I can't remember any of that happening.  Other than what I heard, but for as personally up to myself naw, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, but were people in, in town that you of involved with any sit-ins going on in Chattanooga or anything like that or were people--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, of course, you know, neighborhoods.  You know, where they had downtown black, white, you know, fountains.  And, and you know, you can, can't go into this store you can't do this.  So I remember that much of it but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So they had the signs up all that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes they had signs up, yeah they definitely had signs up.  But, you know, we were too small to even go downtown unless we were with an adult.  And but again I heard more of the conversations that the adults was dealing with.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they render an opinion about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, they, I mean they was all for, you know, of course, equal opportunity and rights.  Equal rights and they thought Martin Luther King was the new savior of the black people.  And so they were from what I can hear they were all in favor of what he was doing.
Story_ID: 158134
Speaker 1: Now did you have much occasion to hear the blues being played?
Speaker 2: Of course, like I was saying in the alley back there when the jukeboxes and the drinking and the cussing and dancing.  I mean we would all sneak back there we wasn't supposed to be back there.  So you would hear all of these [HM] B.B. King's, and Ray Charle's songs being played and just different, you know, all of the older guys music.  And, you know, just being able to enjoy what we could hear.  But then my mom [Lena Pearl Wise] and dad Willie Kitchens, Sr.] had a record player at home, and they would play as well.  So you would hear that music in the house as well as, you know, outside.  Yeah, I got a chance to listen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158135
Speaker 1: When--tell us about high school [Howard High School, later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee] now did you, you liked sports did you get--did you play any sports in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I played basketball.  That was probably one of the main sports.  I really was involved with, I loved all the sports, but basketball was more I guess intriguing to me.  I played basketball up until I got in the ninth grade.  After the ninth grade, I really got involved with music.  My dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] gave me an opportunity to play with his group when some of the names like the [Gospel] Keynotes and the Violinaires all of them came in town.  And my dad asked me could I play bass guitar with them because their bass guitar player had got injured in a accident.  And from that point on it took my interest away from basketball because I got a chance to play with some of the, the most--I guess world, known people.  And I really pursued it after that.  But that's basketball was the only sport I actually really played.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the music kinda dominated I guess your life in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: High school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So were, were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I think I was a average student.  Great behavior student, but not top of my class for as in, you know, academics.  But, you know, I would mind the teachers, I mean I wouldn't never get in trouble or suspended or anything like that.  But I guess the music was just dominating me.  Even at that time where I would just do enough to get by.  But I would go home and sit for hours and rehearse and play.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you involved in like high school clubs or did you run for class office or any of those kinds of things in high school?
Speaker 2: Well I was involved in the high school swing band.  And I was voted most talented of my class my senior year for as vocal and musician.  So I mean I didn't know anybody was watching me that close but evidently the the class had been watching me but that was basically the, the main thing I was involved in.  The--was the school swing band.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 2: I can't think of one I guess I just went to classes (laughter), you know, wasn't really focusing on any teachers at all really.
Speaker 1: Were you're mentors did you have any important mentors that came from the community in terms of music?
Speaker 2: Yes I used to watch Mr. Russell [ph.] good which the was a music teacher a fantastic.  He play for Mahalia Jackson I thought it was so awesome.  When he played at her funeral, and we was in class and they were showing the funeral on TV.  And there he was playing the piano at her funeral, so he was a great inspiration.
Speaker 1: Now Mahalia Jackson, she was from--she wasn't from here was she?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: From Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't from here.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly how he got connected with her, but he played for her.
Story_ID: 158136
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Howard High School, later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee] as a senior did you, did you see yourself going to college?  Or did you see yourself becoming a professional musician right away or what did you, what did you project in your immediate future?
Speaker 2: Well I did wanna in fact I did enrolled into U.T.C. of Chattanooga [University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Tennessee] because I wanted to become a music teacher, a writer, composer and all of that.  Because I felt this was the way that I could get their by getting me a degree.  So I enrolled into Chattanooga U.T.C. of Chattanooga but, of course, I didn't finish I stop going because I had to get a job.  I had a kid on the way, and so I had to, I had to go to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  So you had a kid on the way in high school?
Speaker 2: Naw, no I mean, not in high school I mean once I got out of high school I did enroll into U.T.C.
Speaker 1: Once you got out of high school, so you were at UTC?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How long?
Speaker 2: I was there probably about a year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was about a year.
Speaker 1: Then you had a child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that kinda, that kinda derailed you from finishing school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, and also being involved in, you know, my own personal desires too, you know.  Start doing things I never really should have been doing trying things I probably shouldn't have tried.  So it took my interest away from actually pursuing school.  And but it never took away from took it away from being a musician or wanting to be a musician.  But school just became very much secondary, you know, you start getting money in your hands and realizing, and it just took my desire away from even going back to school.
Story_ID: 158137
Speaker 1: So were you tempted to get involved with secular music rather than gospel?
Speaker 2: No, no I wanted to stay in gospel music. I mean, I've always loved gospel music.  But I was also being enticed by people asking me to play in their local bands because I was good.  You know, I was really good at singing and really good at playing so people would ask me, "Man come play.  Come sit in." And so, of course, and then you get paid for it.  I'm like, wow, yeah, I can do this, you know, and so that kind of sidetracked me.  And I start doing a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: What kind of music--I know when you were coming along I guess the funk music, funk music was the biggest thing going so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, funk, disco, even blues, you know, I was playing I was a guitar player at that time, you know.  And I could play the [HM] B.B. King stuff just as well as the funkadelic stuff, you know.  And so I had a vast variety of music I could play.  So, you know, I could play with this band and then I can go over here and play a little bit with the blues guys a little bit.  So I could do a little bit of all of it.
Speaker 1: Now someone said that a lot of it, well a lot of funk riffs and rock'n roll riffs come out of blues anyway.
Speaker 2: Right, right it does (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Gospel music.
Speaker 2: It actually does, I mean the fingering, riffs, like you said, they're basically the same, you just voice it a little bit different and you got it.
Story_ID: 158138
Speaker 1: Okay. Now some of the Chattanooga [Tennessee]--we were talking earlier about some of the people that came out of Chattanooga.  And, you know, there're other famous people that come out of Chattanooga. You mentioned Samuel Jackson, Reggie White the football player (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Usher the musician a popular young musician.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But two of the original [The] Impressions, you know, were from Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Right, right that's [HM] Sam [Samuel] Gooden and [HM] Fred Cash.
Speaker 1: Now did you did, you know, much about them when you were in high school [Howard High School, later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Other than their music that's--that's basically all I, I knew of them.  I didn't, I didn't actually know that they were living in the same neighborhood.  Or lived in the same neighborhood I lived in at that time 'cause they were living in Chicago [Illinois] at that time, but they were raised in Park City [ph.] just where I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and you--yeah I think when you said it was Sam Gooden's sister went to church with you, yeah.  Later on ended up in church with the right?
Speaker 2: No, she was a member of another church we use the go to her church to do programs.  And my dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] and my sisters and all of us we used to go to her church.  And she introduced, in fact, she told Sam about me when they were looking for someone to, to fill that position and so Sam gave me a call because of her.
Story_ID: 158139
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you played with in those days?
Speaker 2: They called him Ed Owens and the Ed Owens Express Band that was a local band basically here. I played with our high school [Howard High School, later The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee] band came out and became the swing band.  Start doing things in, you know, clubs and, you know, specials social functions and things like that.  Doing a lot of solo stuff as well I was doing, you know, little one, you know, hour gigs stuff like that.  I would play a little, little things by myself.  So, you know, it's just kind of interesting just--I think the pay is what really sparked me 'cause I was getting paid for it.  I wasn't getting paid when I was playing (laughter) in church.  So I was getting paid to play for these guys (laughter) so, you know, it's took my interests to, to them very much so.
Speaker 1: In fact, you know, now days the church choir directors and musical directors get paid, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, very well, very well.
Speaker 1: A pretty good wage, you know, if they could find the right situation, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 158140
Speaker 1: You had--had you been asked to become the music director of church?
Speaker 2: No, I was just playing--I was singing in choir and playing bass guitar for the choir.  And that was it, you know, I was lead vocal but that was it wasn't getting paid for it just showing up every Sunday so every rehearsal and, and playing.
Speaker 1: At, at the same church?
Speaker 2: Same church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at Fellowship.
Speaker 2: No, no at that time it was at First Baptist Church of Bozentown.
Speaker 1: First Baptist Church now is this the church that you're still associated with?
Speaker 2: No, naw the church I'm--I'm with another church at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you moved to First Baptist Church about what year?   When did you start?
Speaker 2: I was in, I was in middle school so it had to be, you know, in the, I guess early '60s [1960s] or somewhere in there middle '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what did you--are there any good stories from those early days that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, for, I mean, I can remember at First Baptist when I was playing there, singing and playing.  And everybody in town wanted to come to that church to hear me.  You know, it was like they were coming because they heard about this guy who was playing.  I was being--I was able to play guitar, sing and dance and all of that.  And they was like, you know, that was like a new thing.  You know, people could play and sing but, you know, I was so emotional with it.  You know, and I would just, you know, I would break it down.  I would, you know, the people would come and see it and so every Sunday they would go, "Man that guy is bad man he gone be something one day," you know.  And so that was kind of exciting, you know.  You know, it can give you a big head if you let it.  But I just enjoyed playing so much I guess I just threw myself into what I was doing.
Story_ID: 158141
Speaker 1: Did you make most of your money playing music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, secular music otherwise, outside of the church?
Speaker 2: Outside of the church, exactly that's right.  I could make, you know, $100 a night.  That was good for me.
Speaker 1: That's not bad for those days I guess (unclear) we talking about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right I mean.
Speaker 1: You know, mid '70s [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or '80s [1980s] I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's, yeah that's true.  It was good.
Speaker 1: Now when were you first recorded?
Speaker 2: I recorded with a group I had called the Ambassadors of Christ.  And I think that was in 1980.  That was the first group I recorded with.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know there's a denomination called Ambassadors for Christ?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  No I didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: To--I don't know if you know that.
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Chicago [Illinois] and Indiana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know here in Chicago and Indiana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ambassadors for Christ right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that was the name of your group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you recorded an album.
Speaker 2: I recorded an album with them, that was the first group.  I wrote all the songs, arranged all the music and that was the first time I really got a chance to do the music that I've, I've written.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was, was it picked up by a big label or a local label?
Speaker 2: No it was just a local label just a local label.  I had one label in Muscle Sholes, Alabama was interested but we, we did--we couldn't get it to land a deal so I just did it myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did it, how did it work did it increase your profile?
Speaker 2: Oh of course, of course I wind up going all over once they finally got it on the radio they were playing on the radio.  And, and people loved some of the songs that were on it so I was really moved on it.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite song on that album?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'Don't Give Up' ['Please (Don't Give Up On Your Dreams)']
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Don't Give Up,' that was the title cut.  So, of course, 'Don't give Up' was the real stickler everybody loved that song.
Speaker 1: Well can you hum a little bit of it for us tis a little bit.
Speaker 2: (Singing) Don't give up your help is on it's way.  God has his people praying for you today.  It's kind of something I love about that song.  It was just really touching for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's reminiscent. I'm not just making this connection 'cause you're, you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a member of The Impressions right now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, I mean thematically, it seems it falls in place with the kind of music that Curtis Mayfield wrote for The Impressions, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'We're a Winner.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Keep on Pushing,' you know, 'Don't Give Up.'
Story_ID: 158142
Speaker 1: Well give us some of the other highlights of your career as you, you know--you were saying off-camera that you would always wanted to stay here.  You wanted to stay in Chattanooga [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And people are urging you to get out of Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Right, you know, the first year I went to [HM] Bobby Jones show.  I sang on Bobby Jones' show ['Bobby Jones Gospel'] and I was just amazed at the response that I got from that particular show.  And everybody that watched it talked about how they was moved and how well I handled myself on national television the way that I did.  And they was always saying, "But you gotta leave here Willie if you gonna ever, you know, go any further than you are going right now.  Because there's just no outlet's here in Chattanooga, you know, I mean, who's gonna see you here.  You gotta get out there," and, of course, you know, that was enticing because you know, if you young and you feel like you have something to offer then you gotta get somewhere or go somewhere where, where you think it'll be happening for you.  And but something always within me would tell me that's not so, you know.  You don't have to take off and run, because I love my family, I loved being here.  I, I you know, I got a vast amount of people that really care about me here in Chattanooga.  So, and I like I told you earlier I lived in Atlanta [Georgia], I lived in Lousiville, Kentucky.  But somehow God always brought me back to Chattanooga.  And I made up in my mind that if God has something for me, I don't have to run anywhere to get it because he knows where I am.
Story_ID: 158143
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were talking about the [HM] Bobby Jones' gospel show ['Bobby Jones Gospel'], I didn't have the mic on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  And that's like a nationally syndicated gospel show shown around the country--
Speaker 1: Right. Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: We were talking about sometimes you taped in Chicago [Illinois], sometimes you taped in other cities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Nashville [Tennessee] and they taped it in Las Vegas [Nevada].  So he goes a little bit of everywhere.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1983 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When you worked with Bobby Jones.
Speaker 1: Right exactly.
Speaker 2: Were you--did you do a lot of those shows or did you just do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: I did two, I did one with the Ambassadors of Christ, and then I came back and did one solo by myself.  And I think that's the one I got really a lot of raves on because of handling the stage the way I did by myself and so from that point on the things started going uphill for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So meaning that they got better right?
Speaker 1: Yes, right things got better.
Speaker 2: Right, well some people says it going uphill means you have to struggle harder.
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no, no (laughter) I meant everything really got a little bit better because people begin to call me.  They saw me on there and they, they complemented me very well for it.
Speaker 2: Okay, but do you--were you still basically based here in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Still, still basically here in Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you are able to travel more than?
Speaker 1: Yes, able to travel more I would out on the weekends and, and come back in and I still had a job.  Working five days a week and I take off on Saturdays and Sunday.
Speaker 2: Now there--did, did you make any more albums--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: During this period?
Speaker 1: I made, I made since then I've made four other albums.  Some of those albums were with some kids' albums, and also of myself.
Story_ID: 158144
Speaker 1: Okay.  So don't let me get ahead now as we get--approach the '90s [1990], I mean, when did you start the--in fact, you changed churches too, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At a certain point, but when did you change churches?
Speaker 2: I changed churches a couple of times because I was asked to become minister of music at different churches.  I left, of course, First Baptist [Church of Bozentown] and went to a church called Church of the First Born.  As the minister of music at Church of the Fist Born.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was in '85 [1985] about '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay, Church of the First Born 1985.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985] and then from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What came next?
Speaker 2: I stayed there for about four or five years. And then I was asked to become minister of music for a bigger church which was Friendship Community Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, not the same as the other church.
Speaker 2: No, no the other one was Greater Friendship [Missionary Baptist Church], yes.
Speaker 1: About, about what year was this?
Speaker 2: That was about '89 [1989], '88 [1988], '89 [1989] somewhere in there I stayed there about four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and then where did you go?
Speaker 2: Then from there that's when I was asked to become the minister of music for Bethlehem Community Church [later, Bethlehem-Wiley United Methodist Church].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Full time, I was never full time until I went to Bethlehem Community.
Speaker 1: Now Bethlehem you were saying before we started was a historic church here in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now it is now we merged with Bethlehem, and Wiley United Methodist Church merged together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where we are now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the historic church was Wiley?
Speaker 2: Wiley, right.
Speaker 1: W-I-L-A (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: W-I-L-E-Y Wiley Memorial--is it Wiley let me see.  I know it's Wiley I --mean before it became Bethlehem-Wiley, it was just Wiley United Methodist Church. That's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now it's Bethlehem-Wiley?
Speaker 2: Now it's Bethlehem-Wiley United Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 158145
Speaker 1: Okay and what was the history of Wiley [United Methodist Church, Chattanooga, Tennessee] you were giving us some story about it, but, before?
Speaker 2: --Well, in fact, the city of Chattanooga [Tennessee] was named in Wiley United Methodist Church, of course, back then downtown was a total different place.  But I mean, they got some old pictures that show where Wiley sat.  And, and it--and the way they've revitalized a lot of the building.  But that's where Chattanooga was actually named in that church they met in that church and named it.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about what Chattanooga mean?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah well again with the choo-choo city (laughter) it is the key point of Chattanooga.  And I'm sure that's because of the railroad the Underground Railroad as well.  That's as far as I can recall I'm sure they had some deeper thing that probably I don't know about but I would relate it to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I just asked you 'cause you might know.  Not that you don't know, a lot of people don't know what these names in these city, cities mean Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Oh, Chattanooga is a sister--oh God probably if you hadn't asked me I could have remembered it.  But Germany sister city--I can't think of it just let's go past that one 'cause I can't even think of it I would be, I would be saying the wrong thing.
Speaker 1: But the name itself is an Indian name.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a Indian name but I'm thinking about something about Germany.
Speaker 1: Oh it's a sister city in Germany?
Speaker 2: Yeah something of that nature.  I hear you trying--I'm glad that--I'm glad you can blurt it out go head (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA) It's a point come into a rock--a rock coming to a point that's what Chattanooga means.
Speaker 1: A rock coming to a point.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA) And Hamburg, Germany [sic, Hamm, Germany and Wolfsburg, Germany] is the sister city of Germany.
Speaker 1: Sister city in Germany okay, rock to the point but a sister city of Germany.
Speaker 2: Hamburg she said?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA) Hamburg Germany.
Speaker 2: Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay I knew it was something about Germany.  I just couldn't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, and all right, so the city was named Wiley church I guess back in the back of the nineteenth century I guess?
Speaker 2: It had to be I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now you said it was also like a stop on the Underground Railroad?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: For slaves trying to escape, you know--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Slavery to freedom.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Before the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158146
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--you've been minister in music in at Wiley [Bethlehem-Wiley United Methodist Church, Chattanooga, Tennessee]] since, since what year?
Speaker 2: Well we just merged about two years ago but at Bethlehem (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, that's been about seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so go back to 1998?
Speaker 2: Yes somewhere around 1998 or maybe yeah 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now you are the director of mass youth choir right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now tell us about the Bethlehem-Wiley United Methodist Church Mass Choir [sic, Bethlehem Center Mass Choir]?
Speaker 2: Yes that choir was started out of a summer academy program that we had there to at the Bethlehem Center [Chattanooga, Tennessee].  And I was, of course, the music director and so after that we had about during that particular year we had about 300 maybe fifty kids maybe 325 kids actually in the whole entire programs.  But every one of those kids had to go through the music program.  And the executive director saw how well things was going, and he said, "Well when this program is over would you consider starting a youth choir?"  And I said well yeah we can give it a shot.  We can see exactly--so we had about actually we had about eighty or some odd kids to join up for the choir.  But we wind up having close to about seventy kids total in that choir.  Where myself, my wife, and another young lady actually took the choir and began to develop it to its degree of what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you start the choir about what year was that?
Speaker 2: That had to be in it must've been around '98 [1998], '97 [1997], '98 [1998] somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, '97 [1997], or '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in--has the choir ever recorded?
Speaker 2: Yes the choir has recorded in fact they've recorded three projects three different ones.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a highlight to this I mean, to the choir's existence to this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the--I would consider one of the biggest highlights of the choir is having an opportunity to, to sing before Bishop Desmond Tutu.  They sang on stage with Shania Twain when she came she needed a choir to sing a song backup, so we pick some kids out of the choir to sing backup.  So these kids sang at the capital here in Tennessee and Nashville [Tennessee] and just several places, conferences here in town.  And just around to different churches and different venues.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you spend, you spend like how much of your time dealing with the mass choir you think?
Speaker 2: Well I was spending probably maybe two, three days a week with them that's including rehearsals and maybe taking them out.  And I think the first year we probably taken them out on about seventy engagements, of course, we had to back up on that when we first started because we were taking these kids so much.  Some of the parents was kind of worried about how much we go out with them and so forth but we kind of backed off that not do as much.
Speaker 1: Okay, you had seventy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Kids or you need at least two buses I don't know--
Speaker 2: Well we use to have parents that would drive. We would get one bus that would hold about--because we're a non-profit organization.  We had to, you know, make sure that where ever we go that they would pay for the buses when brought the kids.  And sometimes we wouldn't take them all sometimes we would have fifty.  Sometimes we would, you know, sixty sometimes we would have forty.  So it was according to how many could go that particular day of, of the program.  And then again we had some volunteer parents that would drive some as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you tour mostly the South or?
Speaker 2: Yes, mostly the South every now and then we would go North Carolina, places like that, but it would be basically here in the South area.
Story_ID: 158147
Speaker 1: Well I guess from being there at the Bethlehem Center [Chattanooga, Tennessee] this is where even the studio--that was one reason.  I wanted to start the studio here because I wanted to record the kids.  I think my inspiration to them and what I wanted to get out of them is that you can do some of the same things that you see the Kirk Franklins doing.  The Yolanda Adams doing, because we have some, some kids that could sing.  I mean really had nice voices and strong voices and we didn't want them to miss out on the opportunity.  And that was a, kind of a fear for them to actually do well.  And so when they realized that they could record and heard themselves.  In fact, they were the first group of kids that ever recorded downtown at the [Creative] Discovery Museum.  So that was a, a history in the making for them because nobody had ever did that before.  So to me that's what all of this, this stuff was all about the studio and, and everything that was because of the kids.  And from that point then it generated into helping other people as well.  So to me that is the highlight of that as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158148
Speaker 1: Alright, now. Well, once again now, should we talk about The Impressions now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's go to The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as stated earlier you were--your name was referred to Sam [HM Samuel] Gooden by his sister--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that attended a neighboring church--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and knew about you.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So what happened did--can you remember how you felt when you first heard from them?
Speaker 2: Yes I can very much so I said I said to my wife I say I wonder why they calling me I'm not interested in that (laughter).  I really did I mean, I was doing very well in the gospel, and I'd just released a new project of my own.  And, and that's all I was concentrating on when I get a call from Sam and said that they'd like to talk to me about, you know, getting with them.  And I told my wife I'm like I'm not interested in that.  Because growing up, I was so involved in the church I guess, and I'd made up in my mind that that's all I was gonna do.  I wasn't gonna do anything else.  So at that time I just wasn't interested in anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay now were you an [The] Impressions fan when you were growing up or, or was it a generation ahead of you sort of?
Speaker 2: No I, I listen to The Impressions music, in fact, I told Sam and [HM] Fred [Cash] that same story.  I could remember coming home from--I was in middle school walking home I came by my house aunt's house, and my cousin was playing some of The Impressions music.  And he knew how much I loved to sing and I would go to the door and listen.  And he said to me he said if you keep up the work you're doing and with your singing one day you might become one of these Impressions.  I never in one million years dreamed that this would happen he's dead and gone now.  But he must have been a prophet 'cause he prophesized that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so they called you up, and you weren't interested right? (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No I really wasn't interested.
Speaker 1: Not cause you don't like them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But because you, you were already busy?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And he called and said they were going to London [England] to tour with Eric Clapton.  And they needed a lead vocalist they need somebody.  And, and I really still wasn't enthused, you know, it was like, you know, most people I know would.  You know, and, and that's not to say that, you know, I didn't care.  But I just wasn't--but and I asked, and I told him I said let me get back with you 'cause they want to come over and meet with me.  And I wanted to talk to my pastor, talk to my dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.]. To you know, to get some kind of opinion or get some kind of wisdom from them of what they thought and that's what led to where I am today.
Story_ID: 158149
Speaker 1: Okay, so you agreed to give it [joining The Impressions] a try?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so your first job was to go to London [England] with--?
Speaker 2: Well, they had one other show before they went to London. I did one show with them before we took off to London.  We did a show in Macon, Georgia, and that was the first show that I ever did with The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy doing the show or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How was it?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was a good show I enjoyed it.  I mean, again like that I thought it was one time or so and maybe go over here, and that's it.  You know, that's what I, I figured they needed somebody to fill in because somebody wasn't there.  I didn't know what was going on, I didn't know any business of the group.  So, I just thought, well maybe they need somebody to fill in, and I was gonna go and come back home and that was it.
Story_ID: 158150
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the condition of the group [The Impressions] when you were called? I mean, were you aware that they only had two members left, I mean--?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't aware. In fact, they had four members at the time they called me.  But somebody evidently did not meet the bill or fit the bill, or something happened I don't know so I didn't know what was going on with the group.
Speaker 1: At least for the record I guess so the original, I mean, The Impressions the two original (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Members were still with the group right now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Started out here in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950] right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sam Gooden [HM Samuel Gooden] and, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: [HM] Fred cash (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Fred, Fred Cash right.  They were a couple of brothers of the--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Brooks brothers [Richard and Arthur Brooks].
Speaker 1: Brooks brothers right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Went to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is around 1956?
Speaker 2: Yeah somewhere around '55 [1955] '56 [1956] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], '56 [1956].  And there they somehow met [HM] Jerry Butler and Curtis Mayfield?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the Brooks brothers left the group (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Just as they were recording for your 'Your Precious Love (laughter).'
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah do you ever talk to the Brooks brothers?
Speaker 2: No, I've never one on one had a conversation with any of the Brooks, not at all.
Speaker 1: Now I'm sure that we're gonna interview Fred Cash.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sam Gooden later on this week I mean tomorrow 'cause they'll probably have a story on them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (unclear).  But I think it was '58 [1958] 'Your Precious Love' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Came out.
Speaker 1: 'Your Precious Love' comes out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Jerry Butler becomes a single act.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right after that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then its, its Curtis Mayfield, Sam Gooden, and Fred Cash.
Speaker 2: Fred Cash right.  I think Jimmy [ph.] was with the group about six months.
Speaker 1: But the group was fluctuating between four, three and four members (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Over the years.
Speaker 2: Over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay so when you went on the road with them were there for you or?
Speaker 2: It was four, it was four of us on the road.
Speaker 1: So who was the other member?
Speaker 2: Smokey Hampton [Vandy "Smokey" Hampton], yes Smokey was with them at the time.  Of course, Smokey is gone now but.
Speaker 1: Now Smokey Hampton didn't he sing lead for another group at one time, another group that he recorded on?
Speaker 2: I think he was with the Chi-Lites at one time.
Speaker 1: I think you're right.
Speaker 2: He was with the Chi-Lites.
Speaker 1: Right.  I guess they called him Smokey because he could hit those high notes.
Speaker 2: Right exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Like [HM] Smokey Robinson.
Speaker 2: Right, of course.
Story_ID: 158151
Speaker 1: So do--I was asking like, were you thrilled to be out there, being an Impression? After you did it, I mean all or it just okay (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, it was good. I mean, I cannot see it and say that it wasn't a great high to, you know, that you've achieved something of this caliber and then to go on a road with Eric Clapton I mean, man, I mean, how high can you get, you know.  But it wasn't where I felt like I had arrived because again I had to do this music just like Curtis [Mayfield], you know.  I had to make sure that I had the contents that Curtis did with it and so, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So did you have to try to sound like Curtis Mayfield?
Speaker 2: I thought I did.  At first I did, and I think I was trying to hard to sound like Curtis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know (laughter).
Speaker 1: I have to ask you this can you, can you give us your impression of Curtis Mayfield.  Just briefly, you know, just to see how it sounds.
Speaker 2: (Singing) You're prettier than all the world, and I'm so proud I'm so proud I'm so proud of you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So and I was concentrating really, you know, those extra little ways he would say words.  And then they finally pulled me over to the side because they, they felt like I wasn't being who I was they said, "you know, Curtis, you know.  We want to sound like the record.  We want to sound like what we do but Willie, you got a little bit more," because they had heard me on television, Sam [HM Samuel Gooden] had said, "Man this guy's strong he's got a, you know, he's really got one of them church strong voices," and I could do both strong and ease up and do some highs as well so.
Speaker 1: So how would you sing that same piece are as yourself?  Would you I mean from what you.
Speaker 2: Well I would probably give a (Singing), You're prettier than all, you know, I would give it a little bit more gut.  Instead of, you know, easing up on it 'cause Curtis had a really light, light voice even though they, you know, they would bump his mic up.  And I have a stronger voice, you know, so I had to hold back, and it felt like I was just not being me until I went I did one of the songs with Eric [Clapton] and them and I really got loose, and Eric was like, "Wow man that guy's got a strong voice."  And so, you know, and the guys said, "hey man you need to be your self, man just be who you are."  And that and from that point that's, that's where I took it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when you when you sing those parts on the road.  Those Curtis Mayfield parts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do people are people--now this could be a two-sided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Blade, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, you said Curtis Mayfield I'm thinking a lot of people would agree that the strongest voice (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he has a voice that identified with The Impressions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: [HM] Jerry Butler had a voice that was really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A really fantastic voice.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did you get critical criticized when people say all you don't sound like him or use sound your best, you know, (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: But they don't like the idea that you sing better than Eric you have a stronger voice or--
Speaker 2: I had people to tell me you fit right in with these guys.  I mean, of course, no one will ever say, you know, man you're better than Curtis man.  You know, I, I don't think anybody would say that but to say that they haven't lost a beat tell me that you're footing the bill.  You doing a great-I've had Jerry Butler to tell me you, "You're the one they needed."  I mean, of course, and I'm not slighting Smokey [Vandy "Smokey" Hampton] or the other guys that they've had in the past.  But to hear them give me those kind of comments--like Russell Thompkins of the Stylistics told me the same thing, and just several people on the road.  And I guess these guys have been out there long enough know what The Impressions sounds like and to hear me singing that part saying you are the man that they needed.  And even [HM] Fred [Cash] and Sam said the same thing said we prayed for a guy like you, you know.  So what that mean to some people or to others.  I mean, like you said, it's a two-edge sword. Some people might say, well I like that.  Some may say they don't, but as long as Fred and Sam feel like I'm footing the bill, then I'm okay with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158152
Speaker 1: How much--how often do you tour with The Impressions?  And, you know, what's the schedule like for The Impressions, what kind of? I know they don't like-they're not you know, perform full-time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --anymore, I think.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm with them every time they go out.  We may do twice a month. They're sometimes busier than others, sometimes lower than others.  But we're here rehearsing every week regardless to whether we have a show or not so we could be prepared for whatever comes up.  But the guys are still on top of their game.  They're very much on top of their game.  So, I credit a lot because of their rehearsals and their time that they put in on their voices. These guys have gotten up in age, but they sound good.  Sound really good.
Story_ID: 158153
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so what are some of the highlights of your touring with The Impressions?
Speaker 2: Being able to go to some of the awards programs and shows.  And being honored being inducted with them and a couple of the awards show that we've been on like the Beach Music Awards I mean I was inducted into the Hall of Fame with them [The Impressions].  I was inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame with them, God there's another one that I was inducted.  And then doing this [The] HistoryMakers, you know, being a part of The HistoryMakers with them.  God, what more, what more could you ask for?
Story_ID: 158154
Speaker 1: Do you ever talk to any of the other new singers with the old groups like Dennis Edwards of the Temptations or Ollie Woodson?  Or, you know, people that came along that were actually really good, but weren't part of the original group--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you ever compare notes with them?
Speaker 2: Well no I haven't had to yet except for the guy with the O'Jays.  I had a small time with him this past year we went to The Vocal Group Hall of Fame.  And the--I mean, he seems to be a very humble young man and just glad that he got the opportunity to be with them.  And I'm wondering, you know, I seem to be real blessed to be a young guy.  I've been with the guys as, as the time that I've been with them and being inducted.  And I know a lot of these guys have not been inducted into these Hall of fames or [The] HistoryMakers.  So I hope that, you know, this will be an example for some of them because I think any time you're on a team you should be considered as well a part of that team.  Basketball players whether you play one game or two games if they win the championship, everybody gets the ring, you know, so I hope this is a inspiration to those guys.
Story_ID: 158155
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have a favorite Impressions song?
Speaker 2: Of course, of course, who doesn't? 'People get Ready.' 'People get Ready' is the song we end with every show.  And it gives me a chance to go to church.
Speaker 1: Now tell, tell me do you have a chance to play your guitar play in the show?
Speaker 2: Naw, I never played the guitar because we have a band and one day I played the keyboards though I played keyboards as well.  But we did a show here in Chattanooga [Tennessee] and called [The] Riverbend festival.  And we did the Lionel Richie song at the end 'Jesus is Love' and so I played that.  And we--I had girls come in and Impressions and we did that song, so that's the only time I've got a chance to actually play on stage.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you remember but I saw, I only saw Curtis Mayfield with The Impressions once live when I was, I was around sixteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 1966, he played the guitar.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [HM] Jerry Butler and [HM] Fred Cash and [HM] Sam [Samuel] Gooden on stage at Dayton [Ohio] of all places (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He would often play, play the guitar.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Dong, dong, (singing)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He'd start the song off to.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I got a feeling if I did that people might think I was really trying to take so Curtis place so I (laughter), you know.  'Cause I could go out on the stage and actually play the guitar 'cause I know these songs, and I could play them.  But I didn't wanna look, you know, he's a legend let's leave him the legend.  And let me just do what I do but I, I can actually play the songs.
Speaker 1: Well I know I, I believe you can.  You know, it's just--yeah I kinda would like to see you do it but, you know, it's just a double edge sword.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Trying to be too much like him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People think you're playing as good or not as good some people think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah not as good and trying to downplay somebody and it's not about that.  It's music--Curtis was a fantastic genius at what he did, and I'd like to leave it that way.  If I did anything which I am doing now with The Impressions, new stuff, new projects that's gonna come out, then it'll be Willie Kitchens and what he does with The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Alright. Did you ever get a chance to meet Curtis Mayfield?
Speaker 2: Never got a chance to meet him personally. Never.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158156
Speaker 1: Of your own songs, what's your favorite song?
Speaker 2: 'Just One Look.' One I've written with The Impressions.
Speaker 1: How does it go?
Speaker 2: Kind of like, (singing) "I cannot believe my eyes when I saw you walk by because I was always taught to believe that angels could fly."  You know, kind of and that then they come in doing background with me.  So I'm just trying to create a new vibe for 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158157
Speaker 1: Now do you have a certain musical philosophy?
Speaker 2: No, because I'm, I guess because I'm wide across the spectrum of the gospel music, jazzy, bluesy type.  The way I write my music and try to produce it, I don't know it just comes out.  And I have no formula no particular--that could be bad, could be good.  But, you know, that's just the way I, I learned to do it, you know.  So, I guess I have to let the people be the judge of that, but [HM] Fred [Cash] and Sam [HM Samuel Gooden] seem, seems to love it really well.  And hopefully, this new Christmas project I did all the arrangement of the music.  In fact, put all the music together, and everybody seems to like it and hopefully Warner Brothers [Warner Bros.] will come out with it.
Story_ID: 158158
Speaker 1: So what advice would you give to aspiring young musicians and singers today?
Speaker 2: To actually become musicians, become singers. Don't get off into just sampling music or doing all the tricks with the stuff actually learn the, the trade.  The tricks of what you need to do, and that's rehearsing and working hard and diligently on your gift and craft and it'll make room for you.
Story_ID: 158159
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Probably as it has been for, for years that we learn to work together.  Learned to keep our neighborhoods our communities our children educated.  Really revitalizing your community seeing what you can do to help your neighbors.  To me just work at that that's the key reaching out and helping one another where we're weak finding out where the strong points are.  Let's go to em and be willing to, to share, to share your knowledge and your experience with one another.  I think that'll be a great help to, to any of us.
Story_ID: 158160
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back at everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently today?
Speaker 2: Probably finish college I probably wanna do that not just for the music sake but for my own self-gratification so that I can be more inspiring to other kids in the educational realm.  I can't think of anything else I'd rather do.  Being more obedient to I guess some things I was disobedient to God and trying to do things on my own.  I probably would take another look at that but other than that, I'm pretty much satisfied with what God has brought me thus far.
Story_ID: 158161
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, likewise when you look back at, at your life to this point what would you see at this point as being your legacy?
Speaker 2: Being faithful, having integrity and that my kids my grandkids can see that, that, you know, I try to leave a good report behind me.  Being a good father, a grandfather, good husband, good son all of that.  That they can see the respect that I have for other people.  Just to see my integrity hopefully that is much more than any money or any fame or any recording they could ever see of me.  But just to know me, to spend the time with me to see exactly how I am and what, what's of value to me.
Story_ID: 158162
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your parents get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Yes mother--my momma [Lena Pearl Wise] and dad [Willie Kitchens, Sr.] is alive today my dad tell me all the time son I'm so, so glad to see you doing what you doing and you exceeded me.  You know, that's what we all want for our children to do things greater than we did.  And now that he, he see's me he's so proud I mean me and my daddy is just like this.  And every time I get with him and every now and then we still sing songs together.  He'll, come up here and we'll go to church and we'll sing together.  But that I think it's probably the greatest thing with him and my mother seeing me doing what I'm doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about your own family, you know, you've got ten grandchildren right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I know that you?  You've been married twice I guess, right?
Speaker 2: No, I've been married three times, and I guess, you know, that could've been a downfall for me in a lot of people eyes.  And I've had people to tell me, you know, "you're, you know, you'll never be able to do anything. You're never be able to make it."  I'm so glad it was their, their words and not God's words because I, I could have been down through there.  'Cause I've had some tough times in my life, but God brought me back around.  But I guess with my wife Barbara who has stuck by me.  And really understand my love for what I do in the ministry as well as the music I do with [The] Impressions and my church my pastor everybody has just been good to me.  My children very supportive my grandchildren I love being around my grandchildren.  I mean that's my highlight I really do I'll leave here, and I'll just take off and go over there and spend some time with them.  And so to me to get to know my grandchildren is right now probably one of the most important things for me and my wife because we love to hang out with our grandkids.  So, I have two I have three sons and two daughters two birth children and two by my wife that had children.  And so we got five kids totally, and ten grandkids and we're having us a ball.
Story_ID: 158163
Speaker 1: Being a writer, a musician and all the things I think that Curtis [Mayfield] was and has been for The Impressions, I feel like I have the same qualities to give to them.  I don't think they are over the hill yet.  I think they still have good time left in their lives and in their, their talents, gifts.  And I just want to give them all I got not for my own self-name to be put in lights.  I just really believe because they have a gospel overtone that's what brought me to them.  And I wanna achieve some of the things that they didn't get a chance to do like do a gospel album do this Christmas album.  Do some things that I know that they have the, the gift and talents to do but never got a chance to do.  So I'm trying to achieve some things that I think could still go into their repertoire of, of talent, gifts, and music.  So, to me it's not about me and, I, I've said this to Fred [HM Fred Cash] and Sam [HM Samuel Gooden].  I said if I can't be a help to The Impressions then I don't need to be with you.  You need to find somebody that can help you or somebody that can give something to you.  And if I can't do that then it's time for me to move on so I wanna just be known that it's not for me to go up in lights.  It's really because I appreciate these guys I appreciate the music Curtis wrote.  I appreciate the attitudes.  These guys are some of the fantastic guys you could ever wanna be with to travel with too, to sit down and talk to and hear the stories about what has happened in their lives.  How they got to where they are.  And, you know, it's inspiring to me I'm like man it's never too late, you know, it's never too late.  They have encouraged me I hope I've done something to encourage or to be a part of them, but they having encouraged me.  If I'm sixty, seventy years old, I wanna still be doing what I'm going today.  So and they have proved it you can do it if you do what you supposed to do get your rest.  You know, don't lay out late at night just, you know, because fame calls you to go out to those things.  He said, Get your rest and get yourself together and you can stay out here."  So, that's something I just want to cover and make sure that these guys understand and know that I love them, and I appreciate them giving me the opportunity to work with them.
Story_ID: 158164
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a man that loved God, loved people, loved his family and give of himself.  Just give of myself too, to people.  I don't know if it's music. I don't think its music, it's not just music, it's really just of myself, just giving of myself. That's all I that's all I know.
Story_ID: 158165
Speaker 1: This is myself, Willie Kitchens, this picture was taken in 1975 at a friend's house.
Speaker 2: Okay, next slide.
Speaker 1: You were about how old then?
Speaker 2: I was nineteen.  This is a picture of me, my wife, Sam [HM Samuel Gooden], Curtis Mayfield's wife and Fred's wife, [HM] Fred Cash's wife and some friends.  Also David Sanchez who played guitar on tour with us with Eric Clapton this is after one of the concerts. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 1: Okay, great, nice. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my wife and a volunteer Herman Frader [ph.] we took the kids to Gatlinburg [Tennessee] to sing at a convention center for the United Methodists.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was in 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay next. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the choir that I take around the Youth Mass Choir of the Bethlehem Center [Chattanooga, Tennessee] we were singing in Lake Junaluska, North Carolina at a conference, and this was in 2000.
Speaker 1: Right, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at a rehearsal teaching the kids getting them ready for an upcoming engagement this was taken in 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay, next okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, Fred and Sam and [HM] Eddie Thomas.  He was visiting here in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and he's here at the studio this was in 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself my mother [Lena Pearl Wise] in the red and my aunt Susie, my mother, is Lena Wise, and this picture was taken in 2002.
Speaker 1: Great next.  Okay, this gone look odd 'cause I'm gone lay this down like this but-- [Off-camera discussion]
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother and grandfather they were in Sandersville, Georgia way before I was born.  This is a picture of them sitting in front of their house at the time.  [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 1: Okay, next. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my wife Barbara we're sitting at the keyboard at church.  Getting ready for Sunday morning worship service this was taken in 2004.
Speaker 1: Very good next and this one.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my grandsons, Marcus and Richie Kitchens [ph.] at their birthday party this was taken in 2001.
Speaker 1: Next, okay.  Desmond Tutu here.  [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Bishop Desmond Tutu given high five to the kids that we take out to sing.  The Bethlehem Center choir at a banquet that they had.  And this was taken in 2000, and I mean 1999, 1999 I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: May.
Speaker 2: May, of 1999. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 1: Great Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I'm so glad to have internet processes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know I have to do a lot.
Speaker 1: Pictures and music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm telling you I have to do a lot on these people.  This is a picture of The Impressions me, Sam, Fred, and Smokey [Vandy "Smokey" Hampton].  We were doing the PBS special this was taken in 2002.  [Off-camera discussion].  This is a picture of me and my father Willie Kitchens, Sr.  We were playing on a Sunday morning at Bethlehem Community Church [later Bethlehem-Wiley United Methodist Church], he is a guitar player, and I'm playing the base this was taken in 2003. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 1: Okay, next. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of The Impressions a photo that we sent out when we are taking engagements through Paradise Artists this picture was taken in 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, next. [Off-camera discussion]
Speaker 2: This is another picture of The Impressions taking another pose for another photo for our sending out through Paradise Artists it was taken in 2004.
Speaker 1: Next, [Off-camera discussion] this the last one its a big one okay. [Off-camera discussion].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the group the Ambassadors of Christ a group that I started in 1985.  The guys are now all still singing. [Off-camera discussion].  Half of those guys are preachers now.
Speaker 1: Are they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the little guy sitting he's a pastor of a church.  These guys are pastor of a church.  The guy right here in the glasses is an attorney now.  This guy is singing at--well he's in Tyler, Texas now.  This guy is in North Carolina, so.  Everybody's still doing (unclear)--so it's a blessing.
