Story_ID: 344466
Speaker 1: So I will start, I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  This is Scott Stearn [sic. Scott Stearns], the videographer, and then you know Denise, of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Denise Gines.
Speaker 1: --is observing, and I will start by just having you state your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: Dennis Kimbro [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], D-E-N-N-I-S, K-I-M-B-R-O.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, twenty-nine, fifty [December 29, 1950].
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Jersey City, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: April 12, 19--excuse me, 19, yeah--2006 [sic. April 12, 2006].
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Clark Atlanta University School of Business [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professor here in School of Business.
Story_ID: 344467
Speaker 1: So, I'm going to start with five basic People magazine type questions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --just to get--your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  Probably blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, the islands. If you wanna go from the broad to the narrow, anywhere in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Learn how to say I can.
Story_ID: 344468
Speaker 1: So, let's start with your family tree.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And can you just give me your mother's name and your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother has a birthday coming up.  She's no longer with us.  She made her transaction, her transition.  My mother was born April 22, 1914.
Speaker 1: Her name, your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Mary Elizabeth Anderson [Mary Anderson Kimbro].
Speaker 1: And her place of birth--
Speaker 2: She was born in Baltimore [Maryland], and she and a younger sister, for the most part her parents died when she was very young and my mother was raised by an aunt [Mae Jarrett (ph.)], an aunt and uncle [Paul Jarrett (ph.)] in Kearny, New Jersey, so they were really adopted.   Back then, in terms of African Americans and family structures, you know, we didn't go to orphanages or foster homes, we sort of took care of our own, and that certainly applied to my mother.
Speaker 1: So they took her in and took care of her as if they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Took her in and raised her from a young child.  My mother married when she was in her twenties.  She met my father [Donald Kimbro] when he was coming back from World War II [WWII], and ironically they were coming back, he was coming back.  He was on a train.  They met in Enid, Oklahoma, and why that is somewhat ironic because the next time they had been back to the State of Oklahoma was my college graduation, which was in May 1972, because I finished undergraduate at the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: So, your mother's childhood, does she ever talk to you about what her childhood was like, losing her parents--
Speaker 2: It was rough.  She tasted the recesses of life.  They didn't have much.  I remember during the holidays she would tell me that she and her sister, they would make popcorn, cook popcorn, and they would sew it with needle and thread and use it as an ornament on the Christmas tree, and for Christmas gifts they gave each other fruit, so they really, you know, they really had it hard.  Back then, that was standard fare for many African Americans.  You didn't question it, you just took it in and you just knew you were armed with hope and faith that tomorrow, next day, next week, next year would be better.  So, she shared those experiences with me and my brother and, you know, served me well.  My mother was by far Shawn [Shawn Wilson], the most spiritual individual I ever knew in my life.  With her, anything could be accomplished with hard work and the Bible, and she wasn't so concerned of what was your lot in life and where you are right now as she was concerned with where you gonna be down the road, so--
Speaker 1: So she, your, her parents died when she was thirteen?
Speaker 2: I never knew my maternal grandparents, okay, and barely knew my paternal grandparents [Eleanor Kimbro and David Kimbro].  My mother, she was a nanny.  That's what she did for a living.  She worked for a wealthy family.  She took of wealthy, the children of wealthy whites, particularly in Jersey, Harrison, New Jersey, and she was taking care of the children of this wealthy family in Harrison, New Jersey and they were vacationing, of all places, out in Oklahoma and that's where she met my father coming back.  He was a sergeant in World War II.
Speaker 1: So, did she have the opportunity to go to school at all?
Speaker 2: My mother went to school to seventh grade, but loaded with wisdom.  My mother was armed with a seventh grade education, and here I am, I possess a Ph.D. from one of the top institutions, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], what's Northwestern, number five, number six, number seven in the country, but my mother would correct my English.
Speaker 1: So, how do you think your mother became so wise?  What was it about her past? What did she experience?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, she was an avid reader.  (Laughter) I would tease my mother and say you could always get a job as a copy editor, 'cause my mother would read the newspaper with pad, pen and pad in hand and if she crossed the word, came across a word that she didn't understand, she would circle it and she would look up the meaning, and one thing my mother always did--back then, newspapers would either feature a prayer or a poem and if she came across a poem that she enjoyed she would cut it out and she'd memorize it, and don't you know, Shawn, many of the poems, or several of the poems that I use in my presentation were given to me by my mother.
Speaker 1: So, what was her, it was, she had a sister as well--
Speaker 2: She had a sister, and that was my aunt, and she made her transition.  She passed a couple years ago.  My mother lived to be seventy-eight, and her sister lived to be, I believe, eighty-three or eighty-four.  My mother died of cancer, and that was actually the cause of death for my aunt, so, but she lived a good life and, as a nanny and working for a wealthy family, she would bring me the hand-me-down clothes of the children, the wealthy Jewish family that she worked for, and it was the first time I ever saw the label, Brooks Brothers.  I didn't know what Brooks Brothers was.  What's Brooks Brothers, but my mother told me that these are nice clothes and boy, you need to take care of them as if you went to the store and purchased them yourself, so I was wearing down the, wearing the hand-me-down clothes and I said to myself, I said, one day I'm going to be in a situation where I can go into Brooks Brothers and buy anything that I want.  Sure enough, one day and now I shop at Brooks Brothers (laughter).
Story_ID: 344469
Speaker 1: Although you didn't know your paternal grandparents and your mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro]--
Speaker 2: Maternal.
Speaker 1: Maternal. And your mother knew them vaguely, did she ever speak about them at all, for the thirteen years that you know of?
Speaker 2: No, really, not that much and I can't remember but I did know her aunt, my great aunt and my great uncle, my mother's aunt and uncle that raised my mother and my aunt.  They were originally from Detroit [Michigan].  He was, my great uncle.  He was a self-taught clergy or pastor, and he pastored like a storefront church, and what I remember, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], was going over to his house and he had a study where he would go into the study and he would prepare his sermons or lesson plans and he had a roll top desk and I used to just play with that roll top desk and he had his books behind and things of that nature, and from my earliest years, I loved to read and I remember going in that study and, you know, going through my great uncle's books and people would tell my mother and tell my father [Donald Kimbro], "Man, when I see your son, when I see Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro] he always has a book under his arm, he always has book in his hand, blah-blah-blah." And I guess, even then, were like the early makings of what I would do in life.
Speaker 1: So, what did his wife do, your great aunt?
Speaker 2: For the most part, she was a homemaker.  She raised my mother and my aunt.
Speaker 1: Now why did they leave Detroit to come--
Speaker 2: Well, she was originally from Detroit.
Speaker 1: She was from Detroit, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know how she got from Detroit to Jersey, but he was from New Jersey.  That was my Uncle Paul [Paul Jarrett (ph.)], and my Aunt Mae [Mae Jarrett (ph.)], and their last name was Barry.
Speaker 1: B-A-R-R-Y?
Speaker 2: I mean, not Barry, Jarrett (laughter), J-A-R-R-E-T-T, and I don't know how she got there, but, you know, he worked in the post office full time and so, you know, ironic, I tell my students today, you flip past my generation and I particularly speak to the black males.  When I was growing up, Shawn, when I was growing up, and I'm fifty-five years old, when I was growing up, I never knew a black man out of work.  I mean, now, you travel through Atlanta [Georgia] and you see them, you know, at traffic lights and stop signs, they've got a cup in their hand, you know, knocking on windows, you know, begging for money, loose change, whatever the matter, whatever it may be, but at that time, I never saw a black man out of work.  And I tell them that no matter what you did for a living, everybody had a second job working in the post office at night, and what is so ironic and paradoxical about that statement, back in my father's generation, you know, when I was coming up, there was no cultural diversity.  There wasn't affirmation action, no such thing as equal opportunity.  There were none of those programs, but still never a black man out of work.  I remember growing up and after school would close down and recess for the summer and I would tell my father, I'd say, "Man, dad, I don't know where I'm gonna find a summer job, me and my brother."  And his response, "I don't care if there's only two jobs out there.  You and your brother are gonna get one of them."  So, it's that type of mental mindset.  It's got nothing to do with conservatism.  It's got nothing to do with religious upbringing.  It's got nothing to do with your outlook on life, but it's got everything to do with personal responsibility.  You see, Booker T. Washington said years ago that, "The circumstances that surround a man's or woman's life are not important.  It's how that individual responds is the number one determining factor whether you will fail or whether you will succeed," and that's what we had.  That's what we had in the black community.  I tell my students all the time, when I was growing up there was no such thing as black on black crime.  No such thing.  You go to the store, if you had a car, you could leave the car unlocked.  You go out of your house, you leave the front door unlocked.  No such thing, none.  If you read the newspaper or you turned on the TV and you heard the news and you either read or you saw where a crime had been committed and probably the first thing out of your mouth, "Gee, I hope it wasn't a colored fellow."  That was the first thing out of anyone's mouth.  That was part of the makeup, you know, the black community back then.
Story_ID: 344470
Speaker 1: Where was your father [Donald Kimbro] born and his date of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Ohio.  My father was born April 4, okay, 1916, and I don't know if he was born in Bellaire, Ohio, but he was raised in Bellaire, Ohio.  Bellaire, Ohio, is a little small town in southeastern Ohio, right across the bridge from Wheeling, West Virginia, and his father, his father [David Kimbro] and his mother [Eleanor Kimbro], who I knew, my grandparents on my father's side, my paternal grandparents, my grandfather was a butler and my grandmother was a maid, and they met working for a wealthy white family in North Carolina, and that's how they got married and they moved to Ohio.
Speaker 1: So, did you, do you remember stories about them?  Did they talk about working for this wealthy white family in South Carolina [sic.]?
Speaker 2: A little bit.
Speaker 1: What sort of messages were they instilling in you as a child at this point?  Were they saying anything to you about what their hopes for you were?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, they talked in term of--one of my father's favorite sayings was I missed my, I missed my ship, I missed my boat, but you'll catch yours, or he was saying I was born too soon, in other words, the opportunities, you know, my father would say let me backtrack.  Every Sunday, this is the [U.S.] military coming out in my dad, every Sunday night my father would get out his shoes.  He'd have one pair of shoes or two pair of shoes, every Sunday night, whether they needed polishing or not, he'd polish his shoes.  Every Sunday, set the clock, every Sunday night he would do that, whether they needed shining or not, and he would say things like, "I don't care how much money a man earns or a man doesn't earn, you need to buy one good pair of shoes a year."  He would say things such as, "Shine your shoes, your shoes are the first thing any individual's going to look at, blah-blah-blah," in other words, it's about preparation, it's about neatness, and everything, but besides shining his shoes, he would share with me his personal philosophy in life, and he would say things like, and I would sit cross-legged on the floor in his bedroom, my chin propped up in my hand, watching my dad shine his, a pair or one pair of shoes or his two pair of shoes, and he would say, he'd say, "Son," he said, "one day you're gonna be married and you're gonna have children and you're gonna raise a family," and he would say, "there's only two things a man has got to do.  Number one, a man has got to work and number two, a man has got to take care of his family."  That's all my father wanted to do.  My father-in-law was the same way.  You know, my father-in-law was, what, eighty-four, eighty-five years old and back then, manhood, I mean, all you want to do, number one, you want to work, you want to read your Bible, you want to praise your God, and number two and number three, you want to keep your family together, and it's his personal philosophy, and he would say things like, "At the times, you gotta be prepared son, times like these won't always be tough on the Negro, you gotta be ready.  I don't know when your time is gonna come, but you gotta be ready.  You gotta be prepared. You know, I was born too soon, but you were right on time."  You know, that type of thing.  It's also like, you know, prepping you to run this race.  A lot of self-pride.  I'll never forget, and I shared this with my youngest daughter, ironically, a couple of days ago and I told her, MacKenzie [MacKenzie Kimbro], my youngest, as we were watching TV, me, my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro], and my youngest daughter.  I guess I was about ten or eleven years old, and we were living in New Jersey at the time, and my dad took me to a Yankee baseball game, a New York Yankee [New York Yankees] baseball game.  We didn't have a car so we took public transportation back and there was only one seat left on the bus and, sure enough, my father gave me that seat while he hung on to the strap handle up above me.  Well, a white woman got on the bus and she was about--I don't know--about maybe forty years old.  What do I know about the time?  And I said to her, I said, "Ma'am would you like to sit down?"  I don't know what led me to say it.  I'm ten or eleven years old.  I said, "Ma'am would you like to sit?"  She said, "Oh, yes.  That's so nice," and blah-blah, so I gave up my seat, so now me and my dad, I was hanging on to, I guess, my dad's leg and my dad's arm while he hung on to the strap, taking the bus from New York, New Jersey, and while, the woman says to my father, she says, "Your son is well behaved."  Well, my father didn't say anything until we got home that night, and he told me, he says, "That is the highest compliment," again, going back, one day you're going to have a family of your own.  He said, "Young man," he said, "that's the highest compliment a man could ever be given, to say that his children are well mind, well behaved, well mannered" and I never forgot that, never, never, forty-five years later.  Here I am fifty-five years old.  I can still remember it as if it were yesterday.
Story_ID: 344471
Speaker 1: So, you said that your father [Donald Kimbro] was in the [U.S.] Army at some point.
Speaker 2: He came back from the Army--
Speaker 1: When did he go?  What are the dates? Was he in World War II [WWII] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as best as I remember, he never shared it, so I imagine, what 1941, 1942, and came back in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Because the Army was legally segregated at the time.  Did he talk about his experiences in the Army?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  He talked about his time in an all-black unit, guys who couldn't read or write, guys, you know, they were marching with bayonets on those rifles, didn't know their right from left.  As a matter of fact, he almost got cut on his arm. They were going through maneuvers, left-right, left-right, and they were supposed to turn right and a guy turns left and you've got that bayonet, you know, so he told me that.  He shared stories about, but he also shared stories that the racial discrimination and segregation wasn't nearly as prevalent in Europe as what he found here in the states.  So, yeah, he shared those stories and I just remember some of my father, my father, never heard my father cuss but, you know, he let it be known every day this was his house.  He would tell you every piece of mail that comes in this house has got his last name on it.  This is his house and there's only two ways, my way or the highway, and one thing about my dad, he could clean a house.  He could clean a house, and Saturday was his day to clean his little house.  He could make a bed and he taught me and my brother how to clean the house and how to make a bed and he wanted those sheets tight on that bed, and one thing about my dad, he always washed the dishes until me and my brother got old enough where one week I would wash them and the next week it was my brother's turn, and if you ever wanted to get on the wrong side of my father, he didn't care how many Brillo Pads you had to use, all right?  That pot had to be cleaned, so if my mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro] made macaroni and cheese, remember how macaroni and cheese sticks, or she prepared baked beans, you know how baked beans stick if you don't soak it overnight.  Oh--no, no.  You get out every Brillo Pad you can find.  That sink had to be cleaned.  That was some of his idiosyncrasies and nuances.
Speaker 1: So, he met your mother what year?  I know they met in Oklahoma, but what year?
Speaker 2: They met at the end of the war [World War II, WWII].  They met in 1945 and he was coming back from the war and she was taking care of the children of this white family in South Jersey [New Jersey], and they met and they developed a relationship and they got married and they moved to New Jersey, actually, they got married and they lived in Ohio, okay, and then from Ohio in search of a better opportunity, they moved to New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And what year were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in 1950.
Speaker 1: And what, your sibling--
Speaker 2: My older brother was born in 1948.  He was born on July 1, 1948, and we were raised in three small towns in New Jersey.  First we were raised in Kearny, New Jersey, and then from Kearny we moved to Teaneck, New Jersey, East Orange, New Jersey, then from East Orange to Teaneck.
Story_ID: 344472
Speaker 1: So what are your earliest memories of Kearny, New Jersey?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of Kearny in terms of ethnicity and culture diversity, we lived in a very culturally diverse neighborhood, always did, always did, and when you speak of cultural diversity, we think in terms now of corporation, you're going to have different ethnicities, and different, you know, not only male and female but sexual persuasion.  To me, that's not cultural diversity.  Cultural diversity, you know, is, where do you live with individuals. Is your next door neighbor--and that's the situation that I was always raised in New Jersey.  I remember every Saturday morning in Kearny, New Jersey, simply because of the Scottish population in Kearny, New Jersey, the Scotts would march with their bagpipes on Brighton Avenue, every Saturday morning, and I remember my friends were Italian, my friends were Jewish, my friends were black, my friends were Asian.  We had that microcosm on our street, and one thing I can tell you, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], if any of my friends did not have a father in the house--I don't know anything about single parent households--if they were not raised with a father in the house it was because their father was either killed in World War II [WWII] or the Korean War, zero exceptions, zero, that's the only reason why your dad was not in the house.  He was killed in World War II or the Korean War.
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about Kearny?
Speaker 2: Working class, blue collar (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Working class meaning the neighborhood was working class?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Blue collar.
Speaker 1: What did most of the people do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, you had, at that time they weren't electronics companies.  They were electrical companies, blah-blah-blah in Harrison [New Jersey], so many people worked in, you know, they performed piecemeal on assembly line right there in South Jersey [New Jersey], you know, smokestack operations.  People did that, people worked in hospitals.  They worked, if they worked in the federal government.  They worked in social security, I mean that type of thing.  You see, my father [Donald Kimbro] worked in social security and my mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro] was a nanny.
Speaker 1: So, why did you move to Teaneck [New Jersey] from Kearny?  What it a move up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a move up--
Speaker 1: Or did you move to East Orange [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: --we moved from Kearny to East Orange.  We actually stayed in, I guess what you would call now, a duplex, and then we moved from Kearny to East Orange and we had, there was a home, now the home would be a single unit dwelling home, but back then family lived in the basement, family lived on the first floor, family lived on the second floor.  We lived on the first floor, my mother, my father, me and my brother, and then we moved--that's in East Orange--and then we moved from East Orange to Teaneck because we had our own house, our own private dwelling.
Speaker 1: And what year did you move to Teaneck?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was--well, when we moved to Teaneck, I was in the fourth grade, so that would make me, what, nine years old.
Story_ID: 344473
Speaker 1: So let's start with the first grade.  Where'd you go to first grade?  What was the name of the school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First grade I was in Columbia Elementary School [Columbian School] in East Orange, New Jersey, and my teacher was Miss Staff [ph.].  I remember Miss Staff, yup.  I was in kindergarten, and yeah.
Speaker 1: Why do you remember Miss Staff so much?
Speaker 2: She was so nice.  She was my kindergarten teacher and I tell my students right now, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], I went from kindergarten to Ph.D., from kindergarten, five years old, to Ph.D., and never had a black teacher.  I was raised by Jews.  I was taught by Italians.  I was taught by Irish.  Um-hm.  Had a pride in education.  I'm not saying there wasn't discrimination, et cetera, but they had a pride in education.  You will perform.  You will measure up.
Speaker 1: Do you think that that--are you--I mean--I don't know you tell- am I hearing that that pride didn't exist--what are you saying, that--
Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying, I'm not saying it didn't exist with other ethnic groups.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does that other ethnic group include black?  You felt that--
Speaker 2: No, I'm--what I'm saying and don't get me wrong, no, let's clarify that point right now.  I'm just saying that, you know, students will measure up when you throw expectations on them, and that's what I do right now.  I will never lower the bar.  I will never lower the bar.  You're looking at an ethnic group that created education--Africans (laughter) I mean, so I know all about that, but I will never lower the bar.  The bottom line is you can learn from anybody.  You can learn from anybody, any ethnic group, any ethnicity, any sexual persuasion.
Speaker 1: So, when you were in first through fourth, do you remember any memorable teachers?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My fourth grade teacher was Ms. Welch [ph.].  Fourth grade teacher was Ms. Welch.  My first male teacher, who was by far my favorite teacher that I ever had, Mr. Anastasio [ph.].  Mr. Anastasio.  He was not only my sixth grade teacher, he was our coach if we played sports, and had a lot of fun with him, just a great relationship with all the students.  We called him Mr. A.  Now, oh, I remember him.  Seventh grade was Miss Castro [ph.].  Eight grade Mr. Manno [ph.], so, I remember them well.  Good teachers.
Story_ID: 344474
Speaker 1: So, at that time when you were in fourth grade, let's say, and you had this teacher and he was kind of a mentor, or you looked up to him, what were your aspirations?  What did you see yourself doing with your life at this point?  What were your dreams (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I really didn't know.  I knew I wanted to go to college, but let me tell you, again, my father [Donald Kimbro] had the greatest impact on my life.  My father was an education nut, all right?  Me and my brother weren't allowed to go out until my father came home and checked our homework.  Now, in the spring, that wasn't a problem because of daylight savings time and my father would get home, what, five or six o'clock, check homework and you'd go out and play and it was still daylight, but in the winter, you get home when it's dark and there you are, you know, you check the homework and where you going?  You're not going when it's dark outside, and that type of thing.  So, you couldn't go anywhere until you did your homework and you could not watch TV on a school night, and I remember my father came home with our first television set.  It was 1957, okay?  So, you couldn't watch TV on a school night except, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], and this is key, except, my father made one exception to the rule.  There was one show that came on once a week, and I can't remember if it came on Monday or came on Tuesday, but came on once a week, prime time, eight o'clock, and my father mandated, made us, made me and my brother sit down and watch this show.  Do you know what the show was?  'Biography.'  And the host was Mike Wallace.  It came on once a week.  I can't remember if it was a Monday or Tuesday, sat us down and we had to watch that show for thirty minutes, and back then again, there were no black profiles.  Maybe, I take that back, I think maybe I saw Jackie Robinson.  The whole profiles are white and nine times out of ten there are white males.  I mean, there might have been a female like Eleanor Roosevelt, okay, but I mean, I sat there and I'm looking at Winston Churchill, I'm looking at FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], I'm looking at Charles de Gaulle, and after we would see it, my father would ask us questions like what'd you learn?  Okay, tell me about this individual.  Why was this individual important?  Why is this individual great, blah-blah, and I remember that again.  And then, I guess the seeds were being planted right there for me.
Speaker 1: I have one quick question.  We only have a minute left on this tape, but you spoke about, like in the biographies, that most of the people were white, but early on you referenced Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of Booker T. Washington as a child, or did Booker T. Washington's, did you become aware of him as an adult, and his teachings?
Speaker 2: I became aware of Booker T. Washington, probably my late teens, my late teens.  When I got ready to go to college, you gotta remember, this is going back to the 1960s with the Civil Rights Movement, there was a push on my generation to go to predominant schools to show people that we could perform, just like kids now.  They want to go to HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but with my generation, the push was you go to these predominant schools and you can show 'em that you're good as and blah-blah-blah.  So, it was never a question of where I was going to go, and particularly back then, if I were going to go to school below the Mason-Dixon Line, I knew I was going to go an HBCU, simply because back then when I came out of high school you couldn't go to the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], you still couldn't go to the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], you still couldn't go to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  I mean, I was a junior, I was a junior in college when the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] got its first black football player.
Story_ID: 344475
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're just going to take you back.  You were talking about Booker T. Washington off camera.  We'll talk about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my first exposure to Booker T. Washington, I guess my junior year of college [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma], okay, I began to metamorphose, metamorphosize [sic.].  I began to, now again, you're going back to the civil rights era, okay?  And, I was looking at poverty and wealth, even back then, and I was reading books on capitalism, economics, and things of this nature and it was part of chasing this, I don't want to call it a dream, but conducting due diligence at least.  I got my first exposure to Booker T. Washington and, like anybody else, I read my history on the man and I read as much as I could about the Atlanta Exposition [Cotton States and International Exposition], when he gave his speech in 1895, pull yourself up by your bootstraps, and what was so ironic, and I shared with you off-camera, is that during the Atlanta Exposition, they really wanted Frederick Douglass.  They had a shopping list of who they wanted.  Either first or second was Frederick Douglas.  Either first or second was Underground Railroad, from Underground Railroad, Harriet Tubman, and neither of those paragons were available.  They were up in years, so here comes by default, Booker T. Washington.  Well, he gave his speech, pull yourself up by your bootstraps, and it really was stealth.  It really flew under the radar except for one individual and that was, of course, W.E.B. Du Bois, and what is so ironic, because here we are seated on the campus of Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], we're in Wright Hall, the School of Business [Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia], the building right next to Wright Hall is Harkness Hall, and what is so magical about Harkness Hall, because on the first floor of Harkness Hall is W.E.B. Du Bois' office.  He taught in Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  He taught Greek and he taught sociology and he taught economics.  It was here that he wrote his seminal work, 'The Negro in Business' [W.E.B. Du Bois].  It was here from this campus, Atlanta University that he came up with the first issues of Crisis magazine [The Crisis], so he took exception to pulling yourself up by your bootstraps, and then it gave the genesis of two schools of thought, okay?  You've got on one side, Booker T. Washington, you know, that says, you know, start where you are, with what you have, knowing that you have is plenty enough, and it was here on the other side, W.E.B. Du Bois mobilized any gains that the Negro would make would be through politics and it was here, here, right here at Atlanta University, that he said the issue facing America is the issue of a color line, that he wrote that book containing all those essays, 'The Souls of Black Folks' [W.E.B. Du Bois].  So, you know, and it still goes on today.  It still goes on today.  You have various factors in the black community that feels as if any gains that we're gonna make are gonna be done through politics, and you have that faction of black America that says hey, don't worry about that.  Let's look at economic development, let's close ranks, let's build our own, and let's take a look at other ethnic groups and see how they did it.  Don't reinvent the wheel.  Just go ahead and push forward and blast forward, and build our own institution. So--
Speaker 1: Well, I feel like strange asking, but I have to, which, where do you fall?
Speaker 2: To me, it's not either or.  It's the and and both.  I mean, you've gotta do both, (laughter) not for the sake of others.  I mean, we need black governors, we need black senators.  We need the movers and shakers within the field of politics so we won't suffer, I mean, so we won't be kicked through the curb as a race, simply because we don't get our man or our woman an office, but on the other hand, we do need our own institutions.  I mean, I was interviewed by PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  They were going around the country to different and various historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs] and I was asked by an interviewer who said, "Well, why do we need HBCUs?" and here I am teaching at one.  I said, "That's a great question but you're asking the wrong individual."  I said you need to ask the Irish why they need Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana].  You need to ask the Jewish why they need Yeshiva [Yeshiva University, New York, New York] and Hofstra [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York].  I mean, no one can teach our own like we can.  You know, it's one thing to teach a new discipline, but I have the feeling if I walk up and down campus and I see a student that I need to make a comment to, tuck your shirt in young man, you know, hey pick that piece of paper up, blah-blah-blah, I've gotta feel comfortable in what I'm doing.  Why?  Because, yeah, I know this is a student and I know this a Clark Atlanta University student and I think this is Clark Atlanta University business student, I know that.  But I also know this is somebody's child, and that's when you go the extra mile.
Story_ID: 344476
Speaker 1: So, going back to your teen years, or sort of, we left off at fourth grade.  When you entered junior high school, where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Franklin Junior High School [Benjamin Franklin Middle School], and that was in Teaneck, New Jersey.  I was there from grades seven through nine.
Speaker 1: And what years are we talking about now?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to be eight years old, so at least from 1964, actually, grade seven, it was 1960 because--1960, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], it was right in there when I remember, oh man, talk about really jogging your memory, I remember that our principal, Mr. Simmons [John W. Simmons], called us in, called the entire school with administrators and faculty into the auditorium unannounced, and we marched in and we didn't know what was going on.  He stood on the stage and he said, "I have some bad news to deliver.  President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] has just been shot and killed in Dallas, Texas," and he told everybody to go home.  And to me, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], that was the day in which America lost its innocence.  You know, I didn't know.  That was one of the few times that I saw my mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro] and father [Donald Kimbro] cry, and you gotta remember Kennedy was a Democrat, but he didn't galvanize the black vote.  He didn't--as a matter of fact, African Americans were sort of leery at Kennedy, because who he chose as a running partner.  He chose Lyndon B. Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], LBJ.  Yes, he was a Democrat, but he was a southern white Democrat and, just like we run to the Democratic Party, I remember the days when blacks were Republicans, you know, and I tell people right now to me it's not an issue of liberal, conservative, Republican, Democrat, I'm a realist.  I know what works and what doesn't.  I'm for whoever's in office.  We gotta work with that individual whoever's in office.  I'll--I remember when blacks voted for the Republican Party because that was the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], so, my father--and I remember asking, I said, "Dad, who you gonna vote for in this, that, and everything?" and he didn't know.  Blacks were scared to death of LBJ because he was from Texas and he was a southern Democrat, and when we think of southern Democrats we think of lynching in the South, and this, that and the other. So, yeah I remember when Kennedy was shot and he died, and, yeah.
Story_ID: 344477
Speaker 1: Although you were a child in 1955, do you remember the Emmett Till?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, man, I mean, he was from Chicago [Illinois] and he went down to spend time with his relatives, I believe with his aunt in Mississippi, oh, that was big.  That was huge.  You only had a couple magazines.  You only had, you know, Ebony magazine and Jet magazine, and Sepia, okay?  And that was like on the front page of Jet magazine.  Everybody knew about Emmett Till, and what you don't know is that he had a perfect set of thirty-six teeth.  A perfect set.  If you ever wanted to use a model for a mold in a dental office of what a perfect set of teeth would look like, when they got his body in Mississippi, he only had four teeth in his mouth.  It's one thing to lynch him, it was another thing to take a pair of pliers and pull out one of this teeth and use it as a trophy, and that's what they did.  Every finger, every toe on his body was broken.  Every finger, every toe was broken, and his mother [Mamie Till] wanted an open casket because she wanted the world to see what they did to her son.  Oh yeah, that was huge.  That was, that was impressed in the psyche and man, the '60s [1960s], whoa and I was--me and my generation--we were knee-deep right in the thick of what seemed like every day something was moving so fast something was going on.  You know, every day either Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], or Malcolm X, if they weren't on the front page of The New York Times or New York Daily News, or New York Post, or New York Herald [New York Herald Tribune] or the New York Tribune [New York Herald Tribune], those were the newspapers at the time, they were certainly on page three.  So, what's so magical about page three?  Okay, here's the front page where you open it up.  Here's page three.  Page three was like front page back and you'd open it up and bang.  I remember it, 'cause I, it was on the front page of the Daily News, I don't know if you saw, you remember the movie, 'X' ['Malcolm X'], by Spike Lee, and remember when they, that scene where that brother from the Nation of Islam was beat up on the police and Malcolm took all those male Muslim brothers to the courthouse and then to the hospital and he stuck up his hand like that and pointed it like that, and they dispersed and that cop said no one should have that much power.  That was on the front page of the Daily News. I remember reading that.  I remember reading that.  I remember the March on Washington. I mean, every day something was going.  I remember, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], the phone call that my father [Donald Kimbro] received.  It had to be between eight or nine o'clock Sunday night, the night Malcolm X was assassinated.  We had our own, my parents had their own little grapevine, black state of the news, blah-blah, and my father got, my father was lying in bed and he got the phone call, "They killed Malcolm."  I remember my father telling that to my mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro], "They killed Malcolm, they killed Malcolm."  I'm going what do you mean they killed Malcom? I didn't know. Yup, got the phone call.  He was our, he was a bad brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What impression was that--
Speaker 2: Man, Malcolm was a bad brother, and Martin Luther King, first time I saw my father cry.  March on Washington.  I mean, back then, you only had four TV stations, ABC, CBS, NBC, and U-P [ph.], what is U-P-S [ph.], or U-H-1 [ph.], Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York], back then, your local TV and it was on all the stations and I was seated there August 22, 1963 [sic. August 28, 1963], and my father was watching it and he just cried, first time, tears coming down.  I said, "Dad," I said, "Dad, why you crying?  Why you crying?"  He said, "Son, you don't understand, you don't understand.  You don't understand."  So, man, that was powerful.  First time I saw my father-in-law crying.  First time I saw my father-in-law cry, when [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron broke Babe Ruth's record, when he had number, what?  Seven hundred and fifteen.  I said, "Pop, why you crying?"  He said, "I never thought I'd live long enough to see a black man hold this record."  Um-hm, yup.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Had some sort of angst against your neighbors because--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah--
Speaker 1: No, I mean, we weren't insulated.  I knew what was going on, and again, be the time 1968 came around, I was a senior [at Teaneck High School, Teaneck, New Jersey] so I knew what was going on and I was making a transformation myself.
Story_ID: 344478
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So let's just talk about, just put, where were you--where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Teaneck High School [Teaneck, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: So Teaneck High School. You're a senior (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].  Teaneck High School was nationally recognized.  I guess there were about six hundred, seven hundred in my graduating class.  Are you ready for this, Shawn [Shawn Wilson]? 90 percent went to college.  Teaneck High School, when I finished, was predominantly Jewish and--
Speaker 1: How many black student?
Speaker 2: Oh, say fifty or less.  Um-hm, fifty or less, so it was no big deal to have black friends and white friends.  I mean, it was no big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, but let me ask you this, then.  How did those teenagers interact with each other with every day, you know, you can open up the paper and see some--
Speaker 2: I mean, there was no problem.  There was no animosity, there was no chauvinism.
Speaker 1: But did you discuss it, though?  Did you talk to your white friends about what was happening in Mississippi, you know, with Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Chaney [James Chaney] and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  We discussed it in class.  We definitely discussed it in class.
Speaker 1: How did you discuss it in class?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, there were different forms of media back then.  They would bring in a TV, you know, on the stand and, you know, we would watch, you know, the news events of the day and I'll never forget, I was in, I don't know if I was in civics class or history class, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, you know, when Dr. King was shot, and some of my black friends were crying.  The, the females.  They cried, and we certainly discussed it.
Speaker 1: What did you--I'm sorry go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, again, even with the white students back then, they had a counter culture revolution.  They were rebelling against their parents.  You know, they were letting their hair grow and they were letting, and growing a beard.  So, just like the black students were going through transformation, the white kids were going through a transformation too.
Speaker 1: You said you went through a transformation personally, starting with high school.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were you before and what were you transforming into?
Speaker 2: Well, I was beginning to question, you know, the rules and regulations of the day.  You know, I was beginning to question, everybody was asking the question, why.  Why are we doing this, why are we doing that.  Everybody, (laughter) fast was not fast enough in terms of change, you know, and so it was, like I said, Shawn, every day something was going on.  Every day.  And again, for the white students, The Beatles.  You had The Beatles.  This whole, I mean, from The Beatles to the Rolling Stones to the hippie movement, and I remember going to Greenwich Village [New York, New York] on the weekend.  You may not know what Greenwich Village is, but that was a big, today this generation is hip-hop, back then what we call beatniks, you know, type of scene and type of culture.  So, everybody was beginning to question why and times were just moving fast and fast was not fast enough, and it was just one big, hey, you only go through the '60s [1960s] once and I told my daughters I tried my best, you know, with what the '60s [1960s] were like, particularly that close to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 344479
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go to '68 [1968], the day King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] killed, April 4th, '68 [1968] in your civics class [at Teaneck High School, Teaneck, New Jersey].  They announce that King's, but riots break out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had been shot that night and we came to class the next day and I just remember just not getting much done in school that day (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about the riots in Newark [New Jersey], though, because that, wasn't that pretty close to--how close is Newark to Teaneck [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the riots, you had several riots.  The riots in Newark occurred in the summer of '67 [1967], okay, and you had the riots in Detroit [Michigan] the same year, so, you know, it was pretty volatile.
Speaker 1: What about the riots in Newark, because that's close to Teaneck, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were you involved, were you--what was your feeling about what was going on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I wasn't involved but I remember going to Newark, see, Newark was like a second city to New York [New York].  Back then, I mean, my parents [Mary Anderson Kimbro and Donald Kimbro] would go shopping in Newark, Broad [Street] and Market Street in New York, excuse me, in Newark, New Jersey.  It was vibrant, it was upbeat, but you had various pockets, you know, of depression and oppression, particularly of blacks, and Shawn [Shawn Wilson], you've got to remember, I was a fre- I was up to a freshman in college [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma].  We're talking '72 [1972] and '73 [1973], and I remem- no, we're talking '68 [1968], '69 [1969], and 1970, okay, I was a freshman and sophomore in college and I remember vividly that blacks couldn't qualify for welfare.  You would never see blacks on welfare.  Like public housing and universal, man, you never saw that.  They'd find 50 million reasons why.  I mean welfare and food stamps were given to poor white farmers.  You never saw that, and I remember, what, '69 [1969] and '70 [1970], when they were finally adding blacks to the welfare rolls.  I distinctly remember when I was in grad school at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  They were building Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago [Illinois].  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was in office.  Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] was the secretary of housing, and they were gonna build the greatest, the largest structure of public housing ever blah-blah-blah.  I remember that.  Now, look at it.  They tore it down.  What, it didn't make it what, barely less than fifteen, twenty years.  Yup.  I remember that.  Man, those are key notes to history, man.  Those are like cornerstones in my mind, walking history.
Story_ID: 344480
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school [Teaneck High School, Teaneck, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].  So--
Speaker 2: And attended University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] undergraduate.
Speaker 1: How did you get to the University of Oklahoma (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a great question.  I knew I wanted to go away and I didn't want to stay in Jersey [New Jersey] to go to school, and I didn't want to go all the way to the West Coast, so I attended this school in this little fly-over state and it was my guidance counselor.  My guidance counselor was a black male, okay, and it was really the first exposure I had, and--
Speaker 1: Before you go on, can I just ask you about that exposure and then you'll continue the story about Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But seeing that this is the first black professional in the, in education that you had an opportunity to deal with, did it have any impact on you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  He, he was the one that really suggested University of Oklahoma, 'cause he was receiving all types of information from schools.  I thought that I held aspirations, I mean, I played sports in high school that maybe I could play on the collegiate level, particularly basketball.  It wasn't about to happen, but there was a little small school up in Wisconsin called Northland College [Ashland, Wisconsin].  They said I might have a chance to try out and blah-blah, so I was looking, but my father [Donald Kimbro] interceded and said, "No, you're not going to school to play sports.  You're going to school to gain an education."  So, the schools--
Speaker 1: Back to Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the schools I was looking at--Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], University of Oklahoma and the like, maybe state university in New York [State University of New York], blah-blah-blah.  So, I applied and sure enough I got in, and I was in either English class or one of the classes, and he came, my guidance counselor came in the class and he had my acceptance letter and I said, oh, okay.  What do I do now?  (Laughter) So, I sent all my, you know, paperwork out there and sure enough, I was out there at the University of Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: How did you pay for it?
Speaker 2: Student loan, student loan.  I tell my students right now, and my daughters, I went from 1968 first year undergrad, to Ph.D., and my education didn't cost me a dime more than six thousand five hundred dollars, 'cause I got a free ride at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Were you the first in the family to have gone to college?
Speaker 2: No, my dad actually went to college.  My dad went to Seton Hall.  He went to Seton Hall University [South Orange, New Jersey], a degree in accounting.  My brother went to Fairleigh Dickinson [Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck, New Jersey].  Okay, he didn't finish.  He was a state trooper.  He, after his exposure to the National Guard, he came out and he liked, you know, that security type, blah-blah-blah, so he was a state trooper in New Jersey, so he worked maybe two or three years, and I went out to the University of Oklahoma.  Initially, I didn't like it, and not because I was homesick.  I said I don't know if this is for me, blah-blah-blah, but the longer that I stayed and grew on it, and now I'm a proud follower of the Sooners [Oklahoma Sooners] so--
Story_ID: 344481
Speaker 1: And then, right when I finished in 1972, I graduated in 1972, my first job, I worked for Texas Instruments [Texas Instruments Incorporated] in Dallas, Texas, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Doing what?
Speaker 1: I was a front line supervisor.  Back then, they were just starting to manufacture Texas Instruments, the silicon chips, okay.  That was used for the TI [Texas Instruments] calculator.  Remember the two calculators that they had, one was the financial calculator and the other one was--there was a financial and scientific calculator and the other one was a regular calculator.  I can't gloss over this--got married my senior year in college.  Yup.  Me and my wife got married by a justice of the peace.  We were both seniors at the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma], got married and went back to class after we got married (laughter), had our first child, okay--
Speaker 2: While you were still in school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm, and got married.  Several months later my first daughter was born, went to Dallas, Texas, worked for Texas Instruments, worked there for one year, but I knew that I wanted to go to grad school.
Speaker 2: Did you know what you wanted to do?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Back then I was still studying wealth and poverty, okay?  And I went to grad school.  I got a free ride from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  They had a program in political science, of all things, and I took it because it was a free ride, okay?  Because I don't know what I actually want to do.  I want to do international business and this, that, and the other, so I took it and they had a three-year program, and it was a free ride, but I was looking at wealth and poverty among under-developed countries, okay?  And, all that time, the three years that I was at Northwestern, I just started collecting data and I started looking at why is one country, you know, impoverished while another one is wealthy.  What are the linkages, what are the mindsets, what are the institutions that these wealthy countries, you know, particularly in sub-Sahara [Sub-Saharan Africa] and Africa, what do they produce?  How are they galvanized, you know, how are they pulled together?  Who organizes them?  Well, by the time I got to my third year and I defended my dissertation, I didn't want to study countries.  I still wanted to ask that question about wealth and poverty.  I didn't want to study countries.  I wanted to study individuals, and I didn't want to study anything about Africa.  I wanted to study African Americans here in the United States, and so, I did a 180.  I started looking at the wealthy African Americans here in the United States, and I started collecting data, you know, because there weren't any books, and no one had published anything on these individuals.  Again, at the time it was get a job, work on a job, work for the government, that type of whole mindset, and I was, there were only a few people that were creating wealth, and I was collecting data on them, and so I had all this data, all this research that I conducted, and I turned to my wife and I said, "Pat [Patricia McCauley Kimbro]," I said, "I think there's a book here and I'm not sure, but I think that maybe I could write a book off of everything that I learned on the surface, you know, circuitous with these individuals, but I won't know," and she said, "Well, when will you know if you have a book or not?"  And I said, "Well, you gotta conduct face-to-face interviews," and she said, "How do you do that?"  And I said, "Well, maybe I'll apply for a grant or somebody will blah-blah-blah," and she says, and it was really my wife's idea, she said, "Don't wait for a grant.  Go ahead and do it now."  I said, "Well, you don't understand.  I mean, you gotta fly to these locations, you have to stay in a hotel, and we don't have money for that."  She said, "Well just get started.  Maybe some people around here, you can drive to with this, that and everything, and somehow, some way, the money will come."  Well, that's one year ordeal.  I thought I could finish this book in eighteen months, Shawn [Shawn Wilson].  That book took seven years of my life.  It took me longer to write what became 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' [Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill] than to finish my Ph.D., and the money never came (laughter) but I just went around the country interviewing successful African Americans.  I had a list of fifty individuals.  What did I know?  I said these are the fifty that I've got to interview and you can go back to this particular time.  We're going back to late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], and you can imagine who were the fifty, you know, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] of Ebony magazine, Don King, the fight promoter, Wally [Wally Amos], Famous Amos chocolate chip cookies, you know, those type of individuals--Ernesta Procope [HistoryMaker Ernesta G. Procope], she was the only black woman on Wall Street, E.G. Bowman investment company [E.G. Bowman Company, Inc., New York, New York].  So, those were, Ral--those were the individuals that I was going to meet and interview.
Story_ID: 344482
Speaker 1: Just to move back a little bit, during your college years [at University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma], did you pledge?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you pledge and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.
Speaker 1: And why Alpha Phi Alpha?
Speaker 2: The guys that I was hanging around with were Alphas, and I went to all the informational sessions, Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], but I knew that I was gonna pledge Alpha all the time, because the guys that I ran with, they were all Alphas and--yeah.  I know those dates.  I was on line from September 30, 1969 to March 7, 1970.  There were seventeen of us that pledged and four went over, and now you can pledge, what, about a week or two, a month at the latest, yep, from September 30, 19--(laughter) 1969, to March 7, 1970.
Story_ID: 344483
Speaker 1: We were talking about you pledging [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But also, in addition to that, what type of a student were you?
Speaker 2: A pretty good student, not the best, not the poorest (laughter), above average.  What I had going for me is just a desire and inquisition, I wanted to learn, I wanted to know why. And I loved to read.  I'm still to this day an avid reader.  If you come to my study at my home, you'll find just rows and rows and mountains of books, just the nature of the beast, that's all.
Story_ID: 344484
Speaker 1: So you said that your father [Donald Kimbro] had gone to university [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey].  Did he, did he give any words of wisdom to you before you went off to school?  What to expect?  What he expected of you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It was expected that me and my brother would go to college.  We didn't know how we were gonna pay for it.  We'd pay for it with a student loan.  I remember when I finished college and I was about to go to grad school [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I just told my father, I said, "I'm going to grad school," and he reached in his pocket and pulled out lint and I said, "Don't worry about it."  I said, "I got this."  But--And I remember when I was going to the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] and I said to my mother [Mary Anderson Kimbro], I said, "Am I going to meet up with any discrimination, or am I going to meet up with any racism or anything like that?"  She told me point blank, she says, "I don't know, but you better not come home and tell me you failed or you quit because somebody called you a nigger.  I'm sorry, you gotta get over it.  You gotta finish.  We don't have that type of money and you will finish and you will complete and you will earn your degree.  That's a given."
Story_ID: 344485
Speaker 1: So, did you have any ideas what you would do with the wealth and poverty?  You were so interested in it, or did you think you'd teach or become an economist or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, really I didn't.  It was more a journey.  It was more a personal journey and that's what made it so interesting.  I carved out a list of at least fifty individuals, okay, that I was going to meet and interview at point blank range and, just like you're seated here, I mean I had my tape recorder and I was armed with a three-page questionnaire, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], three pages of questions that I was gonna ask him, and that list grew from fifty to a hundred, from a hundred to a hundred and fifty, and I still interview people today, but I quit counting at a hundred and fifty interviews, but I was just going to find out what makes these individuals tick, you know, what do they do?  What are their idiosyncrasies?  What is their mindset?  What is their personal philosophy?  What is the calculus, you know, of success?  There's got to be a mathematical formula to it, and that's what drove me and this was a seven-year ordeal.
Speaker 1: Well, since we're talking about that, why don't we just stick with that for a moment and talk about, and I wanna talk, we'll talk about it itself, and then we'll talk about the incarnation of the book.  But, in the book you lay out, I think it's seven or nine principles of successful people.
Speaker 2: Okay, and 'What Makes the Great Great' ['What Makes the Great Great: Strategies for Extraordinary Achievement,' Dennis P. Kimbro].
Speaker 1: 'What Makes'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I call, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine, nine values of greatness.
Speaker 1: Why don't we, can you break those down and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me what you discovered through interviewing these people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I don't care whether it was Warren Brown [sic. Ron Brown], the secretary of commerce, former secretary of commerce, Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] publisher of Black Enterprise magazine to Ben Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], arguably one of the greatest neurosurgeons of this country.  I even got a chance to meet Condoleezza Rice.  I met T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes]. I mean, we're talking a potpourri of individuals, but number one, the common core that all of them had, they respected life.  I mean, that's why I call number one is the greatest gift.  What is the greatest gift?  It is purpose.  Living your life on purpose, finding your purpose, finding your area of excellence, you know, and we're only on this planet, Shawn, for two reasons and two reasons only.  Number one spiritual growth.  I did not say religion.  The goal is not to be a Christian.  The goal is to be Christ-like.  The goal is not to be a Muslim.  The goal is to be Muhammad-like.  The goal is not to be a Buddhist.  The goal is to be Buddha-like. All right. So number one, spiritual growth, and number two, define your life's purpose and you know when you've found your life's purpose, because you have this feeling, you have this awe, you have this DNA that you were born to do this.  You see, I've gone to basketball games.  I've seen Michael Jordan play, and when I walk out that arena, what's the first thing going through your mind?  Man, Michael Jordan was born to play basketball.  When I've gone to concerts and I've seen Patti LaBelle sing, and I've seen, (laughter) you know, Gladys Knight sing and as I'm walking to my car in the parking lot, what's going through my mind?  Man, Gladys Knight was born to sing.  What were you born to do?  You don't come here and find a dream.  You don't come here and locate your dream.  No, your dream is already here.  That's why you were born, and when dream and your recognition of that dream marry up to each other, that's called destiny, and what do we say of all the great people?  You were born to do that.  You better pray and hope within these twenty-five thousand days that you get on earth, and that's all you get if you live to be the normal age, the average age, age seventy-four, you only get twenty-five thousand days on earth.  Somewhere, and it's a microcosm when you're talking about the speck of life, and that's all life is is a speck, like sand going through an hourglass, one speck at a time, well that's your life, that one speck, it's just a microcosm in the speck of life.  You better hope that someone says, "Boy, you were born to do that."  So, number one is the greatest gift.
Story_ID: 344486
Speaker 1: Number two, the greatest question.  What is the greatest question?  What does it take?  It takes courage.  It took courage for me, for seven years, to go out and do what I did.  It takes courage to create wealth, you know?  And I found courageous individuals and the critical question is what does it take?  It takes courage.  And the bottom line, sometimes it's risky not to take a risk.  Sometimes it's risky not to take a risk.  Sometimes it's risky not to take a risk.  You know, we teach strategy here at the School of Business [Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia] and I make sure that my students know the four elements of strategy and whatever you encounter or challenge, whenever you encounter a roadblock, whenever you encounter a problem, subconsciously or consciously, you're gonna utilize the four elements of strategy.  Number one, what's the worst that can happen?  Number two, what's the best that can happen?  Number three, what's likely to happen?  Number four, am I willing, am I willing to tolerate the worst to achieve the best?  And those people that I interviewed, they dropped all the way down to number four.  I'll put up with this nonsense to get what I want, 'cause I know I only gotta pay the price and I'll only pay it once, but once is enough.  Only gotta pay it once.  I got good news and I got bad news.  The bad news, oh yeah, you will sacrifice, and you'll get your hand spanked and you'll get your teeth knocked out, and you will be driven to your knees, that's a given.  That's the bad news.  The good news--you only gotta do it one time in your life.  Sometimes it's risky not to take a risk (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Purpose, courage.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Courage.  Number three, imagination.  You know, number three is imagination, you know, the ability to dream.  I tell my students and I always reflect that my students you know, sometimes my sharpest students, I'm glad that you're acing accounting and I'm glad that you have a 3.9 [grade point average] in statistics, and I am so excited that you are damned near a 4.0 in finance.  Oh, I'm excited.  You're a good student and I take my hat off to you, but sometimes my best students, sometimes my sharpest students, sometimes my most capable students, can be found daydreaming and looking that window.  I'm glad you got a 4.0.  I'm glad you're an A student.  But don't you lose sight of the big picture.  Don't lose sight of it. What's the big picture?  See, I know that A students will work with B students, and C students will employ both A and B students, and those D students, those D students that you make fun of, that you made fun of?  Those are the individuals that change the world.  Those are the individuals that we have buildings named after, all because imagination.  What do you see?  Master, we fished all day and we haven't caught a thing.  Okay?  Well, this time go cast your nets on the right side.  Not in terms of right versus left, but in terms of your thinking.  What do you see?  Imagination.  The average individual in our society gets four ideas a year, any one of which, if they have the guts, the courage, the fortitude to chase their dream will make them financially independent.  That's imagination.
Story_ID: 344487
Speaker 1: Number four is the greatest asset, and what is the greatest asset?  Integrity.  Integrity.  Integrity is not telling a lie.  Integrity is, you know, not being you know, being kind to people in a, you know, that just the surface of integrity.  Integrity is doing the best in all that you can do.  Integrity is regardless of the circumstances at hand, doing your best.  Did you give it your all?  Did you do your best?  Integrity is being the same individual behind the curtain that you are in front of the curtain.  That's integrity.  Why is integrity so important?  Because integrity leads to character, and character leads to discipline, and discipline is the wherewithal to do what you have to do when you know that you have to do it, whether you want to or not.  That's integrity.  See, in marketing that's called branding, and your brand must be authentic, and how do you know when your brand is authentic?  When you buy a hamburger in New York [New York], and it tastes like the same at McDonald's or Wendy's or Burger King, and it tastes like the same hamburger in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Well, what do they say of your brand?  The brand is authentic.  And you've got to be authentic.  That's integrity, and I've seen it so many times in these individuals, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], if they're in a circumstance or situation where they can't do their best, they don't get involved.  They don't get involved.  It is out of integrity, under that backdrop, under that framework, that rubric, in which you develop passion, because if you're passionate about what you'll do, you'll always give your best.  You'll always, I don't mean, I don't care if you're a toll keeper on the George Washington Bridge in New York, if you're passionate about what you do, you'll hand money differently to the patron, (laughter) if you're passionate about what you do, and I learned that over and over again.  I mean, I tell people when I interviewed Maynard Jackson and we go across the country and we're in and out of airports, and we look at airports the way airports are constructed today, you know, that was all Maynard Jackson's idea.  You see, Maynard Jackson was the first individual that came up with the idea that an airport should be nothing more than a shopping mall where people can catch a plane, and he was the one that transformed Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia].  And now, as you crisscross the country and fly in and out, you see all these airports that are nothing more than shopping malls where people can catch a plane.  Well, he was passionate.  Maynard had such a passion about life and about the City of Atlanta [Georgia].  You know what he would do on his off days, like on Sunday after church?  He would get his family together, put 'em in a car and his daughters and his sons and his wife, saying, "Dear, where we going?"  "Dad, what we gonna do today?"  "I just thought that we'd drive around Atlanta and look for potholes."  Drive around Atlanta and look at potholes.  Or, he would get his family together, "Dad, where we going today?"  "I just thought we'd just take a nice little trip and go off to the airport and make sure the restrooms are clean."  Because he read an article where he found out that whenever a passenger, whenever a patron, comes to your city, they deplane and the first they do, they go to the restroom and if the restroom is clean, what's going through the mind?  I like this city.  I'm gonna spend some money here.  If the restroom is dirty, is nasty, is filthy, I can't wait to get out of here.  Let's go.  That's passion.  On his off day, go out there and make sure that the restrooms are clean.  And I saw it again.
Story_ID: 344488
Speaker 1: I saw it in Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], you know, when she was at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and now she's at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] in North Carolina.  This woman, Johnnetta Cole, president of Spelman College, she gave me about four hours of her time to interview her.  She didn't know me, and I had the tape recorder going and I'm over there at Spelman and I'm just listening to her, blah-blah-blah.  And she shared a quote with me that I'll always use.  She said, "Show me somebody content with mediocrity and I'll show you somebody destined to fail."  Well, you may or may not realize that when she became the president of Spelman College, she wasn't Spelman's first choice.  She wasn't Spelman's second choice.  She wasn't Spelman's third choice.  She was barely Spelman's fourth choice.  All right?  All she was, was a teacher.  She told people that.  "Look, I'm a teacher.  I'm a professor.  That's all I do is teach," and the reason why she was so low on the pecking order to become the first black female president of Spelman, she had never been a dean.  She had never been a department chair, she had never been an administrator, so they wanted to know during the interviewing, what do you know about running a university?  And on the other hand, she wasn't a Spelman woman.  She had finished from Fisk undergrad [sic. Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and, like me, she had taken a Ph.D. from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  What do you know about a Spelman woman?  You didn't finish from Spelman College.  But, the time that she spent in the interviewing process on Spelman's campus, the students loved her.  They could feel the electricity.  They could feel the vibe.  I mean, she walked on the campus and she was there and she said, "Don't call me Dr. Cole.  Call me Sister Cole."  And then she became Sister President.  Well, she becomes president of Spelman College and you talk about integrity and passion and character, and this woman wasn't president for seventy-two hours.  She was barely president for two or three days and she's walking on her campus taking in the sights.  Now, she's president of Spelman College and no one knows who she is.  She's completely unannounced and she's walking on campus and she's noticing how people driving by in their car and they're up on campus and they would ask one of the groundskeepers, how do you get to admissions?  Or they would ask one of the utility workers how do you get to Sisters Chapel?  Or they would ask somebody, a landscaper, how do you get to the bookstore?  And she was just noticing how people were asking blah-blah-blah, and she said, you know, these individuals are really the first point of contact with Spelman.  These individuals are really Spelman College.  So what did she do?  She put 'em all in new uniforms.  She said if this is the first contact that the outside world has with my school, I want them to have new uniforms.  Different mindset, character, passion, integrity.  So that's your greatest asset.
Story_ID: 344489
Speaker 1: Number five, you're already wealthy.  It's the greatest secret.  Number five is the greatest--what do I mean you're already wealthy?  There are ten different forms of wealth.  You know, we think that what I have in my pocket, ladies what you have in your purse, is a form of wealth, which is money.  Yeah.  Money is a form of wealth.  Money is only one of 'em.  We don't have time to go through all of them, but there are ten different forms of wealth and you, as an individual, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], you've gotta realize you've gotta recognize which form of wealth, what form of wealth do you possess, and how are you gonna leverage it?  Now, money, what I have in my pocket and what you might have in your billfold.  It's number three.  It's not even the number one form of wealth.  That's why I teach right now, because of the number one form of wealth.  The number one form of wealth is knowledge.  Now, my students, people ask me all the time, how come knowledge is number one?  Because a pocketbook can't grow until the mind grows.  The pocketbook can't grow until you develop a wealth consciousness.  I mean, you gotta see it, you gotta take ownership.  You know, what does the master say?  The first shall be last and the last shall be first.  Well, what does that mean?  It depends on who you ask.  Now, I've asked people.  Please explain that biblical phrase to me, and I've heard all types of explanations like, "Well, black people have been last all these years and one day we'll be first."  It doesn't mean that.  That's nonsense.  What it means is that we live in a mindset and unfortunately we are driven by images and unfortunately we live in a mindset that says, that precludes, until I see the physical I won't believe it.  Until I see the outer manifestations of it, I won't believe it.  What does the Bible say?  The Bible says think just the opposite, you know.  The vision, the mental that you have first put last, switch 'em.  Put the mental first and put the physical last.  Mental, concentrate on the mental first, and then you will have the outer manifestations of it. So in other words, the last shall be first and the first shall be last.  So what is the great secret?  You're already wealthy.  Number one is knowledge.  Number two, your work ethic.  Your work ethic.  Let your light so shine that it glorifies your father in heaven.  Now, I don't care what the job is, do it well.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] told you that.  Okay.  If you're a street sweeper, you sweep these streets just like Michelangelo painted, just like Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] conducted and somebody will recognize you for your work.  Do it well.  Now, we're going back to Booker T. Washington, "Start where you are with what you have, knowing that what you have is plenty enough and people will recognize you for--you couldn't hide it." And so, I mean, so that's the greatest secret.  And then, you know, number six, wow--number six, nine different forms of wealth.  Whew--number six is powerful, networking.  It's not who you know, it's what you know about who you know.  It's what you know about who you know, and you gotta recognize people, Shawn.  People don't care about you until they realize how much you care about them. People don't care about you until they realize how much you care about them.  That's powerful.
Story_ID: 344490
Speaker 1: The greatest advice: you gotta work.  You gotta work.  Number eight, you've got to work.  The average work week in the United States is 37.5 hours for the entrepreneurial, the average executive work week is 60 hours.  You work 8 hours a day for survival, but everything over 8 hours a day you work on yourself, so you've gotta work but if your work is your play, you'll never work a day in your life.  You've gotta make sure that you're in the correct vocation, that you're doing the job that you were meant to do.  You've got to identify your area of excellence.  And how do you identify your area of excellence?  You ask yourself four critical questions.  Question number one, what do I love to do?  What do I have a passion for?  What can I throw my whole heart and soul into?  Question number two, what would I do for free?  If no one ever paid me a dime, if no one ever gave me a financial reward for my efforts, what would I do for free?  Because when you're doing what you love to do and you would do it for free, your work is your play, and if your work is your play, you'll never work a day in your life.  So many times during the course of my interviews, I couldn't tell when these people were working and when they were playing.  I remember I went up to New York [New York], and I interviewed Walter Turnbull [HistoryMaker Walter J. Turnbull].  Walter Turnbull was the founder of the Harlem boys choir [Boys Choir of Harlem], and I said to him, I said, "Dr. Turnbull, I'm going to ask you a question that you're very rarely asked."  He said, "Sure, go ahead, fire away."  I said, "Would you define wealth.  What is wealth to you?"  And for some reason, I hit a nerve.  He started crying, I mean, physically crying.  And I said, "Dr. Turnbull, did I say something wrong?  I apologize.  Please, I hope I'm not stepping on toes."  He said, "No, no, no."  He said, "Just give me a few seconds."  I said, "All I want to know is your definition of wealth."  He said, "Just, just, just give me a few seconds" as he was wiping away his tears.  He says, "Wealth is hearing the voices of my boys."  How can an individual be defeated?  How can you beat a man like that?  Question number three, what comes easy to you but difficult to somebody else?  What comes easy to you but difficult to somebody else?  You know, I take my hat off to you.  You're here interviewing me.  This might be tedious work.  A lot of people can't do this, but to you it's like breathing.  We've got to find that vocation, to us, it's like breathing.  It's second nature, because when it becomes second nature, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], what do we say to the individual?  Oh, they're in the zone.  Oh, they're unconscious.  If they're entrepreneurs, if they're involved in, you know, running a business, what do you say?  Oh, they've got the Midas touch.  Everything they touch turns to gold.  And then last but not least, if you can't identify, you know, answer those three questions, go to those individuals who you respect and admire, ask them what do you see me as?  What do you think I'll be good at doing?  And then last but not least, the greatest need--number nine is the greatest need, and what is the greatest need?  Prayer.  And what is prayer?  Prayer is an ongoing conversation with the Creator.  Prayer is an ongoing conversation with God.  And you can call that source anything you want to call it. You can call it God, you can call it Muhammad, you can call it Jehovah, you can call it Yahweh, but there is a force for good in our lives.  There is a force that wants the best for us, that is yearning, this promethean urge, you know, as Benjamin Mays would call it, this great force that moves everything forward wants the best for our lives and will do anything for us.  That is what makes the great, great.
Story_ID: 344491
Speaker 1: After you had collected all of that, how did that become a published book ['What Makes the Great Great: Strategies for Extraordinary Achievement,' Dennis P. Kimbro]?
Speaker 2: Great question.  I got back, I had just spent a few hours with Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]; he's the publisher of Black Enterprise magazine, okay?  And when I got home, my home in Atlanta, Georgia, I saw there was a message on my recorder so I hit the button and who was it?  None other than W. Clement Stone, president of the Napoleon Hill Foundation [Wise, Virginia].  He called me up.  He said, "Young man, we caught wind of you.  We heard what you're doing.  When can you come to Chicago [Illinois]?  I'd like to meet you."  About a week, week-and-a-half later, me and my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] fly to Chicago and we don't have the slightest idea what this man had in mind, and I knew about Napoleon Hill.  I had read some of his works--I even had 'Think and Grow Rich' [Napoleon Hill], maybe a couple of other of his books.  I had maybe a book or two by W. Clement Stone.  I heard of him, I knew of him, and I was honored, okay?  So, I get to this meeting and there I am seated in his palatial offices on the outskirts of Chicago, big mahogany desk, W. Clement Stone was seated behind this desk, bright flowered yellow bow-tie, smoking a Havana cigar, surrounded by his seated lieutenants, and I'm seated right there and he said, "Young man," he said, "based on what we see and hear, we've got a proposition for you."  And I said, "What is that, Mr. Stone?"  He said, "We want you to finish, complete, and update this book." And I said, "What book?"  And he reached across his credenza, pulled out the last one hundred written pages of Napoleon Hill.  Napoleon Hill, at the time of his death, was attempting to write a black version of his all-time classic 'Think and Grow Rich.'  He got a hundred pages in the manuscript, died of a stroke and didn't finish it, and W. Clement Stone said to me, he said, "You know, you're not the first person to go around the country interviewing successful African Americans," and I was taken aback.  I said, "I'm not?"  He said, "No."  He says, "Napoleon Hill was doing this at the time of his death."  If Napoleon Hill would have lived one year longer, what was 'Think and Grow Rich:  A Black Choice' [Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill], would have been out in 1972, not 1992. So, he drops these one hundred pages on my lap and my reply to him is, "Well, Mr. Stone, I'm flattered. I don't know what to say, but I really can't do it."  He said, "Why not?"  I said, "Well, I'm going around the country, you know, writing a book of my own."  And he said, "If you have any sense, I suggest that you put your book aside and finish this one."  The book that I was working on is 'What Makes the Great, Great.'  That was going to be my first book, all right?  So, I took him up on it, I pushed my book aside and I finished 'Think and Grow Rich:  A Black Choice,' and that's why both of our names, Dennis Kimbro [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro] and Napoleon Hill, appear on the cover.  And, I said to W. Clement Stone, and I hope your viewers understand that W. Clement Stone in the 1970s was the Bill Gates of his time.  At one time, he was the wealthiest individual in the world.  I said to him, I said, "Mr. Stone, if you want me to complete this project, you've gotta give me some type of financial support."  I said, "I'm dead broke.  I had to borrow money for the plane ticket to come up here.  I mean, I'll do it under one condition.  I mean, you underwrite this effort for me and I will do it."  And he said, "No, I'm not gonna do that."  He said, "Napoleon Hill wasn't given any money to complete his research."  But, he said, "I'll tell you what, young man.  If you really want to find the answers--remember those two questions that you asked?  Why is one individual rich and wealthy while another is impoverished?  Why is one individual successful while another meets up with failure?  If you really--if you're really serious about finding the answers to those two questions, it is in this laboratory that you must find it, and that's why I'm not gonna underwrite this project."  And to this day, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], I'm glad he didn't.  I praise God every day that that man did not give me a dime, seven year ordeal, financial hell in high water.  Almost lost my house on five different occasions, did lose two cars in the process.  Seven years of ups and downs, but the good news is I can look at anybody, I can look anybody in the eye and people come up to me, "Oh man, I read your book, I read your book.  It changed my--."  I can look anybody in the eye and I can tell them without a doubt these principles work.  Don't focus on me, focus on the principles and they will serve anybody wealth.  See, if he would have given me some type of financial support and given me a safety net, I wouldn't have been so sure.  To me, it would have been like a job.
Story_ID: 344169
Speaker 1: We were talking about the book ['Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill] being published.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: So, he [W. Clement Stone] gives you this, I'm not gonna underwrite this book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he heard of me and the reason why he heard of me was because I had so many articles, published by Success magazine, or Nation's Business because this was like the first of its type, and when individuals caught wind of what I was doing, magazines would call, "Hey, man.  Can you write us an article about the commonalities?"  I even had an article published in AJC [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], of what I was doing prior to the booking release?  Prior.  Are you ready for this, Shawn [Shawn Wilson]?  I didn't even have a publisher, and the way that I, the way that I acquired a publisher is a fascinating story by itself.  Success magazine knew what I was doing, all right?  So I get a phone call from Scott DeGarmo, who at that time was the editor in chief of Success magazine.  He says, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], you gotta write an article for us."  I had already written one.  He said, "You gotta write--."  I said, "Well, you've seen my manuscript, Scott.  Take whatever you want."  He said, "No, no, no.  We like your writing style.  Yeah, you write it."  I said, "Okay."  So, I wrote an article for Success magazine, and sure enough, it was a big feature article.  Harvey Mackay, who wrote 'Swim With the Sharks' ['Swim With the Sharks Without Being Eaten Alive: Outsell, Outmanage, Outmotivate, and Outnegotiate Your Competition,' Harvey Mackay], 'Beware of the Naked Man' ['Beware the Naked Man Who Offers You His Shirt: Do What You Love, Love What You Do and Deliver More Than You Promise,' Harvey Mackay], 'Sharkproof' ['Sharkproof: Get the Job You Want, Keep the Job You Love...in Today's Frenzied Job Market,' Harvey Mackay], 'Pushing the Envelope' ['Pushing the Envelope: How to Be Better, Faster, Smarter and Get the Results You Want in Business and in Life,' Harvey Mackay], I mean Harvey's got about seven or eight books out there.  He's on a book tour in Dallas, Texas, pushing, pumping one of his latest books, all right?  And he's catching a flight to go back to Minneapolis [Minnesota], his home office, and right before he gets on a plane he goes to a magazine stand, news stand, grabs the latest issue of Success magazine, sees my article in there, all right?  And it says at the end of the article, you know, Dennis Kimbro, author of forthcoming book, 'Blacks are Growing Rich.'  I didn't even have a title for it.  I called it 'Blacks are Growing Rich,' because that was the title that Hill [Napoleon Hill] had on his hundred written pages, 'Blacks are Growing Rich.'  So he sees it and don't you know this man calls me up out of the blue.  He called me up and it's so fortuitous because here we are, man oh man, see how God works?  This Friday is Good Friday.  I'm gonna tell you something.  He calls me up on Good Friday.  He read the article and he says, "Hello, Dennis Kimbro?" He said, "My name is Harvey Mackay, blah-blah-blah," and I had heard of him.  He says, "I read your article in Success magazine."  I said, "Thank you." He said, "Man, that's a real inspiring piece." Again, first of its type.  He says, "I see you've got a book coming out."  I said, "Yeah, I'm putting the finishing touches on it right now."  He says, "Who's your publisher?"  I said, "I don't have a publisher."  He says, "Who's your agent?"  I said, "You got me there.  Don't have an agent."  He said, "Who have you shared your manuscript with?"  And I said, "Only a couple people."  He said, "Can I see the manuscript?"  Now, I'm on the phone talking to Harvey Mackay.  My wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] is in the room and I covered the receiver and I said, "This guy wants to see my manuscript," and, I said, "I guess it'll be all right."  He said, "But do me a big favor."  He says, "I want you to overnight the manuscript to me but do me a big favor.  Give me forty-eight hours.  Don't share it with anybody else.  And, if I like the manuscript and I think the manuscript is what it is, I'm going to share it with my agent, and you never know.  You never know."  He says, "You give me forty-eight hours and I'll get back to you."  I hung up the phone and I turned to my wife and I said, "Man, this guy, he says give him forty-eight hours and he's gonna share it with his agent."  I know he said forty-eight hours, it's Easter Sunday.  I know this man's not going to call me Easter Sunday.  Three o'clock Easter Sunday, I'm seated on my deck and he calls.  He is bouncing off the ceiling.  He says, "Do you know what you've written?"  I said, "I have a good idea."  He said, "No, do you really know what you've written?"  I said, "Yeah, I think it's gonna do pretty well."  He said, "I have shared this with my agent.  When can you come to Minneapolis?"  They overnighted the contract.  He took that manuscript, his agent who became my agent, took the manuscript and sent it out to the top twelve publishing houses in the county, the floor bid.  They got it to an auction.  The floor bid.  Just to be invited to the party was six figures.  My lifestyle changed overnight.  I went from below poverty to off the meter, overnight.  Seven year ordeal.  My wife retired on the spot.  (Laughter) On the spot.  She said, "I have officially retired at age forty-two.  It's been a nice career and this is a good time for me to exit side door right, see you later."
Story_ID: 344170
Speaker 1: So then, how did, and I mean I'm sure during those seven years, the ups and downs--
Speaker 2: Oh, I could tell you stories. Gas, lights, water, electricity cutoff.  I could tell you stories that would put anybody--there were times that my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] threw in the towel, she quit.  There were times that I threw in the towel and I quit, but praise God, we never quit together.  We never quit together.  Shawn [Shawn Wilson], I remember the second time we got our water cut off at our house.  Got the water cut off on a Friday.  That means it can't be restored back to any use until Monday.  Do you ever go a weekend without water?  So, we got it cut off and the second time we got it cut off, they tacked on a sixty-five dollar surcharge.  We didn't have enough money to pay the water bill, let alone sixty-five dollars, okay?  And I need to share this story more often.  So my wife said, "What in God's name are we going to do?"  So, I said, "Pat, I don't know what I'm gonna do, except I'm gonna go down to the water company and I'm gonna just tell somebody what I'm involved in and what I'm doing, and I'm gonna just throw myself on the sword and maybe somebody feels sorry for me."  So sure enough, Monday morning came along and I went down to the water company, all right?  And just like you're going into the social security office, and they, there were three clerks or three customer service representatives and you get a number and you stand in line.  There were three and they were all lined up and those steel gray hard desks with the glass petitions and everybody had a, you know, a computer on the desk, okay.  There were two white males and one black female, okay?  So, I said, if I'm going to bare my soul, if I'm gonna open up, I'm gonna do it to this black female.  So, I got my number and I positioned myself in line and I saw, where if I saw the line was moving fast and this black female wouldn't call me, I said, oh no, you can go ahead, and I'd tell the next person in line, go ahead, blah-blah-blah.  So, sure enough, she called me into her cubicle--'cause it was in full view of everybody.  You had glass partitions between them and it was in full view.  So I walked into her cubicle and, Shawn, I got on my knees in front of this woman and I had my head bowed down, I had my hands clasped, and I said, "If me and my wife had the money to pay, we would pay it, but I'm a writer and I'm involved in this book project ['Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill] and every dime that we have goes into this project, and I don't know why I'm writing this book.  I don't know of anybody that's going to read it.  I don't know if it's going to change anybody's life, but that's what I'm doing right now and I'm just sorry that I put you--blah-blah-blah."  And this is what this black woman did.  She looked to her left.  She looked to her right to make sure no one was looking, typed in a few numbers, erased my account--erased my account.  And, you know what she said to me?  She said, "I won't tell if you won't.  Pick up your bed and go walk."  She said those words.  That biblical phrase.  She said, "Pick up your bed and go walk.  I won't tell if you won't."  And I cried.  I got home and our water was restored.  I could tell you some ghost stories, (unclear) ghost stories that will put you on your knees, and that's why, you know the phrase you can't have a testimony without a test, is so true, but you gotta go one step further.  You know, the Lord's not picking on you.  He's pointing you out.  And I just think back, I mean who in the world could he get to prove to anybody that this will work, and he just picked on this poor soul in Atlanta, Georgia, so I'm all the blessed for it and I wouldn't trade anything for it, and I tell, I speak sometimes before entrepreneurs, those folks who are trying to go the next mile who have taken their company through the five stages of entrepreneurship, and they said, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], when is it gonna end?  This roller coaster, these highs and lows, these ups and downs."  I said, "It never ends until you get off the roller coaster."  But the last thing I said, I said, "This is all part of a test."  And I said, "And I want you to be tested.  And I want it rough, and I want it hard.  Why?  Because it wouldn't be fair to me and my wife," and I said, "But you'll appreciate it in the end.  You'll be all the better for it."  Scar tissue, um-hm.
Story_ID: 344171
Speaker 1: So when you get the big check, your life changes, were you writing the motivational, 'Keeping the Daily Motivations' [sic. 'Daily Motivations for African-American Success: Including Inspirations from Famous African-American Achievers,' Dennis Kimbro] before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they came to me--no.
Speaker 1: No. So, you didn't start that until, so--
Speaker 2: I wasn't even thinking about that book.  See, I thought that, all right, you've got 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice' [Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill], and then here comes my book, 'What Makes the Great Great' ['What Makes the Great Great: Strategies for Extraordinary Achievement,' Dennis P. Kimbro], right behind it.  Well Doubleday said, yeah, we want 'What Makes the Great Great,' but we don't want it now, we want to flip up, we want to switch up a few things to go in a different direction.  We want you to write a daily meditation book.  And I said, "Why?"  And they said, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], we have received so many phone calls, so many faxes, okay, so many letters from readers of 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' saying that, you know, it's funny.  Whenever I open up that book and I don't care if I start at the beginning of the chapter, the middle of the chapter, the end of the chapter, there's food on that page.  So we want you to write one of those daily inspiration books."  So I said, "Well, if I'm gonna write one, I wanna write it the way I wanna write it."  And they said, "Well, how do you wanna write it?"  And I said, "Well, number one, I want to start off with a quote."  And I said, "Number two, I want to title every page.  I want to give a page a title. And number three, and this is critical, number three, I want to tell a story on that page."  I wanted to tell a story, 'cause I had never--there have been many meditational books, blah-blah-blah, where the author would expand on the quote.  I don't wanna--I wanna tell a story.  I wanted to get allegorical on every page.  And they said, "Write it any way that you want to write it."  And, I have been so blessed with that book, I could go into the study of any prominent clergy in this country, and I may not find 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' on the bookshelf, and I may not find 'What Makes the Great Great' or 'What Keeps Me Standing' ['What Keeps Me Standing: Letters from Black Grandmothers on Peace, Hope and Inspiration,' Dennis Kimbro], but nine times out of ten, I will find 'Daily Motivations for African-American Success,' because of stories in that book that they used to deliver a sermon.  I have been, I don't care, I've been in the study of T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes], I've been in the study of Eddie Long [HistoryMaker Bishop Eddie L. Long], I've been in the study of all the prominent--there it is, that one book right there.  Yup.
Story_ID: 344172
Speaker 1: So when did they actually publish the 'Great' book?
Speaker 2: That was published, okay, '92 [1992] was 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice' [Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill], '94 [1994] 'Daily Motivations' ['Daily Motivations for African-American Success: Including Inspirations from Famous African-American Achievers,' Dennis Kimbro], and '96 [1996], '97 [1997] 'What Makes the Great Great' ['What Makes the Great Great: Strategies for Extraordinary Achievement,' Dennis P. Kimbro].
Speaker 1: And how did that feel, because you had been working on that by now since the '70s [1970s], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, man.  It felt like, I don't know how it would feel being a male, but I said to my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro], I said, "It's got to be similar to childbirth, to actually see that bad boy in print."  And that was really, though, the first book on leadership, on black leadership, because if you read 'Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' I focus on entrepreneurs, wealth creators, but in 'What Makes the Great Great,' I focused on those leaders and those individuals who had carved their names on the tablet of success, regardless of what area of interest.  I had interviewed Olympic athletes.  I had interviewed the top great school--I mean, you get all the black great school teachers, I had interviewed them.  I had interviewed politicians.  I had interviewed from all walks of life and that was the first one in that book that's--man.  That book, if I speak ten times, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], I know, I know for a fact seven of the ten times are gonna be for Corporate America.  And when I go in to speak for Corporate America, and I don't care who the client is, from Bayer Pharmaceutical [Bayer AG] to America Online [AOL Inc.], when I go in there to speak, on every seat is going to be a copy of 'What Makes the Great Great.'  A couple days ago, not a couple days ago, about maybe one or two weeks ago, the principal at Columbia High School, right here in Decatur, Georgia, he said, he said, "Doc [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], you gotta do me a favor.  It's our annual banquet and I don't know if you know it or not, but the men's basketball team are the state champs, okay.  Please come over and speak to them."  And I said okay.  So, they had the banquet at seven o'clock.  I stayed on campus until about six o'clock and I went over there and I spoke to the team and I told the team the true story about me and 'What Makes the Great Great.'  I said, in the year 2000, as you know, Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], the Spartans [Michigan State Spartans] were national champs and I told them, I said, "I didn't know it until one of the players on the team by the name of Steve Finamore, very rarely got into a game.  He was like number thirteen on the bench.  It had to be a blowout before he would ever get in there.  He didn't hold any aspirations of playing in the NBA [National Basketball Association].  All he wanted out of the deal, he wanted to get his degree in education and go back to Detroit [Michigan] and be a public school teacher," okay?  Didn't even know it, Shawn [Shawn Wilson].  So, the year is 2000, and here you have Michigan State, Tom Izzo, who is still the coach today of the Michigan State Spartans basketball team, prior to their team to Michigan State going into the Big Ten tourney [Big Ten Men's Basketball Tournament] and then going into the NCAA tourney [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament], he gave every player on that team a copy of 'What Makes the Great Great,' and told them to read it.  I didn't even know it until Steve Fennimore emails me.  He went online, he googled me, got my email address and he emails me and he said, "I hope this is the right email address, I found it, blah-blah-blah, but I just wanted to tell you, coach gave every player 'What Makes the Great Great,' and told us to read it to get ready for the tournament and mentally tough, this, that, and everything."  So, I shared that story with Columbia High School.  To make a short story even shorter, Steve Fennimore, he had some real reservations.  He told me the team had some reservations about them winning the whole thing, 'cause everybody, all the number one seeds get upset, some Cinderella team will come and knock 'em off, and I was emailing back and forth and I told him to relax, you guys are gonna win it all.  Well, towards the end of the conference, he began calling me, you see, we had these personal conversations on the phone.  After Michigan State wins the entire tournament and now he's a national champ, and now he can visualize wearing that championship ring and going back to Detroit, all those people who doubted him, blah-blah-blah, and he can become a school teacher and this and everything. He told me the day after they won it, on the phone, he says, "Dr. Kimbro, man, I'm reading 'What Makes the Great Great,' and you just harp, you just talk about visualization and seeing with your mind's eye and if you can see it and believe it, you can conceive it."  He said, "Let me tell you what coach did at our first practice back at the end of September, the beginning of October."  He said, "Coach Izzo did the same thing, man.  He talked about visualization.  Don't you know the first practice that we had for more than two hours, the only thing that we did was practice cutting down the nets."  For more than two hours of practice, he had the music piped in, he had the confetti, he had, you know, (unclear) get on the stepladder, showing to put the hats on backwards, cutting them, they did that for two hours.  At the last game of the season, they cut down the nets.  That's powerful.  I didn't even know it.  So, I ask people all the time, do you practice cutting down the nets in your life?  If I see a videotape of your life, do you win?  (Laughter) You're the only one to keep score.  You're the author and finisher of your life.  I mean, you write the final chapter, final page, final paragraph, final sentence.  What's the outcome of the book?  Do you win?
Story_ID: 344173
Speaker 1: So, by the time that the third book, 'What Makes the Great Great' ['What Makes the Great Great: Strategies for Extraordinary Achievement,' Dennis P. Kimbro], has come out, you've become a motivational speaker and you're speaking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I never see it in myself.  I don't even claim being a motivational--people may, you know, they may hear me, you know, and they might say, man, your words are inspiring.  Your words motivate me.  But I'm just a college professor.  I've never said that I was a motivational speaker.  I mean, you may capture me and you may pigeonhole me into that, and I have no problems with that, okay, but I teach.  That's what I do for a living.  People come up to me all the time, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], "Man Dr. Kimbro [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro], I wanna do exactly you want to do."  I said, "You--you're a teacher?"  "No, I don't teach."  "Oh, you're a writer?"  "No, I don't wanna write."  "You're a college professor?"  "No, I don't wanna--."  "What is it that I do that you wanna do?"  "Man, I wanna be a motivational speaker."  I said, "Okay, go do it," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, the reason I say that is because out of you travelling country, the book, the standing--what's the title?
Speaker 2: 'What Keeps Me Standing' ['What Keeps Me Standing: Letters from Black Grandmothers on Peace, Hope and Inspiration,' Dennis Kimbro].
Speaker 1: 'What Keeps Me Standing' comes about--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: And it's just a great idea for a book.
Speaker 2: And that was the idea of my youngest daughter.  Again, you gotta rewind the videotape and go back to this time period where Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is running for reelection against Bob Dole, okay, and I was about to go on another wing of the tour for 'What Makes the Great Great,' and I knew that I was gonna be gone for several days, blah-blah-blah, and this, that and everything, so my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] said, "Well, takes a mini-vacation.  Let's get all the girls together."  I had one in college, one was about to go in college, and I had my youngest daughter, who was about to go into high school and the girls always loved going up to North Carolina, this, that and the everything, so no one wanted to fly.  They wanted to drive and this, that and everything, so we're driving, I've got the three girls in the back, my wife is reading USA Today, and I'm driving, and when she gets through reading it, she just throws it in the back to the girls, and my youngest daughter, MacKenzie [MacKenzie Kimbro], she gets a hold of it and right there on the first page, it's about the impending, upcoming presidential election, and while I'm driving she says to me, she says, "Dad, who you gonna vote for?"  And I said, "MacKenzie, that's a good question.  I don't know.  You tell me, who should I vote for?"  And she said, "Well, if I could vote, I know exactly who I'd vote for."  I said, "Who would you vote for?"  She said, "I'd vote for Grandma Mary [Mary Anderson Kimbro] for president and Grandma Ruby [Ruby McCauley] for vice president."  I was driving and I said, "And why would you want to do that?"  She said, "Because Dad, man, they know everything, man.  Grandma Mary helps me with this, Granma Ruby helps me with that," and these are two black women.  If you put their entire education together, you still wouldn't get a high school diploma, but in the mind and in the eyes of a young child, they know everything.  So I just thought about that and even when I'm on tour and signing books at 'What Makes the Great Great,' and blah-blah, and it just stayed in my mind, days turned to weeks, weeks turned to months, I guess about six months later, this thing just wouldn't let me go, so I turned to my wife and I said, "Pat, you know, I'm thinking about this grandmother book and even if I were to write this book, even if I were to write this book, I can't go around the country interviewing all these folks.  It would take me forever.  How would I get this information?"  And my wife says, completely passe, completely off the cuff, in passing, she says, "That's easy."  I said, "What do you mean, easy?"  "Tell them to write you a letter."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  "Tell them to write you a letter."  I said, "Who, in this day and age, will write a letter, in this day of emailing, faxes, phone call, call waiting, (laughter) voicemails?"  I said, "No one takes the time to write a letter."  She said, "Yeah, they'll write you a letter."  So, whenever I gave a presentation, if I thought the audience would lend itself, the audience was apropos to that type of setting, people would ask me all the time, "What book are you working on now?"  And I would share that with them and I would say, "By the way, if there are any black grandmothers in the audience who would love to write a letter, blah-blah-blah."  And I, did I received letters over a five-year period.  Oh, my God, did they respond.  Over a five-year period I received letters from every type of black grandmother under the sun.  I received letters from black grandmothers, Ph.D.s from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], high school dropouts, doctors and lawyers, third grade education, grandmothers whose children and grandchildren are thriving and surviving, to one grandmother, her name is Flora Kelly, she lives is Waterloo, Iowa, in Waterloo, Iowa.  She has seven children.  The day that she wrote my letter, five were incarcerated in prison.  She told me, she told me right there in the letter, that she would go down to the correctional facility and she would see her sons, but she just got to the point in life where she just hated to see her sons caged up like animals, and she would write 'em letters.  She sent me one of the letters that she would write to her sons.  I received three letters from white women, white grandmothers raising black children (laughter).  Every type of letter out there.
Story_ID: 344174
Speaker 1: I received letters written on personal stationery, I received letters written on greeting cards, I received letters written on the back of church programs.  I received letters written on the back of funeral programs.  I received letters faxed.  I received letters emailed.  I even received, I had four black grandmothers in a New York [New York] housing project after church one Sunday, they go to the apartment of one of the grandmothers, sit around the kitchen table with an audio cassette, a tape recorder in the middle, spoke for about three or four hours on every issue on life, and sent me the cassette, and on the cassette they had wisdom of the ages explaining their take on life.  First time it's ever been done.  This is the rich wisdom--I tell people, don't act like you'll see this again.  And so, after five years, I have mountains and mountains and mountains of letters, so the publisher says, "Man, you gotta start throwing this into a book," and I said, "I don't have the slightest idea," you know, and the interesting thing about that book, when my wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] travels with me, I've seen my wife actually sit down and read one of my books.  Never, never.  She might critique something that I write when I say, "Pat, give me your take on this," but I've never seen her open up one of my books.  But, I'll never forget, we were travelling to Orlando, Florida, and packed and were getting ready to get in the car to go to the airport to get on the plane and she said, "Wait a minute, I forgot something."  She goes back in the house last minute and she comes out with a stack of letters and there we are, seated in first class flying to Atlanta [Georgia], I'm reading a magazine, blah-blah-blah, waiting for time to go by, and she's just enjoying the letters and that's when I knew that I had my hands on something.  So, Doubleday calls, "Okay, man, you gotta start going from broad to narrow.  We have to put this in a tight box.  How you gonna do it?"  And I said, "I don't have the slightest idea."  But, what I do know, what I did, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], if one of the grandmothers addressed this subject I put it in that stack.  If they addressed this subject, I put it in that stack, and after five years, I noticed I had seven different stacks.  They spoke on seven different--it just worked out that way.  So, I said what I'll do, I'll put all the letters in this one stack, and these are the seven areas that they spoke on.  Number one, live this day as if it's your last.  Live this day as if it's your last.  Okay?  Number two, hope.  Number three, count your blessings.  Count your blessings.  You're here not to count your money.  You're here not to count the moment.  You're here to count your blessings (unclear).  Number four, love.  Love.  Love is the master plan.  Number five, are you ready?  And this one really, I've been married thirty-four years, but this is what really blew me away.  Number five, manhood in marriage.  These were black women writing to me, writing to me, telling me what constitutes a man, what is the difference between a man and a boy, why is marriage the final rung on the ladder to manhood.
Story_ID: 344175
Speaker 1: Number six, I asked, I said if God had given us an eleventh commandment, what would it have been?  It came back kindness and service to others.  They wrote on kindness.  If you just read the kind acts that these women performed and never told a soul, never told a soul.  The kind acts that these women performed and never told a soul.  And I got upset.  I was in Chicago [Illinois] and I got, man, I said the Chicago Sun-Times and the Chicago Tribune, because everybody's looking for feel-good stories and I received a letter from Rosie Hodges, a black grandmother in Chicago.  She was a schoolteacher for more than twenty some years and she retired and she didn't know what she wanted to do for the rest of her life, but as a schoolteacher she loved children, okay, so she begins to take care of some of the children in the neighborhood and, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], before you know it, this woman has a full blown daycare.  She didn't even, she didn't even start out with that in mind, you know, just proliferated, just escalated, one child, two children, blah-blah-blah.  So, one day she's taking care of this infant and every day the infant's siblings, older brother and teenage sister were coming to pick the child up.  One day just the brother comes in and he's like in elementary school, and Rosie Hodges says, "Where's your older sister?"  And he says, "She's in the car."  And she said, "Why doesn't she come here and pick up your brother?"  He said, "She's embarrassed."  "Why's she embarrassed?"  And he says, "She's pregnant."  And she says, "You tell your sister to get in here."  So she comes in and she's crying and she can't even make eye contact with Rosie Hodges, 'cause she feels so bad.  She said, "Miss Hodges, I know you're upset with me because we've had so many conversations about how I'm gonna go to college and get out of this neighborhood and make something of myself, but now with the baby here--." So, Rosie Hodges says, "Girl, nothing's changed.  You're still going to college."  She said, "Well, Miss Hodges, how can I do that 'cause I gotta get a job.  I gotta take care of this child," and Rosie said, "No.  I'm gonna take care of this baby."  She said, "Miss Hodges, I know what daycare costs.  I don't have any money to pay you."  She said, "Well, when you graduate that will be repayment enough."  Four years later Rosie Hodges sits on the front row at the commencement exercise of Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] and watches that child walk across the stage, receives her degree, and when she receives it, Rosie Hodges goes (gesture), "Job done."  And no one wrote about it until my book ['What Keeps Me Standing: Letters from Black Grandmothers on Peace, Hope and Inspiration,' Dennis Kimbro] came out and it made the back page of the Chicago Sun-Times.
Story_ID: 344492
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I received a letter from Janie Coverdale, who is the black grandmother who lost her two grandsons [Elijah Coverdale and Aaron Coverdale] in the Oklahoma bombing of the Murrah Building [Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], and as I was sharing, she did not want to go to work that day because she had some comp time coming, but at the request of the urging of her two grandsons, who just loved and adored their friends, their little buddies at the daycare, she gave up and she gave in and she said, "Okay, I'll, we'll go in," and so she drops him off at the daycare and she goes to her building and she goes up to the cafeteria to get her morning coffee and as she's on the elevator going down, the bomb was so violent that it shook the elevator in the adjacent building and the elevator, she said, "What in the world was that," and she goes down to her floor and as she's walking off it didn't register in her mind, she said, "Uh, some fool just bombed the Murrah Building," and she was walking and she catches herself about five steps later, "The Murrah Building."  And she drops her coffee and she runs and the rest is history.  But, the reason why I wanted to share that, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], she wrote a four-page letter on peace, hope, and forgiveness that I conclude the book ['What Keeps Me Standing: Letters from Black Grandmothers on Peace, Hope and Inspiration,' Dennis Kimbro] with, and I know for a fact that if George Bush [President George Walker Bush] would take this letter to the Mideast [Middle East], he'd have peace right now. How she forgives all involved, you know, that type--it's that type of spirit, you know, that wins the day.  Because these individuals by far are the most spiritual individuals walking on earth, you know, just kind soul.  Just kind soul.  These grandmothers are just living proof that there is a God.  You see, that's what they bring to the table, okay?  If I want money management, you know, I might turn to Jewish Americans.  If I want craftsmanship, I might turn to German Americans, all right?  If I want to look at persistence, taking the long road, I might look at Asian Americans, but I want that one individual that gives inspiration, that lift everybody up, that takes everybody's excuse away of why you haven't succeeded and why you can succeed, that takes every--that removes all, that pulls out all the stops, it's that black grandma.
Story_ID: 344493
Speaker 1: How did you get to Clark University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: In 1992, Clark was establishing its Center of Entrepreneurship [Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development], and based off my first book ['Think and Grow Rich: A Black Choice,' Dennis Kimbro and Napoleon Hill], the dean at that time was Ed Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons].  He had a clear idea who he wanted to run that Center of Entrepreneurship and he called me a couple times and initially I wasn't interested and blah-blah-blah, but he was certainly persistent and I came here, I was here from 1992 to 1996.  I was the director for the Center of Entrepreneurship and I took time off to finish my fourth book ['What Keeps Me Standing: Letters from Black Grandmothers on Peace, Hope and Inspiration,' Dennis Kimbro], and then I came back.  I've been here since 2000, so I've been here in total for about nine or ten years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So why, I'm sorry. I wanted to know, why do you teach?  Why did you accept the job after all of the persistence?
Speaker 2: To make a bigger contribution.  I mean, I can't make any bigger contribution than my books, but here, you know, I tell people all the time there's a difference teaching at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] than it is at a predominant school.  We know that.  I don't need to go into it, okay?  So many of our children are first generation.  So many of our children, this is the first foray or introduction to higher education, so with that comes responsibility as an instructor, as a professor, and with mine it's teaching the unteachable, reaching the unreachable, and to be patient, be patient, with the late bloomers.  Because you've got to be patient.  And, that's really the underpinning to it all.
Speaker 1: So, how, let me just think about how to connect these, but you spent your entire, I mean you were educated--your education was all white, no black--
Speaker 2: Predominant schools, undergraduate University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma], doctorate at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: But now you understand the value of having black people teach black people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?  Does that make any sense, the question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know what?  Don't get focused on the race.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Get focused on the values and the traits and qualities that I or any other instructor at an HBCU would bring to the table, okay?  Because these children are my own, okay?  I know where they need to be, and I'm not gonna cut corners.  Why?  Because I know what lies on the other side of this curtain for them and I'm gonna make sure that they're fit, they're focused, ready to run the race of their lives.  I'm not gonna lower that bar, you know, and I tell my students all the time there's only one thing better than winning, and that's preparing to win.  So you, there's 50 million ways you can win.  You can win by being in the right place at the right time.  You can win by, you know, the competition not showing up.  There are plenty of times the competition doesn't forfeit. Okay. You can win by somebody feeling sorry for you.  Ah--I'll go ahead and let him win, I'll go ahead and give it to him.  All right?  You can win by your adversary moving to another location.  There are 50 million different ways you can win, but suppose the competition does show up, and suppose it just isn't your day.  You're not in the right place at the right time, and suppose somebody doesn't feel sorry for you, but comes at you with a vengeance.  What are you going to rely on?  You've been prepared to win.  Here, you know.  I've prepared for this day since I was born.  Oh, I could handle it.  Bring it on.  No problem.  I got it.  Yup.  Hard work beats talent when talent doesn't work hard.
Story_ID: 344494
Speaker 1: Along those same lines then, what are your hopes for generations to come? And I mean, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, that's my lot, that's my station in life.  People say why are you here?  Well, I'm here to do what you do, because it's success, achievement, okay, particularly within the black community I want to be there to chronicle it for future generations.  You can look at any of my books and you can see that I use the language that is timeless.  I use timeless language, you know, and I share stories, almost biblical, allegorical.  That means you can learn, anybody can learn from that story.  There's food for you on that page regardless of your personal or professional development.  You can get something out of that.  So, I want to be there to chronicle it for future generations.  The book that I'm working on now, 'Have Versus Have Not' ['The Wealth Choice: Success Secrets of Black Millionaires,' Dennis Kimbro], where I'm going around the country interviewing black millionaires. There are so few black millionaires, the [U.S.] Census Bureau doesn't even who they are and where they exist.  When I say few of the 33.7 million African Americans, only 160,000 of what we call the top 1 percent.  What's the top 1 percent in black America?  Featuring an income of $200,000 a year or more.  So wherever they are, I survey them.  I ask them 118 questions.  I give them a survey and let 'em check.  I want to find out why they're different, why they're different and unique. How do they think different, blah-blah-blah.
Story_ID: 344495
Speaker 1: So, just one question.  Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] wanted me to ask you about Barbara Thomas [HistoryMaker Barbara L. Thomas].  Do you know Barbara Thomas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barbara Thomas of the Black MBA Association [National Black MBA Association]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And, any stories?  Anything you could share with us?
Speaker 2: I just know of Barbara being a more than capable leader.  I mean, her fingerprints, her DNA can be felt, can be seen all through National Black MBA Association.  I mean, she is a leader in every, whew, every phase, every facet of that world, of that word.  I mean, that girlfriend not only shows up, she shows out, you know, and I've just been enamored with Barbara because I've been to too many to count Black MBA Associations, and you can see when she takes the reins--
Story_ID: 344496
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: My books, my writings, making a difference, never want to be like everybody else.  Never wanted to be like everybody else.  Yup, living proof that I was here.  In my seventy-four years, I'm gonna leave my fingerprints.
Story_ID: 344497
Speaker 1: Last question.  Looking over your whole, the span of what you've been able to accomplish so far, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: The journey.  The people I met.  The circumstances that I faced.  The decisions that I made.  And through it all, I just tried to do my best on the journey.  It's been a hell of a journey.  Continues to be a hell of a journey.
Speaker 1: And you are a HistoryMaker.  Why did you agree to be a part of the program, The HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: Again, I want to leave what I've done for future generations.  I don't know, I mean maybe somebody will look at this tape next year, ten years, twenty years, okay, and they just might be able to get something out of it.  I just might be able to shorten their stroke and make it a little bit easier for the next generation.
