Story_ID: 327188
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Gail Knox and [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] George Levi Knox, III, K-N-O-X.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on September 6th, 1943, in Indianapolis, Indiana, Labor Day.  My mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] tells me the coincidence was appropriate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and, so what is your occupation briefly?
Speaker 2: I'm now retired.  I was an executive for many years with Philip Morris Companies [Philip Morris Inc.], now the Altria Group [Altria Group, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, you were like a senior vice president?
Speaker 2: I was vice president of corporate affairs when I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 29, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in La Jolla, California.
Story_ID: 327189
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spare ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think I like the fall the best.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm in it in La Jolla, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Story_ID: 327190
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George Levi Knox, II] side, beginning with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Yvonne Marguerite Knox, Wright, sorry, her maiden name.  Y-V-O-N-N-E, M-A-, I don't know you gotta trip on the spelling of Marguerite.  M-A--
Speaker 1: Is it the usual spelling?
Speaker 2: The usual spelling of Marguerite whatever that is.  I don't have--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: It's M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E.
Speaker 2: I-T-E, I think that's it.  Wright, W-R-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on August 27th, 1919, in Medford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know that my mother's parents, John Clarence Wright and Adelaide, I'm sorry my grandmother's real name was Addie Lee Streeter [Addie Streeter Wright].  I know my grandmother died when I was still waiting to be born, and my grandfather when I was three, so I didn't know them quite well.  They were educators, or at least my grandfather was.  They, he was a graduate of Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] in I think 1906, one of the early graduates.  Went on to teach at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where he met my grandmother who was a graduate of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and they were both as I said faculty members there.  He, let's see, they went on to Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts], and I'm trying to remember.  I can't remember exactly and I've been trying to nail this down whether it's there he got his Ph.D or was there working on a post doc at Tufts when my mother was born in Medford, that's how they happen to be, that's how she happened to be born in that strange place where people in those days.
Story_ID: 327191
Speaker 1: Now before we go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --we get 'em to Massachusetts there, there's a story that you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --have on Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] we need to probably tell.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I was quite interestingly I was googling Booker T. Washington papers which are I think at the University of Illinois.  I'm not sure, but at any rate I was looking at them on the Internet and just for the heck of it I typed in my, my [maternal] grandfather's [John Wright] name into the index of the Washington papers and found a correspondence from Booker T. to my grandfather telling him that he thought, he, Booker T., thought my grandfather's pursuit of my grandmother [Addie Streeter Wright] was inappropriately ardent and not quite befitting behavior of faculty members at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I'm glad that my grandfather ignored him and kept going, 'cause otherwise I wouldn't be here.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  That's quite a story.  That says something about the times.
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: She was actually--it was interesting, 'cause we went to visit Tuskegee once, and I had my children with me, and we were at The Oaks, the president's residence of Tuskegee, which is now a national monument or historic site or something.  And we went through the house and we got to the third floor and my mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] was with us, and she said that her mother, my grandmother, actually lived on the third floor of The Oaks for a time because she was supervising the young women who lived there and took care of the house, so it was interesting, a bit of history from her.
Speaker 1: That's right 'cause students--
Speaker 2: Students.
Speaker 1: --provided all the help in the house--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --as part of their training.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At Tuskegee at the time.
Speaker 1: So, he would have well, he, Booker T. would have seen your grandfather--
Speaker 2: He would have seen too much of my grandfather probably at the time.  That's what prompted that letter is my guess.
Story_ID: 327192
Speaker 1: So your mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] was born in Medford [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Medford, Mass.
Speaker 1: When your grandfather [John Wright] was attending Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: He was at Tufts, and I've been trying to get in touch with them to find out what exactly he was doing there.  She said it was post doctorate, I'm not sure.  Give the year 1919, she may be right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he, he earned a Ph.D. in theology?
Speaker 2: I think it was in English because he was largely a teacher, and he went back to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] as a professor and served into the presidency of, of Booker T. Washington's successor, Robert Russa Moton, and went from there to Bethune College [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], now Bethune Cookman, I think, where he taught English.  Then, my grandfather went up to North Carolina and was president of Brick Junior College [Joseph Keasbey Brick School and Junior College, Enfield, North Carolina] I understand and they had ran into some difficulty in the Depression [Great Depression] and as a consolation price the counselor, the congregational church gave him a pulpit in Atlanta [Georgia] and that's how he became the reverend.  His degree was in English.  I think he was an English teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so he--
Speaker 2: There may have been some theological--(unclear)--as far as I know.  I mean it's hard to find some of these things out, but that's how I believe he got from Tuskegee [Alabama] to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your mother raised in, in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: She, yeah let's see if she got there in 1936 she would have been in her late teens at the time I guess.  Went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and her older siblings spent less time there don't talk much about it but my mother you know spent a lot of her formative years in Atlanta, so Atlanta would have been her home she would say.
Speaker 1: Did she talk a lot about growing up?  Did she tell you any, any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: She wasn't very, she wasn't much of a storyteller.  I mean, there were anecdotes here or there, but we never did what you and I are doing now, to sit down and sort of wash the years and find out what's in there and to, to, I've tried that with her and my grandparent, my grandmother [Addie Streeter Wright], I just couldn't get, couldn't get it out of them.  So, most of what I heard from her was this or that anecdotes rather than a stream of consciousness that I could have turned into a story or written it down.
Story_ID: 327193
Speaker 1: Did she [Knox's mother, Yvonne Wright Knox] tell any memorable anecdotes that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite one is kind of, well I'll tell it anyway and then I can decide later whether to, ask you to think about it, but my father [George Levi Knox, II], jumping to my father a minute, was you know dismissed from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] at one time for getting caught in a place where he shouldn't been caught.  I didn't discover this until later it was somewhere near a girls dormitory.  He spent a year out and went back, finished school.  Then, when he and my mother met, in order to get back into school, he had to sit in front of a panel of people at Fisk, faculty members and outsiders, then when he was taken home by my mother to be presented to the Reverend Dr. Wright [John Wright] and his wife [Addie Streeter Wright] as the husband candidate, discovered that the alumni sector at Fisk who sat in on his readmission meeting was my grandmother, so she in order to preserve the domestic tranquility kept it to herself, didn't tell my grandfather this.  So, they managed to get married after all, but that was one of my mother's favorite stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something.  Now, can you tell us what, what was your mother's personality like and was she, you know--?
Speaker 2: My mother was I think very closed to outsiders.  She was very loving with us and with her closest friend, I mean she was very loving, but she was closed, a bit closed to outsiders, not particularly effusive.  But, and it would see all to be turned, her energy and focus seemed all to be turned inward on us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --her children and her family.
Story_ID: 327194
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is George Levi Knox, II, K-N-O-X.
Speaker 1: And what do you know--what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on December 23rd, 1916, in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay and what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: There I can get back to my great-great-grandfather's name, which was Charles Knox, and I know his name because my great-grandfather who was named George Levi Knox wrote an autobio- autobiographical series in his newspaper and made reference to his father.
Speaker 1: Now is this the, the, was this the one called from, 'From Slave to Freeman' [sic. 'Slave and Freeman: The Autobiography of George L. Knox,' Willard B. Gatewood, Jr.]
Speaker 2: 'Slave to Freeman,' right.
Speaker 1: Okay and this appeared in the Indianapolis Freeman?
Speaker 2: Yeah my, my grandfather, great-grandfather acquired this newspaper, the Indianapolis Freeman.  I'm not quite sure how though.  I hear it had something to do with reclaiming a debt that was owed him, so you know he didn't get the money back, he got the newspaper.  He was engaged in other businesses at the time in Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at, at a point then he wrote a serialized autobiography in the newspaper.  This was taken by professor, I think his name is Gaylord [sic. Willard B. Gatewood, Jr.], at and turned into a book called the Indianapolis--I mean 'From Slave to Freeman,' which is essentially a, a redoing of the autobiography in more, you know, time sensitive terms, a serialized autobiography is somewhat redundant probably and he shortened it up a bit and wrote a long introduction which went into some of my family history which was a gift.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful to have that kind of a document.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So many people don't know, you know.
Speaker 2: Don't know what, don't know where they came from.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I mean they--I hear it a lot (laughter). People really don't know.
Story_ID: 327195
Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather, your great, yeah your great-great-grandfather [Charles Knox] came up from Tennessee right?
Speaker 2: He was in Tennessee.  The story is that he followed an Indiana regiment out of Tennessee as it made its way home after the Civil War and wound up on Greenlee, Indi- Indiana [sic. Greenfield, Indiana].  I can't spell it, sorry, maybe later, but he opened--
Speaker 1: Did he fight in the war himself--
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: --or did he, or did--
Speaker 2: I have no evidence of that.
Speaker 1: So he was like what they would call contraband (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He just walked out.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and--
Speaker 1: He had been a slave--
Speaker 2: He had been a slave, but I'm not, I cannot remember now what his status when he followed the regiment out.  I'd have to go back and look at the book ['Slave and Freeman: The Autobiography of George L. Knox,' Willard B. Gatewood, Jr.] again to figure that out.  But he and his brother followed the, some Indiana, Indiana troops back to, back across the river into Indiana.  I think that's Ohio River that that divide, and he made his way to Greenlee where he opened a barbershop, which is what free blacks could do in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah there a lot of famous black barbers from those days.
Speaker 2: That's everybody, you know, all the barbers were black essentially, and that's what free blacks could do, or allowed to do.
Speaker 1: What do they call--you wrote the name in the tonsil--
Speaker 2: Tonsorial parlor.
Speaker 1: Tonsorial parlor, right.
Speaker 2: I think in Greenlee it was a barbershop, then when he moved to Indianapolis [Indiana] he opened a huge and it became hugely successful, tonsorial parlor where you go in, take a bath, get a haircut, shave, blah, blah, you know, where the wall was full of personalized shaving mugs and these were meeting places at the time and his place of business was quite successful.  It was in one of the principal hotels in Indianapolis.  He was quite a businessman at the time.
Speaker 1: Now that's a business in those days that a black man could have.
Speaker 2: He could have.
Speaker 1: White people had projected barbers as being black at that point.
Speaker 2: Right precisely.
Speaker 1: And they cut everybody's hair.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.  Well, they didn't cut black people's hair, at least not in a barbershop.  If you, you know, there was this, these were not integrated tonsorial parlors.  I mean the barbers were black and the customers were white.  Now they may have cut somebody's hair at home at night, but you didn't wander in for a haircut I don't think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I understand the way it was.
Speaker 1: Right, I think you're right, that's right.  It's so, so different from today, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, you know this is in the--so from 1865 to I guess to the eighteen, well you know through--he founded this barbershop around 1880 or something?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he, the one in Indianapolis I'm trying to remember when he would have actually gone to Indianapolis from Greenlee [sic. Greenfield].  I would think it was closer to the, the mid-1870s that he made the move.  I don't think he was in Greenlee [sic. Greenfield] all that long 'cause he was well established in Indianapolis by the 1880s.
Story_ID: 327196
Speaker 1: Okay, about that--this was during the 1880s he [Knox's paternal great-grandfather, George Levi Knox] bought the paper [Indianapolis Freeman] right, I mean, or acquired--
Speaker 2: Well, he acquired the paper was during the 1880s would be my guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it--do you have any sense of what status the paper was in then because this is a historic paper goes away back, but was it in decline when he (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was in decline.  I believe what I understand out of this and I, this has to be checked out to be sure, but I believe there was, he loaned someone some money, you know, the paper was part of the co, collateral of the loan.  The loan was unable to be repaid, so he assumed ownership of the newspaper.  This is what I understand happened.  But, the paper itself was in good shape.  It was the, it was the ownership of the paper, not the paper that was the problem--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from what I understand.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so and he remained the, the owner of the paper for--
Speaker 2: He remained the owner of the paper until the paper went out of business in the 1920s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I understand it was the high cost of news print, I think that's what you call the paper stock was starting to, it was starting to become an issue and they were under some pressure from the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] in those days.  You know Indiana was a hotbed of the Ku Klux Klan.
Speaker 1: That was the only state where the governor was elected is the Grand Dragon.
Speaker 2: Grand Dragon of the Klan, I didn't know that, but I--
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-eight [1928].
Speaker 2: There you have it.  Well, during the '20s [1920s] he was under some pressure from the Klan and out of those two facts as I understand it caused the paper just to shut down.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but he had a lot of, a lot of business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had some other things going.  He, I believe he was invested in real estate.  Somebody wrote that he was the richest black man in Indiana at one point.  I don't know what that means in today's terms.  Probably wasn't a lot of money, but it's all relative, and I, I think it was the function of the barbershop, the newspaper, some real estate investments, and he owned a baseball team, the Indianapolis ABCs, which I didn't even know about until about four or five years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hadn't heard of that one.  When I read about it I was, 'cause I think most people who follow history have heard of the Indianapolis Clowns, you know.
Speaker 2: The Clowns yeah.
Speaker 1: The Clowns yeah and I, I've never heard of the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Or the ABCs.  Well, this was early and these were the early days.  And the only reason I know about it was I got a call from a guy who was writing a book about the Negro Leagues and he wanted to, he wanted to use the Freeman's [Indianapolis Freeman] reporting baseball statistics, you know, games won, won/loss records and batting averages and all this stuff, which the Freeman because it tended to follow things having to do with social life, I mean the sports, the theater, or whatever was going on outside of politics was a big interest of the Freeman.  It was the variety of the black community is how it was described to me, and he needed this writer access to the Freeman's reports of the baseball games to write his book and came to me for permission which is how I found out we actually, my grandfather and great-grandfather actually owned this team, so, yeah, he did that, too.
Story_ID: 327197
Speaker 1: Your father [George Levi Knox, II] was born and raised in Indianapolis [Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did he talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not so much.  I guess, again it was anecdotal.  I mean I don't even, I don't do that with my kids [Reed Knox and Gillian Knox] sit down and have long, I mean they're not patient enough to sit there while I give them an hour's worth of recollections about this and that.  I mean my--so there wasn't a lot of commentary about how it was except that you know things were increasingly difficult during the Depression [Great Depression], of course.  By this time when we hit the Depression my father was in high school.  This was not, not a good time for anybody.  During the '20s [1920s], there was the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] stuff going on.  This was pleasant in Indianapolis, but I don't know that anybody felt sort of overwhelmed you know like they were hide, had to hide in their houses all day long every day, but that was life the, but he didn't talk about a lot, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, he attended Crispus Attucks--
Speaker 2: Went to Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] where he graduated from Attucks.  He was a big athlete there, played football and basketball there and went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and played football and basketball for Tubby Johnson [Henderson A. Johnson] whose name sort of leaps into my head.
Speaker 1: Tubby Johnson was the coach.
Speaker 2: Tubby Johnson.  I met him, got to meet him at one time.  He was the football coach.  I don't know about basketball.
Speaker 1: Well you know the coach of Kentucky's [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] team is Tubby Smith--
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: --and people, some of the announcers speculated as to how he got the name Tubby because he's not fat.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Could it be you know a flashback to Tubby Johnson, I mean I don't know.
Speaker 2: Could be, although I know that he used to call a lot of guys who were skinny tubby and a lot of guys who were not so skinny, skinny as a joke.  But, I don't know, but Tubby Johnson didn't seem to be I don't remember him as tubby or a large guy.
Story_ID: 327198
Speaker 1: Your father [George Levi Knox, II] became in the [U.S.] Air Force [sic. U.S. Army Air Corps], I mean a member of the Tuskegee Airmen, right?
Speaker 2: He became a Tuskegee Airmen.  I think it was a combination of patriotism and it could have been some desperation 'cause by the time he went into the service in nineteen, early nineteen, mid-1940, this was before the war [World War II, WWII], mid-1941 before the war started, he had, had a job washing parts in an auto plant.  This is what, a job you could get as a black college graduate in those days.  So, I think when they started to raise this black squadron it was a combination of frustration with his job prospect in Indianapolis [Indiana] as well as other motivations that drove him towards the airmen, but he did begin his training as an officer, which you did first in 1941 before the war started.  He was in a third class of graduates which brought to when his class of four got their wings.  It brought the total number of black pilots in the Air Force to twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was involved in what it's called a mutiny right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he later in the war he had been transferred out of fighter planes because he was too big to sit in the cockpit, became a bomber pilot and--
Speaker 1: Just out of curiosity, how big was he?  I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: He was six foot one.  He was about a little shorter than I am and when you first started your flight training as fighter pilot the cock, the cockpits were, were fine they could slide over your head and when they, you know your transitioning to the actual planes that you're gonna fly and you're 6'1" with a long waist like I am you sit there and they cannot close the canopy over your head for some of these guys, so these oversized pilots who'd been trained in trainers, but now couldn't fit in the planes that they were gonna fly were shifted into bombers.  They were gonna go to the Pacific and fly, they were medium bombers, B25's I think they were.  But, they were, these guys were--there two interesting stories about them, one is guys like my dad had been in the Air Force for now two or three years before they're shifted to bombers don't go to fight in the Pacific because the [U.S.] Department of the Army would not send integrated flight crews abroad or would not allow them to fly actually, and they were not navigators trained yet, so we had all these pilots who had more hours than the white guys who were being sent, you know, right out of flight school being sent to fly combat missions in Asia, but these black pilots were not, even though they had more experience because they were no navigators to go with them.
Story_ID: 327199
Speaker 1: We were getting to the mutiny I think.
Speaker 2: The--these bomber pilots were being shifted all over the place while they were in training to go to the Pacific, and they wound up in Freeman Field [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], which was in Indiana I think or Michigan, one of those two states.  When they got there, they were told that the officers' club was off limits to them.  Now these guys were all flying officers.  If you flew a plane in the [U.S.] Army Air Corps you were an officer.  There was an officer' club for officers, except that they were told they couldn't enter this officers' club because, well obviously they didn't want them in there, but the argument was you're, you know, student officers and so therefore your different from regular officers, so you're not to go into the officers' club.  Well, these guys, you gotta, if you've interviewed Tuskegee Airmen, you know, this crowd is, was a pretty good crowd and they were all college grads or college guys, I mean, they might have left college to join the [U.S.] military and become a pilot during the war [World War II, WWII], but these were all pretty sharp guys, pretty aggressive guys, and they thought this was bull.  And a bunch of them went to the officers' club one day and demanded to be let in.  There was a, someone came out from the club and says you can't come in and then two or three of them walked passed and into the officers' club.  It was a sit-in.  You know they didn't go in and sit down, but it was basically a sit-in.  Well, the Army Air Corps brought court-martial charges against these guys for mutiny and it was terrible.  It was called the Freeman Field mutiny, and the court-martial board, which were all officers of the Airmen--this was not an outside group--was supposed to be led by Benjamin O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] who at that time was a colonel I think it was.  Yeah, he was the senior person involved in the Airmen as everybody knows, one of my absolute heroes.  But, B.O. Davis was the president of the board and he figured this was not good because he's the commander of the, all of the black pilots in the service, he's the president of the board, this is not good, so he removed himself or was asked to step down as president of the board and the next senior officers became president of this mutiny, this court-martial and that was my father [George Levi Knox, II] who was the senior captain at the time.  So, he presided over this court-martial, which itself was written about in a book by a guy named Jim Warren [James C. Warren] who wrote I think it's called the Freemen Field Mutiny ['The Tuskegee Airmen Mutiny at Freeman Field,' Lt. Col. James C. Warren] (unclear) and what a mess this was and the, the dancing act between, you know, trying to follow the rules of the Army Air Corps as presented by the military and being basically in sympathy with the mutineers quote, unquote, was probably quite difficult for him, and he never talked much about it, but apparently he required all of the white officers who were treating this quite dismissively to salute him and the court-martial board as they were supposed to do, but had not.  And then there was a lot of tension in this court-martial, which resulted in three guys, the three who pushed past the officer being fined $50 each the others with letters of reprimand in their file, which were good, but still given what the charges were this was fairly modest result befitting the ridiculousness of the whole situation.  A reversal of these actions was made by the [U.S.] Department of Defense in the late 1990s at the, an announced at a Tuskegee Airmen convention was just, sorry, it was wonderful to have their records expunged.
Speaker 1: Right and I think we interviewed I think [HistoryMaker] Roy Chappell was part of that group--
Speaker 2: There you are.
Speaker 1: --and some--
Speaker 2: Well you know about it then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it was quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 327200
Speaker 1: Your father [George Levi Knox, II] was right in the middle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in, well he was, yeah he was in the middle of that [Freeman Field mutiny].
Speaker 1: That's something.  Now, he went on to have career in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He stayed in the [U.S.] Air Force.  We all moved to Lockbourne Air Force [Lockbourne Air Force Base; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Columbus, Ohio] base after the war [World War II, WWII].  It's just amazing about the Airmen [Tuskegee Airmen]; you know, they thought black people couldn't fly airplanes.  In fact, there was a defense department study said that in addition to other things black people didn't have the physical coordination required to be flyers.  You know black man can't jump essentially they were saying.  Then we went on to after that, but they, and they had a tremendous record in the war, unbelievably successful record in the war despite all attempts to make them fail.  Then, they went to Lockbourne Air Force Base where it probably gave the citizens of Columbus, Ohio, a bit of pause to have these guys flying fighter planes and bomber planes around town all the time.  But that's where I had my first conscious memory; I was four or five living at Lockbourne.  And the, this base was always rated among the highest by the administrative inspections about how well it was run and everything.  It was amazing.  So, every attempt to make them fail, failed.  And this, we were there in 1948 when Truman, President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] signed the executive order that segregated the [U.S.] military and we all went our separate ways, but my mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] said that was the happiest time in her life on that base.
Speaker 1: Right, it was right on the cusp of change--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --during that whole period of time, right.
Story_ID: 327201
Speaker 1: What is, and you, you base, as a result you, you tra--you spent a lot of time in different, at different bases around the world (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I did, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well my earliest memories are of, well my earliest childhood memory is sitting next to the bed of my dying [maternal] grandfather [John Wright] when I, when I was only about three years old, so and most people can't remember back that far, but I was so close to him that I remember sitting there and telling him stories.  He called me Toby, and I called him Toby back, and I remember that.  But, the kind of childhood memories that you're talking about when I'm a bit more self-aware began when I was four or five at Lockbourne Air Force Base [Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Columbus, Ohio] and--
Speaker 1: Okay, you grew up in a variety of places so--
Speaker 2: I did.
Story_ID: 327202
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  I know it was always in the [U.S.] military, but, you know, a variety of locations.
Speaker 2: Well, I was sort of in and out, 'cause I--we were always in the military, but didn't always live on air bases, which made it kind of different 'cause we went from Lockbourne [Lockbourne Air Force Base; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Columbus, Ohio] where I learned how to swim at the swimming pool on the base and where one of my favorite things to do was to go across the streets when they had parades and reviews.  I used to love to watch the troops being reviewed by Colonel Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] to whom we were a bunch of pests, these kids.  He told us we couldn't come out we made too much noise, so we would sneak over and hide under the reviewing stand, you know he's standing up there, we're laying down on the grass looking out between the boards at the parades and review.  I loved, loved that.  Then, we went from there to--oh we spent some months in Florida when my father [George Levi Knox, II] was in school.  We lived in a placed that they fondly referred to as Nigger Town in, in Panama City, Florida, right near I guess there was a factory that made paper or something.  All I know is it stunk to high heck.  So, my memory if you ask me about the sights and sounds of growing up this was one really foul smell that I remember from Florida.  We shared a house there, the Knoxs did--with Gene and Mil Carter [HistoryMaker Herbert Carter] were liked just like, essentially family to me.  He, he was a Tuskegee Airmen as well and he and my father were at the school in Florida.  So, we were there for a time and on to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where my father spent a year at the University of Pittsburgh studying accounting because he was shifting into the auditor's general work and became an internal auditor with the [U.S.] Air Force, and he spent a year at Pittsburgh there and that's where I had my first year of school.  My sister [Adelaide Knox Jones] was born there.
Story_ID: 327203
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You remember the name of the school that you--?
Speaker 1: I don't.  I can't remember.
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Air Force school was it?
Speaker 1: No, no this was a civilian school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At the time, they discovered I had a very bad problem with my right eye and one of fixes for it was for me to wear a patch over my left eye, but when I had that patch on I could hardly see, so I used to be led to school every day by a neighbor girl.  My parents [George Levi Knox, II and Yvonne Wright Knox] gave her something, and she walked me to school and back every day.  This is how I started school, and they used to, the other kids used to tease me.  It was really bad because I had this patch over my eye.  So, that was my first grade.  After that, my dad was sent to Anchorage, Alaska, down at Elmendorf Air Force Base [Anchorage, Alaska], but we couldn't get housing on the base right away, so he spent a year there in the BOQ [bachelor officer quarters] with his name on the waiting list for base housing while we, the rest of the family, went to live in Indianapolis [Indiana] with my grandmother [Susan Craig Perry].  So, that was very interesting.  I went to school, public school number four there in the second grade and had the same teacher that my father had in the second grade in that school.  That was amazing.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was in--
Speaker 1: This was, this would have been 1952.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is in Alabama?
Speaker 1: No, this is in Indianapolis.  We went from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to Indianapolis.  This was 1951.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And went to school there for a year living with my grandmother who is one of the great and storied people in Indianapolis, my father's mother.
Story_ID: 327204
Speaker 1: Now this is, let's pause here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and talk about this a second--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think it's something we need to say about her right?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she, my [paternal] grandmother [Susan Craig Perry], was married four times and my [paternal] grandfather [Elwood Knox] was her second husband.  She had, had a son when they married, my uncle Eddie [Edward Thompson], who himself married Evelyn Preer who became, and she and he, my Uncle Eddie and Aunt Evelyn were, and she in particular, a famous actress in the Oscar Micheaux, Micheaux films.  But, my grandmother then had two children, my father [George Levi Knox, II] and my Aunt Vick [ph.].  She lived to be two months shy of 100 and was enormously and deeply involved in Indiana politics.  Well, my family had always been politically involved, even my great-grandfather, George Knox [George Levi Knox], who became the first when my father and I became the second and third, had been an advisor to President Benjamin Harrison who was an Indianapolis [Indiana] guy who, in fact I was sitting in an historical meeting at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] once when I was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and a guy was reading a paper he had written about the gubernatorial election in Ohio in eighteen something or the other '76 [1876], '80 [1880] something like that.  It was the election of Rutherford [President Rutherford Birchard Hayes].  I think it was Rutherford B. Hayes to be governor of Ohio.  I think that was the election.  But, at any rate, he then reads an editorial written by my great-grandfather in the Indianapolis Freeman about this election in Ohio, which was like stunning, but he was deeply involved in Indianapolis, Indiana politics and politics of the area, and this--my grandmother was his successor in that.
Story_ID: 327205
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name, I don't rememb--?
Speaker 2: Susan Craig Knox [Susan Craig Perry].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, her name was Susan Craig Thompson Knox Word Perry if you get all of these, but her maiden name was Susan Craig.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She and my grandfather whose name was Elwood Knox, married in I think the, sometime between 1910 and my father's [George Levi Knox, II] birth in 1916, and they were married until my grandfather died in 1947.  But, she was as I said very, very, very involved in Indiana politics on the, Indiana politics on the ward level.  You know if you wanted to get elected to something certainly in Indianapolis [Indiana] you had to go see her.  You had to talk to her and make sure she got out the troops, which she could do and every time I went to her house, you know, the mayor or judge this or somebody was sitting in there talking about x, y, and z.  In fact, when, when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had a dinner to celebrate the centennial of the Emancipation Proclamation in 1963 he invited three people from each state to come and from Indiana my grandmother was one, which demonstrated her--his recognition of her political jobs there in Indiana.  She thought he was quote unquote a very nice boy.  She wrote us a letter (unclear) 'cause she was really getting up there by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she until the end of her days was a force in Indiana politics.
Speaker 1: In those days, she would have been a Republican.
Speaker 2: No, she was a Democrat.
Speaker 1: Oh okay (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, but she, well by, see black people became Democrats when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] became president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Up until that time, they were mostly Republicans.  In fact, if I--because the Democratic Party was a southern party, but you know by the, by the time she was really pushing it in Indiana on the political side she's a Democrat with Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and did she, was she involved in the, in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so. I don't think she was, 'cause my grandmother--(unclear)--I think her juice was because she wasn't involved in anything except making politics work.  In other words, you know In- Indianapolis was working like Chicago [Illinois] works, you know, so you, you've got a brother, he needs a job, you call Joe, you know this. Suddenly a spot in the post office is open.  This is sort of the way things worked, and that's, she was in the middle of all of this service provision to the community.  You need something, you call her up.  You, she'd make sure you got it, and this, and so at election time when she called up all her friends and says now you know you gotta go down and vote for Joe, then that's exactly what they'd do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was politics at the ward level, on the street politics, but it got to, but it got to be really big, she got to be really big in Indiana (unclear).  Certainly at the mayor, mayoral, mayoralty level and probably was friends with the governors.
Speaker 1: Okay, she kind of reminds me of--there were some other black women doing similar, not many, but I think Parren Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] grandmother had the same kind of impact--
Speaker 2: You're talking about a real, this is Clarence Mitchell's [Clarence M. Mitchell, Sr.] mother?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  The Mitchells in Maryland were a very strong political family, so you don't have to say much more about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's kind of hard 'cause it makes me, it reminds me of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --story when with all that kind of organizational capacity you know for--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --black women in those days--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to have that kind of political clout--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --is really singular and special.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she had it.
Story_ID: 327206
Speaker 1: Now you lived in Indianapolis [Indiana]?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so that was the year we spent living in her [Knox's paternal grandmother, Susan Craig Perry] house, so I saw a lot of this stuff, who came over, who called, you know meetings in the living room and all that stuff and we spent a year there while my father [George Levi Knox, II] was along in Anchorage [Alaska] waiting for base housing, and at the end of that school year we left and moved to Anchorage, Alaska.  This was during the Korean War, so there were anti air, aircraft gun and placements on the corners of the streets, 'cause we lived on Elmendorf Air Force Base [Anchorage, Alaska] and it's like wow.  This was very close to Russia, and when they have air raid drills in school for instance the buses would, you know the school buses would come screaming up to the front door and we'd all run out and jump on the buses.  They're be air police leading these buses with their sirens going while they rushed us home, and then we go and our mothers would be waiting for us, and we'd go sit in the basement all day with the shades drawn and practice being bombed.  So, this was different from the get under your desk because they're gonna drop an atom bomb kind of thing and somehow being under your desk at school is gonna protect you.  You know this was, they were really thinking that this was possible.  So, I went to two different schools in Anchorage.  We had a great time there.  I loved Alaska, except that in the wintertime when I left for school it was pitch black, and when I came home from school it was still dark, and the sun would come up for two or three hours in the middle of the day and it go, it was hard getting used to being in the night all the time.  And in the summer time I couldn't sleep because the sun wouldn't go down until 11 and would come up again at 2, 2 a.m.  So, it, it was very strange getting use to the daylight, day/night sort of stuff, but otherwise I loved it.  It was the most, I think Alaska is one of the most beautiful states in the union.  I remember going fishing for, fishing for salmon on the Red River and deep sea fishing with my father and mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] around Seward [Alaska] where the mountain tops sort of spring up out of the water.  I mean it's so extraordinary.  We were there two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Eight and nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember going down to, going into Anchorage on Sunday afternoons when the Eskimos would come in, and they'd have things like, I don't know, there was some name for this gathering on Sundays.  I can't remember what it was now, but there'd be dog fight races through the streets of Anchorage, and there'd be blanket tosses and all kinds of festive things happening in a town where not all the streets were paved.  It still had a, Alaska was still a territory then.  It still had a frontier field about it.  Interestingly, there was a fairly large black community there that had moved up in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] for one reason or another.  My father had one really good friend there named Zula Swanson.  I don't know why I remember her name, but I remember going to her house a lot, and she tried to sell him some property she owned in downtown Anchorage, and he said who'd come here and didn't buy it.  And not only did he not buy the property, she struck oil on it, you know, years later.  I remember the day that happened.  He was pretty hot, boy.
Story_ID: 327207
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we were there two years.  Then left there and went to--after my fourth grade year and I moved into my fifth grade year when I went to three different schools.  The first one was in Montgomery, Alabama 'cause my father [George Levi Knox, II] went from Alaska to Maxwell Field [Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama] in Alabama to air command and staff school [Air Command and Staff College], and we lived there for that summer, I think it was, let's see it would have been the summer of '53 [1953] until December of that year.  In the parsonage of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Montgomery, Alabama], they were looking for a new minister, didn't have one, so they rented the parsonage to us to live in.  Sometime after we left they hired Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the King family moved into this house.  So, and I learned how to roller skate on the front porch of that house, which the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] or somebody of similar persuasion blew up.
Speaker 2: Right, that's that famous case--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --where they, they blew up the porch of King.
Speaker 1: That was it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I lived down the street from--my godfather's name is Rich Harris [Dr. Richard H. Harris, Jr.] who owned a drugstore [Dean Drug Store] there in town, and when the boy, the bus boy cuts began, this was after we'd left, but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had quarters, was upstairs from his drugstore.  He, I think he owned the building, but he had a drugstore on the first floor, they were on the second floor when the, when the boycott began in '55 [1955] I think it was.  People used to go to his drugstore and sit there at the counter, and then he'd call from the back, call people up to come get him and take them here and there.  So, it became a, it became a--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, at any rate the bus boycott was running out of my godfather's drugstore, at least the, the--well of course you know when the thing started they were ready for it, I mean when they got an incident they were ready to go--
Speaker 2: Yeah they organized (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were ready to go.  This was not a spur of the moment decision.  They needed a focal point.  Rosa Parks wouldn't stand up, they got one, they were ready to go and so the one thing you had to do was help people get to their work 'cause they, you know we needed to ride those buses to get here or there and so they set up the shuttle system, which was running out of his drugstore and he lived down the street from us on Jackson Street and some years later I was able to take my kids [Reed Knox and Gillian Knox] and stand across the street from that house and say, you know, this happened here.  We just walked down from the Southern Poverty Law Center [Montgomery, Alabama] where they've got this great memorial [Civil Rights Memorial] and including a disk in front where they've chiseled the names of people who were killed in the movement including a friend of mine.  I, I, you know, I let them rub his name, and we walked in street and you know I said you know it isn't free.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Somebody paid for it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 327208
Speaker 1: Well we were talking about Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Montgomery, I went to the Lab School at Alabama State [Alabama State College Laboratory High School, Montgomery, Alabama] in fifth grade for a few months.  Then when my dad [George Levi Knox, II] finished--and we used to make lots of trips up to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in those years, which wasn't all that far away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then--
Speaker 1: Your family still had connections up in Tuskegee [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, we certainly did then.  We, see my, what happened was when my mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] went to Tuskegee [Alabama] when they established Moton Field [Tuskegee, Alabama] and the air training base there, she stayed with the Carter family the--actually that wasn't there, I'm sorry, it was the Hemans [ph.] family to her when my [maternal] grandfather [John Wright] was president of Brick [Joseph Keasbey Brick School and Junior College, Enfield, North Carolina], grandpa Hemans, Luther Hemans went up to, let me back up 'cause I can't remember if his name was Luther or not, but at any rate grandpa Hemans went up to be the bursar at Brick.  My mother grew up with their three daughters and they're like family, and they were from Tuskegee and they went back to Tuskegee and when we were in Montgomery we would go visit them Hemans like we were going to Indianapolis [Indiana] or someplace to see my [paternal] grandmother [Susan Craig Perry], and it was the same as far as I knew this was my family.  So, yes we were still very connected and still connected to them and that group in Tuskegee, but certainly then.  There were more of them there then.
Story_ID: 327209
Speaker 1: But, at any rate around the end of the year, during the Christmas holiday, we moved and now at this time my father [George Levi Knox, II] was going from Air Command and Staff school [Air Command and Staff College, Maxwell Air Force Base] in Montgomery [Alabama] to Mitchel Field [Mitchel Air Force Base] on Long Island in New York.  And again there was, there was always the housing issue when you transfer.  Unless you are a general or something like that you can't go from this base to that base and move out of this house and into that house.  You've gotta show up and put your name on the list to get housing on base, and that's kind of what he had to do again.  So, while he went to Mitchel to get us organized, the rest of us, that is my mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] and my brother [John Knox] and sister [Adelaide Knox Jones], this was before my youngest brother [Craig Knox] was born, so there were my mother and three of us went to live with my aunt in Syracuse, New York, and we were enrolled in school there for one month in Syracuse.  What was interesting is my, my aunt was a social worker and she happen to get a report across her desk one day while we were there identifying us as the children of itinerant farm workers because they had people like that in upstate New York who came up to pick apples or do whatever and of course if you're browner in the school system in January you must be an itinerant farm worker, so that's how we were carried on their list until she got hold of it.  So, we were there for a month, then went to Mitchel Fields where we were for a time now.  I think I went to two different schools there for the last half of my fifth grade, then switched to a new school in the sixth grade, but we lived in the same place.  And in fact, we were three doors down, living three doors down then from the family of Lee Archer [Lee A. Archer].  I don't know if you know that name.  He was a Tuskegee Airmen, America's only black ace, great guy, like an uncle to me.  And we were back together again for a brief time as neighbors before we then moved to Hempstead [New York].  My father was no longer working at Mitchel.  He was shifted to the, one of the federal office buildings in the city, so he became a commuter to New York City, and we moved from Mitchel into a house they wanted to buy for investment purposes in Hempstead, New York, and there I went to school for three years.  That was the only school at seventh and eighth grade I went to the seventh and eighth grades in the same school.  That was the first time that happened.
Story_ID: 327210
Speaker 1: Well, that must have been--was that a relief for you in some ways?
Speaker 2: No, you know none of it was, none--people often ask if this wasn't disruptive, this life, you know I went to nine schools in eight years and wasn't this a pain and, and no it's the, it's, you sort of deal with whatever life you got.  You don't know any better.  I, I think there were greatest advantages and this sort of great sense of fun and it got to the point where after a year or so I got, started getting kind of antsy, ready to go.
Speaker 1: Well, in that environment you weren't the only young man going through this--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, actually it was easier, it was always, it was easier when I went from, to an air base because at an air base there were a whole bunch of people who just showed up.  When I wound up say going to a school in Hempstead, New York, in the seventh grade I was the one new kid in class.  You know it was bad being the one new kid 'cause kids are really vicious to the one new guy.  You know, that's, so that when I went to school in what we called a civilian school off the base then I usually got grief from the other kids.
Speaker 1: What was the name of this school?
Speaker 2: At Hempstead?  I went to Jackson School [Jackson Main School, Hempstead, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they made it rough on you?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was integrated.  I, I think the only school I went to in all this time that was--well now I take that back.  I was about to say something that I, I can't remember what the classes looked like in my first and second grades whether they were all black or not, I mean I just didn't, I don't remember, probably didn't notice, but the, the school I went to at Alabama State [Alabama State College Laboratory High School, Montgomery, Alabama] was segregated.  Of course schools were segregated then.  This was 1955, and that was the only all black school that I went to.  I got just as much grief from the black kids at an all-black school as I did from the white kids when I was the only black kid.  It was just about being the new kid.  It was just different kinds of grief.
Story_ID: 327211
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a kid?  You know what were you interested in and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I always liked sports.  I was good at, good at it.  I wasn't much of a reader until I got to be about thirteen or fourteen, but I'd say I was pretty much interested in sports and hanging out with guys you know in my neighborhood, and we were just fooling around, but I can't say that I had an over-arching interest that you could identify, unlike my brother [John Knox], say who got really interested in chess and he pursued that like crazy, but I didn't have anything like that.  I was just out there.  But, I always seem to get--beginning when I was about ten I started getting noticed in things.  I mean, I wasn't working for it, but like what happened, oh I'd go off to Boy Scout summer camp, maybe ten or eleven or something like that, and we'd have a thing where every scout in camp is gonna run for one of the administrative positions, it's a big joke kind of thing, so my troop leader picks me to run out of troop for the mess hall guy, whoever runs the mess hall, so I, I got elected.  You know, I had to give a speech.  I was ten years old, I got up and made a speech in the dining hall, got elected.  So, then school starts at Barnum Woods [Barnum Woods School, East Meadow, New York] in Long Island and when I was living outside Mitchel Field [Mitchel Air Force Base, Long Island, New York] I was in the sixth grade they're gonna--it's a new school, they're gonna have the school safety patrol.  This is the only thing that kids at the school can do.  So, each teacher picks three kids to be on the safety patrol, so my teacher just picked me for some reason, so I was one of the three.  I go to a room, we're all in a big meeting.  We, none of us know each other.  We're going around the room introducing ourselves.  For some reason, I was leaning back in my chair and when they got to me as I said my name I fell over backwards, so there's a big commotion, but then everybody remembered my name and they elected me captain of the school safety patrol, and it's sort of an idiotic kind of thing.  But, that stuff, kind of stuff started to happen to me then where I'd get picked for some stuff.  I don't talk about it much or think about it much, but for this purpose you asked me, I'm telling you, so that started then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but as I said I didn't have any over-arching interest.  What I got to be good at was kind of political stuff because being a new kid made you politically adept, you know to show up every year at a new school with a whole new set of people you got to be good at politics or you got your butt beat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, in fact when I was eventually writing applications to graduate school you know this was done of these applications that demands self-reflection on your part and they wanted me to say something about me and how this life, how my life had affected me and I pointed out that this vagabond-ish existence had made me very good at making friends, but very bad at having friends 'cause I just wasn't any place long enough to have a real friend, but I was really good at arriving (laughter).  So, that was the life.
Story_ID: 327212
Speaker 1: Jackson School seventh and eighth grade and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackson School [Jackson Main School, Hempstead, New York] and I went on to my first year in high school, Hempstead High School [Hempstead, New York] in New York.  I had a great experience there, 'cause one day Life magazine sent this photographer out to do a shoot, you know a senior class or a high school or something.  I forget what the--so it was one of those mindless the world we live in kind of shoots, and the photographer they sent was [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks who was on, I don't know if he was on their staff or doing contract work for them, but he was the photographer they sent, and I went up and introduced myself and his jaw dropped then, 'cause when Gordon Parks had been sent to do a story on the Tuskegee Airmen or to become their photographer or something like that, he was assigned to fly in the back of my father's [George Levi Knox, II] plane because my father was one of the first guys to have a full instrument reading in his plane, so if they had a photographer or some civilian in there they'd put him in his plane, so they got to be great friends and thankfully Gordon Parks extended that friendship to me.  What a guy.
Speaker 1: Did any pictures of you appear in Life?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  That didn't, that didn't work.  He took a lot, but they didn't, my picture did not get in Life magazine.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a story (unclear).
Speaker 2: But, I did get to meet Gordon Parks--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And John Mackey you remember he used to play tight end for the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts].
Speaker 1: Right John Mackey was probably one of the greatest (unclear).
Speaker 2: John Mackey my claim to fame at Hempstead High School is that John Mackey borrowed my towel one day, 'cause I was on the freshmen football team, and he was a star of the team, a junior, I think he was two years ahead of me, and one day we were out for practice he lost his towel some place and borrowed my towel.  Boy, I've lived on that story for a long time, great guy.
Speaker 1: Well he's one of the greats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh fantastic.  Great player, but a really good guy.
Story_ID: 327213
Speaker 1: Now did you run for any offices or anything there?
Speaker 2: Not then, not at Hempstead High [Hempstead High School, Hempstead, New York].  I was just a punk freshman, so I stayed, you know, I stayed and had my head down then.  But, after that year we left anyway and I went to, my family moved to Tokyo, Japan--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I then spent three years in high school in Tokyo.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, the name of that high school is Tokyo?
Speaker 2: Well it was the, the formal name of it is Tokyo American High School [Narimasu Tokyo American High School, Tokyo, Japan], but it was called out there Narimasu High School, N-A-R-I-M-A-S-U.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: N, N-A-R-I-M-A-S-U.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the section of town in which the housing, residential, which high school was located, was located, so as far as everybody knew it was Narimasu High School, but it's formal name was Tokyo American High.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was an [U.S.] Air Force high school.
Speaker 1: This is the first time you've actually lived out of, outside of the country I guess right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  It was the first time I'd been out and then we went out to live there for three years.  I had a great time.  My first year when I was a sophomore I was very lucky again because I was on a football team and, but as a sophomore, so I was not big news in those days, but they, one of, they were, they were having a rally for school elections, so this is like the second or third week of school and I happen to be sitting in the locker room when one of the senior guys who was running one of the skits on behalf of a candidate came running in the locker room saying God one of the guys had failed to show up and dropped out, then he just turned to me 'cause I was on the team and said would you do it?  I said sure.  So, I put on this foolish dress and we all had wigs and dresses, dressed up like girls and went out and did this thing.  But because I was with the senior football players, everybody else thought I had some kind of cool gene or was in, boy that sort of got me going at that school you know, so I had a great year.  And that year we happen to live in the city 'cause again you know we had to go on the waiting list for housing on the base but this time we look what was called private rental and lived in a house in the outskirts of Tokyo, and I used to have to take a bus to school.  And you know this bus would go all over town picking us up these kids who lived in private rental to go to school.  It took us about two hours each way on the bus to do all this.  But, I guess the most interesting thing about that was that about two weeks after school started, and I'd been in Japan now maybe six weeks, this was fascinating.  When we arrived, we went to Japan by ship, and so it took three weeks to get there from Seattle [Washington] and this feeling of being far away because it took so long to get there was just overwhelming and they made us stay on the ship for a day while they processed everybody off.  So, I'd stand at the rail every night watching the guys pushing these carts selling sweet potatoes, Yakiimo, Yakiimo, they were yelling, I can still hear it and smell the sweet potatoes grilling on charcoal on the docks in Yokohama [Japan] this was in 1958.  I think I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: This was in nineteen--?
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], okay.
Story_ID: 327214
Speaker 1: And we drove from Yokohama [Japan] to Tokyo [Japan] through absolute flat--it was absolutely flat.  It was nothing there.  This was all, the war damage had been cleared away, but they hadn't started really building it back yet, so it was like flat to Yokohama, from, from Yokohama.  I only say that because of what you can now see on this drive, but after school started as I was saying I went off to this party at one of the air bases way outside of town, and my parents [George Levi Knox, II and Yvonne Wright Knox] let me go, I was fourteen.  I get on a train, I go out there.  This was what people did you know when I was a kid.  You went places.  You rode the bus.  You got a train, thirteen, fourteen, didn't matter.  So, I went to this party at this kid's house, took a train back at about 11:00 at night, got off at probably the wrong stop.  I never could figure out what had happened, and I was completely lost.  I'd been in Japan six weeks or so, didn't speak any Japanese, it's 11:00 at night I'm wandering through these streets and alleys.  This is mostly residential, I can't find anything.  I find a phone.  I had ten yen [currency] in my pocket.  I called my parents said I'm lost and they were concerned, but not frantic and I finally found a cab and got in it and started having him drive around until I recognized something and then you know directed him to my house.  This took me two to three hours I think it was.  The most amazing thing is I wasn't really frightened.  It was that kind of place, you know.  Maybe we were more self-sufficient as kids then, I don't know, but, but I wasn't petrified and my parents weren't as I would have been had this happen to one of my kids at some point, sort of absolutely petrified, calling the cops, you know, what's going.  It's, it's a thing that's burnt into my mind, which is the reason I mention it, that how safe I had felt and how unsafe I'd feel now here under these circumstances.
Speaker 2: It's a different world now (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I could do that there, but I could never do it here.  I think people have a different attitude about, you, you know you have a different sense of your personal safety in this country than you do there.  I never feel frightened there.  I often feel frightened here, and it's amazing.  At any rate, that was my, the first of my three years there, and I had a great school [Narimasu Tokyo American High School, Tokyo, Japan].
Story_ID: 327215
Speaker 1: Now you were president of the class  at (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, by the time I got to be a senior.  I ran when I was a junior for class president, and I did not win and my parents [George Levi Knox, II and Yvonne Wright Knox] sort of looked at when I went home and reported that I had failed to be elected they looked at each other knowingly like oh yeah well, and my father tried to explain to me that they will never elect you, not that, not that he meant I wasn't worthy, but you know don't get your hopes up too high about this place.  But, but by the end of the, my junior year I'd gotten an award as the outstanding junior in the school, not the outstanding student, but I was the outstanding junior in the school, played a lot of sports and was into to this, that, and the other thing.  When the senior year started, I wound up being elected president of my class, captain of the football team.  I played basketball.  They had these superlatives where they at the end of the year they'd vote you this, that, and the other thing and I got voted Mr. Narimasu.  That was the, it was Mr. and Ms. Narimasu the number ones and I got that.  It was great.  I had a great, great year.  In fact, in 1961, nineteen, nineteen, in 2001 they had a reunion of my high school [Narimasu Tokyo American High School, Tokyo, Japan] 'cause at the end of my high school of course everybody goes to the four winds.  This is an [U.S.] Air Force high school in Japan.  Once when I went back to Japan, I went and visited the school.  This was about seven or eight years later, but then the school shut down, so not only did, could I not find anybody who went to school with me, I couldn't find the school anymore.  It didn't exist anymore.  Sort of like that whole experience evaporated.  There's no physical vestige of it except one pal that I had that I managed to find and he and I, he lives right up the road here in Newport Beach [California], and he and I have been, been constant friends since we reconnected in like 1972.  But, aside from him, there was no one.  In nineteen, in 2001 I get because of the Internet onto a thing classmates, discover that there's a place you can register yourself, find a bunch of my old high school friends.  They're organizing or part of organizing an all classes' reunion for my high school in Las Vegas [Nevada].  I go to it and I see Ms. Narimasu again after forty years.  She lives in Idaho, unbelievable.  And my, when I took my son [Reed Knox] white water rafting up in Snake River in Idaho, then we went down and spent the night at her house.  It was unbelievable to reconnect that way.  At any rate, that was, that got me through high school.
Story_ID: 327216
Speaker 1: After high school you came back to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Came back to the U.S.  My family was assigned to Travis Air Force Base [Solano County, California] in California up near--
Speaker 1: So you graduated [from Narimasu Tokyo American High School, Tokyo, Japan] in '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].  Family went to Travis.  I went to Purdue [Purdue University] for a year.  I blew that.  It wasn't the school I wanted to go to, but I went there.
Speaker 1: You didn't, you didn't do very well?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't do well.  I didn't, well, I wasn't studying.  I found that all of the, you know, the ratio of men to women at Purdue it's like 8 to 1.  It was an engineering and agricultural school and where my cousin, who had been a cheerleader at Shortridge High School in Indianapolis [Indiana], one of the great beauties of Indianapolis, and so she had lots of beautiful friends.  I was going to school at Indiana University [IU] where the ratio was reversed, so I spent all of my time at IU.  I blew that.  Plus the fact my father [George Levi Knox, II] was making me study engineering at that time.  I told him I wanted to be on the [U.S.] Foreign Service, but he wasn't buying that.  I decided on that when I was in the summer between my junior and senior years in high school [Narimasu Tokyo American High School, Tokyo, Japan].  I had been asked along with some other guys to come over and vacuum out the swimming pool.  I was working at, I had a summer job working at the swimming pool as a life guard and we used to clean it.  You know you have these vacuum things.  To come over and vacuum out the swimming pool at the U.S. embassy 'cause they didn't have a cleaner, so we went over in a truck we were vacuuming it out and I'm watching all of this back and forth going on at the embassy door when those come open and I said this looks like what I'd love to do.  So, I decided I wanted to be on the Foreign Service, become a diplomat, and my father wasn't buying it.  This is in--he says they'll never let it happen, and at the time out of some 3500 members of the U.S. Foreign Service there were maybe ten or twenty blacks and some of those were you know politically appointed ambassadors, so they didn't come in through the career service.  You know this was not a thing you could do.  So, he insisted that I study engineering as a guarantee of future employment, of course if you were in high school and this was the Cold War this looked sensible, I guess, 'cause there'd always be need to, to make weapons and rocket ships.
Story_ID: 327217
Speaker 1: Purdue [Purdue University] doesn't work out so--
Speaker 2: Purdue doesn't work--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and my father [George Levi Knox, II] at the end of that year was assigned to head the [U.S.] Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] detachment at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], so I say--you know, he says, "Okay, you messed up Purdue, what are you gonna do now?"  I says, "Well, I think I'll stay here, you're going to Alabama, I think I'll stay here, and I'll go to one of the state colleges here in California," and he says, "Okay, what's your second choice?"  I said, "What do you mean?"  He says, "Well, your second choice is to go with me to Tuskegee," and I said, "But I don't like that choice."  He says, "Well, let me rephrase that: your only choice is to go with me to Tuskegee," so that's how I wound up going to Tuskegee because he was sent there to run the Air Force ROTC detachment.  One of the best things that ever happened to me.
Speaker 1: So you really liked it?  You really liked Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: I did.  Well, you know there were things that I didn't like, but in terms of its impact on my life that was seminal.
Speaker 1: Now did you think it was kind of old timey when you--
Speaker 2: I thought it was awful.  I didn't want to go to the South.  You know, we drove across country.  My mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] and two youngest siblings [Adelaide Knox Jones and Craig Jones] flew and then we as usual, my father and my brother [John Knox] and I, my brother is only two years younger than I, drove and drove the dog from, from California to Tuskegee and when we get to the South, now this is in 1962, and there're still colored signs up everywhere, having to go around the back of the gas station, being treated like an idiot, which is the way it was, I didn't want to go there.  I didn't want to go to a black school.  You know I'd just come out of high school [Narimasu Tokyo American High School] in Tokyo [Japan] and a year at Purdue; I didn't want to go to a black college [HBCU].  So, if, if I'd had any leverage I wouldn't have gone, but I didn't have any so I, you know with my dad, so I had to go and it turned out to be great because for the, in those four years, the first time in my life I realized, this is towards the end of it when I actually thought about it and I didn't recognize it while it was happening, I knew that whether you liked me or not, whether I got elected or not, whether I got picked or not, whether I got an A or not, didn't any, have anything to do with whether I was black, you know, you just thought I was a cruddy guy; that's okay.  This gives me a chance to change.  It was wonderfully liberating in that way, and a very nurturing environment like most black schools are.
Story_ID: 327218
Speaker 1: Who are some of the people that you remember from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] that--
Speaker 2: Well, I of course remember the president, Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Jr.], who and his wife, Vera, who went, Vera Foster [Vera Chandler Foster] went to college with my dad [George Levi Knox, II].  I thought Dr. Foster was a really great guy.  His daughter was my good friend.  His grandson is my godson now.  He was in the long tradition of Tuskegee presidents who'd come and stay forever.  Charles Gomillion remember the law, Gomillion v. Lightfoot [1960].  Dr. Gomillion was still here.  I took his sociology course.  My--then there was Stan Smith, Dr. Stanley Smith [Stanley H. Smith] who became my great mentor.  He went from Tuskegee to be president of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and then on to be president of some other school.  I don't think he's still alive, but he, he really embraced me and was a great leader and supporter, and I remember him so fondly.  I'm trying to remember actually ever taking a class of his.  I think I must have.  He was, he was my academic advisor though so I had to go to him for everything, so we got to be great friends over the years, and then there was a guy whose name was Howard Greenlee who was one of the white professors that taught history.  One time--there used to be a, there probably still is at Tuskegee, I don't know this for sure, but there use to name institute scholars every year, I mean people who were really flying and doing the very best.  I did quite well at Tuskegee in the end, but I never got to be an institute scholar.  I was talking to a friend of mine who was a professor there kind of like a family friend and he said if you had been an institute--now one of the things an institute scholar did at some convocation was to identify the teacher that had meant the most to them, and he said to me if you had to, if you were an institute scholar who would you have picked?  And I picked Howard Greenlee, Greenlee that I had just named, who was a history teacher and I think that it was a course I took from him that turned me from being a pursuer of a degree into a student because up until that point and I think about it now because I see other kids, and I know if I want to get a degree I need 32 credits, I need this, so every, every class is a step towards the degree as opposed to an opportunity to learn something new and at one lecture he was giving in American history about the election I guess it was of 1876 and he came in with campaign posters and had songs from the election and I sat with my mouth open like it was like a movie.  It was fascinating and entertaining.  I mean his class was so good that I stopped taking notes in it 'cause I didn't want to miss anything and I had to work harder 'cause I didn't have notes to take the test.  But, it was like the sun came up to me, and at that point and for the rest of my academic career I did really well.  I went from being a sort of a middling student to finishing with honors because learning became the focus as opposed to getting another credit.
Story_ID: 327219
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, by this time my father [George Levi Knox, II] and I had been going another round or two about the [U.S.] Foreign Service, and he finally real--cause I, you know I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] I was studying engineering in the beginning again at his insistence and finally he says you really don't like this.  I said I don't like it, and I was sitting and I was taking a class in physics and I was not interested and I went in to take a physics test and I could not describe why the ball rolled down the incline plane and I really didn't care either.  I said you know I really hate this.  You know like the math part of it I'm not interested in it.  So, finally he gave up and allowed me to switch to political science and he says that's okay you can be a lawyer, 'cause you know my dad was doctors, lawyers, teachers, and preachers.  You know I washed plants, parts in a bottle plant with a college degree.  You gotta find a way around the system that will not allow you to do what you want to do.  You may want to do this, but the system will not allow you.  And he was, you know, you know, in retrospect when I think about now as an adult and have my own children and try to protect them from things, I understand that he was trying to protect me, but he worked too hard at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I switched to political science.  I was fascinated by it, and my grades started zooming up.
Story_ID: 327220
Speaker 1: Now you had a fascinating experience where you were an intern--
Speaker 2: I was an intern.
Speaker 1: --the summer for the--
Speaker 2: Well, what had happened was co- coincident was my interest in the [U.S.] Foreign Service when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] got elected president and then Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] succeeded him.  They looked around and said you know we need to have some black people in the Foreign Service, I mean, we're--look at the world and of course by this time too beginning in 1960 or so the African states are becoming independent, members of the UN [United Nations], a part of the world community.  You know we have a Foreign Service that does not reflect America in a world that is becoming, a political world that is becoming more diverse, so they said we gotta do something about this.  So, the Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] and Field Foundations got together and created what they call a Foreign Affairs Scholars Program, which was essentially an attempt to get minority kids into the Foreign Service.  They took--there were 160 of us I think, four summers of 40 kids each.  I was in the second group, and it was a highly competitive program and I was selected in 1965 for the second group to go to Washington [D.C.] as part of the Foreign Affairs Scholar Program and be an intern at either the state department [U.S. Department of State] or the U.S. Information Agency.  Now the 40 of us got mushed in with 80 other interns, so there were altogether 120 interns at least the summer I was there.  I don't know what the overall number was the other three summers, but my summer there were 120 of us, 40 of whom were Foreign Affair Scholars.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: And, huh?
Speaker 1: So you were assigned to the state department?
Speaker 2: I was in the state department, and my specific assignment in the state department in the summer of '65 [1965] was the Vietnam working group, the Vietnam desk, and I shared--they put a desk into the office of the junior guy on the group, that was like an eight officer group there, who was Anthony Lake who turned out, wound up being Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] first national security advisor and he and I shared an office for that summer and I was an intern there.  When I got there, there were some eight thousand troops in Vietnam as advisors, and when I left a hundred and fifty thousand had been committed to, so it became a war [Vietnam War] that summer while I was there; a fascinating experience.
Story_ID: 327221
Speaker 1: What were your feelings about it at that time?  Did you, I mean--
Speaker 2: I supported it at the time.  In fact, they asked me about it during my--I thought they might ask me about Vietnam [Vietnam War] when I was being interviewed for this internship [Foreign Affairs Scholars Program].  They sent a team from the state department [U.S. Department of State] around and interviewed candidates for this trial, and they came to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and interviewed me.  And I had thought they might ask me about Vietnam, so I had to run and look it up on a map, make sure I knew where it was.  But, I basically supported what I understood to be our efforts then, 'cause I'm, I'm an [U.S.] Air Force brat and my basic view was if you know where the bad guys are, take it to them.  (Unclear).  I bought into the containment and domino theories, you know first Vietnam, then Thailand, and the next thing you know the whole world is coming and this was the rationale for it, and I believed it, plus the fact when I got to the desk there were only 8,000 of our troops there and they were advisors, mostly volunteers.  I mean this was not a war at that time.  I mean there was a war going on, but it was not one that involved us in any super way and most of the argument about it was largely theoretical in nine, in 1965.  It was fascinating because my job on the Vietnam desk was to answer a lot of public correspondence about it, so people would write in why are you doing this, and then I'd write a letter back explaining and then they'd say it's illegal, and I'd give them the legal rationale, the political rationale.  I was very good at defending U.S. policy in Vietnam.  In those days, people could walk in off the street.  I mean, there was no security guard at the state department.  You'd go to the front, there was an information desk, you know, where is the Vietnam office?  It's Room 5202.  The guy would get on an elevator wonder in, into the office and say I, you know, object to what's going on in Vietnam.  So, it's amazing to think of now.  They put--
Speaker 1: You can't do that now.
Story_ID: 327222
Speaker 1: You cannot do that now.  You can't go two feet past the (unclear), and the reason they put security guards in there [U.S. Department of State] was from a woman was attacked in one of the stairwells, you know mugged.  So, in order to protect people from being mugged they put in security guards and that the idea that here, here is the Vietnam working group, there is a top secret memo laying on the secretary's desk and some guy can walk in off the street.  It was just a different sense of security in those days.  This was just the '60s [1960s].  But, if some guy did walk in off the street, then I'd take him into the office and we'd have a debate about it.  I got to very good at debating the war, and I believed in it. And interestingly when I went back to school now the thing is getting really hot and the teach-ins have begun and I saw the argument shift in Vietnam in a way that I thought was detrimental to the opponents of the war [Vietnam War] because as long as the arguments being brought by Walter Lippmann and (unclear) and others on political grounds that's historically you know you shouldn't be here, politically it's bad.  I thought these were compelling arguments that were appealing to the mid, middle ground on this war, people who didn't think about it all that much, but when people, when the opposition of the war became it's immoral, our government is corrupt, then all that did was shut down the middle, you know, you know if you attack a point of view from an extreme position, which that is, what you tend to do is drive people out of the middle to the other extreme rather than pull into yourself, which is what happened to the argument about the war I thought.  Then, there'd be teach-ins and had these big meetings at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and we had a lot of, we had a strong relationship with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and there were exchanges of students and teachers between Tuskegee and Michigan all the time, and we had a bunch of teachers down from Michigan, which is one of the places where the teach-in movement had really gotten going.  So, they organized and the Tuskegan [Tuskegee, Alabama] people would go, and then they had four guys who would sit up there and they'd all get up in seriatim and say why this was all fouled up, you know, why legally it's wrong, politically it's wrong, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba.  And then say does anybody have anything to say about it, and I raise my hand, you know, and I'd get up and I'd argue with them, which was stunning to them because this was the kind of thing where nobody expected any resistance.  It was just a series of a verbal applause lines to your argument, you know, and it got so weird that we had these things, they'd ask for comment, and I'd be the only one with my hand up to, to speak and, and they knew I was gonna argue with them and they would say well there being no comments the meeting is over.  So, I got very isolated on Vietnam.
Story_ID: 327223
Speaker 1: So I finished, you know, went through, finished Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], had a great time there, great experience.  Got--did lots of things.  You know I joined fraternity, joined Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  My father [George Levi Knox, II] was a Kappa.  My grandfather Kappa, three, three generations of Kappas.  My son [Reed Knox] said can he join a fraternity, I said yes you may, but as long as it's not Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] or Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] I don't care what you join (laughter).
Speaker 2: It kind of, for those the uninitiated, narrows it down to one.
Speaker 1: It narrows it down to one or, or you can go, you know, and join Sigma Nu [Sigma Nu Fraternity], I mean this won't bother me so much, but, you know, if you're staying in the community you gotta be a Kappa.
Story_ID: 327224
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is the Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in the South is really heating up in'64 [1964], '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and you were a junior or senior [at Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I guess--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --in all, in '65 [1965] especially it was focused on Alabama--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sixty-four [1964]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they had the Freedom Summer in Mississippi, but '65 [1965] Alabama--
Speaker 2: Alabama, Selma [Alabama].
Speaker 1: --(Lowndes County [Alabama] and all--
Speaker 2: Selma to Montgomery [Alabama], all those guys were around there I knew them yeah.
Speaker 1: --voter registration.  March across Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all this was going on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you, well I know you were aware of and were you involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was certainly aware of it.  I was not as involved as I now wish I had been.  My father [George Levi Knox, II] died in 1964, and the, it was accidental gunshot wound.  It was awful.  The day after the '64 [1964] election as I discovered him at home.  I was twenty-one.  I was just twenty-one.  I was the oldest of four kids.  My mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] was as you can imagine--well I didn't know where she was gonna wind up.  I was really afraid that if something happened to me marching around that I don't know what would have happened to her, and to the rest of them.  You know, I had a brother [John Knox] at that time was nineteen and my sister [Adelaide Knox Jones] was thirteen, and my youngest brother [Craig Knox] was eight, so and I had sort of become at least for the two youngest ones, not so much for my next brother, 'cause he was close to my age, but for the two youngest ones--you know and I think back on it now and I say well is this an excuse you used or not to not, you know, march from Selma to Montgomery or 'cause it was very scary down there.  It was awful, and I don't know whether I was just, I, I don't know what sort of kept me back, but it was, but some of it was concern about my mother.
Speaker 1: That was a devastating thing for your father to die suddenly like that in that way--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I, and I thought if something happens to me this will be the end of her, so I stayed away from the what looked like scariest parts.
Story_ID: 327225
Speaker 1: Did you have friends that participated [in the Civil Rights Movement]?
Speaker 2: I had a friend who was yeah, lots of friends that participated.  One was shot to death behind the tu--behind the bus station at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Now this is not during the demonstration?
Speaker 2: No, no, this was, this was not during a dem- and I don't know what exactly transpired.  The guy, of course, was never convicted of killing him.  Everybody knows who killed him.
Speaker 1: Who, who was it, another black person?
Speaker 2: No, no it was a white, old red neck, and Sammy [Sammy Younge, Jr.] was a real agitator, and he may have provoked the guy.  I don't know it was the middle, it was late at night, but he was shot in an alley behind the bus station, and Sammy was not armed.
Speaker 1: What was Sammy's last name?
Speaker 2: Younge, Y-O-U-N-G-E, Sammy yeah.  Yeah so I knew him and I was there when, in Alabama when Viola Liuzzo was killed and the Chaney [James Chaney], Goodman [Andrew Goodman] and Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] disappeared.  When the dogs attacked marchers in Birmingham [Alabama], I mean, this was all a part of our life then, but it was exciting too, 'cause I remember I was on the swimming team of Tuskegee, and we were going to, to swim at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], I can't remember which one, or maybe it was both of them 'cause if we made a trip that long we would probably swim both of them.  But, we had to cross through Mississippi to get there, and we were in this long bus, this was early on, a long you know sort of like an airport limo is how we travelled.  We got lost in some Mississippi town at about twelve o'clock and we stopped to ask a cop and he essentially ran us out of town, and this is--and I was out driving with a friend one night in Alabama, and he ran out of gas, and we're pushing his car down the road, a back country road in Alabama in the middle of the night, and cops got behind us and sort of followed us for a half mile, no offer of assistance, you know, just making sure we pushed the car out of their town.  I mean, so this was bad news time.  So, yeah I remember it.
Story_ID: 327226
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was it '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: I, well I graduated in December of '66 [1966] 'cause I took a semester off, which made, put me a semester off my schedule, which would have been a '66 [1966] graduate.  I finished in that December.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I'm officially in the class of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I got a commission in the [U.S.] Air Force, and I was, but I was given a year off, 'cause I was in the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] and was given a year off so that I could go to graduate school.  I had a, as part of this Foreign Affairs Scholars Program you had the summer internship and then if you pass other hurdles then they would send you to graduate school for a year, so I had won a fellowship from this from this program for a year of graduate study which I did at American University in Washington [D.C.].  So, I went straight from Tuskegee to American, finished on a Friday and started school on a Monday or something like that, started graduate school.  Towards the end of that year, in fact that summer we had a whole summer program which was great 'cause we got to go down and meet a lot of politicians.  That summer I spent an hour in Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] office with our little group.  This was in the summer of '66 [1966], so this was not too far before he got killed.  At the end of that year, I took the [U.S.] Foreign Service exam.  I had been taking it and that December, December of '67 [1967] I think there were somebody said some 18,000 people took the Foreign Service exam around the country, and the next year in 1968 they took what 100 people in or something like that.  I passed it that winter.  So, just as I was passing the Foreign Service exam, I had, I was instructed by the Air Force to go to Maxwell Field [Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama] and have my Foreign Service, I mean my active duty physical for the Air Force.  I was supposed to be in air intelligence, that was my Air Force specialty.  I wanted to go in the dip, the, you know the ad, the attache corps, you know go to embassy as an air attache or something.  But, this was still during Vietnam [Vietnam War].  This was 1968, and this is when it's really hot.  This was just before Ted [ph.] and all that, so what they told me was I was gonna be an air target's officer, that is read 3D, 3D pictures and say bomb this, bomb that, you know, this was what's a tar- what a target officer does and for that I had to have a special eye exam.  I said well you know I've got a bad eye.  I told you earlier in our talk that I have a bad eye, they knew it all along, so I said why are you making me get this test, but they insisted I take it.  So, when I went to have my physical, I had a beard, like the one you're wearing there, and of course in 1967 a beard was equivalent to mindless communism.
Story_ID: 327227
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I was talking about mindless communism and--
Speaker 1: Right.  He had a beard, had a bad eye--
Speaker 2: Had a beard, a bad eye, so the [U.S.] Air Force sent, they, oh so when I got there [Maxwell Field; Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama] to, actually to have my physical there was get over here, get over there, and I said wait a minute I'm a lieutenant in the Air Force.  He didn't care, we don't care 'cause they treated me like I was a real idiot.  Then, I get home and two weeks later I get notified that I not only failed the test that was taking to see if I could read 3D pictures, which required binocular vision, but my eyesight was so bad that I couldn't be an officer in the Air Force, so they wanted me to resign my commission and they said by the way this will not, you will not have fulfilled your obligation under the Universal Military Training Act [1951].  That's what the letter said.  I said this means I could be drafted, you know, I can't see well enough to be an air target's officer, but you can draft me.  This is kind of like dumb, but you know I'd spent a lot of time working around the government, so this was not, you know, impossible that it was true.  But, at the same time though, I passed the [U.S.] Foreign Service exam.  Now the pressure was really on to get, you know, black folks in the Foreign Service by this time.  So, ordinarily if you passed the written exam, then you take an oral exam, then you go on a waiting list.  So, the distance between the written exam and actually going in could be two or three years, but you know I took the test in December, was notified in January that I passed.  The first week in February I had my oral exam, 'cause passing the written was just the ticket to the oral exam you had to really pass the oral exam in order to be selected.  They passed me through, I went right into my security clearance process and went in the Foreign Service in June of '68 [1968].  Now in the meantime I was getting these calls from all of my father's [George Levi Knox, II], a bunch of my father's old friends you know this is an outrage about the Air Force, they can't do this to you, you know, general this and colonel that.  I'm saying please just, just let it go, you know, 'cause it looks like I'm gonna be okay, and I finally got what I wanted which was to be in the Foreign Service.  So, I went in, in the summer of '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 327228
Speaker 1: Where were you assigned [as a member of the U.S. Foreign Service]?
Speaker 2: Japan.  So, I was assigned to Japan after language instruction.  So, I went into six months of Japanese language study.  Now, it was interesting; the first day of class, it was like eight of us and they, they had us sitting in a semi-circle ,and I was on one end of it and the teachers walks in and she says to the person sitting on that end of the foreign, that end of the semi-circle-- ohayou gozaimasu and you know the guy looked around like this, and she said ohayou gozaimasu and she kept saying it to him, which means good morning, and she kept saying it to him until he said ohayou gozaimasu, you know, back, and she say yes, so then she goes now you get it okay, so she gets to me and she says ohayou gozaimasu, and I say ohayou gozaimasu, blah, blah, blah, and started spewing out some of the Japanese that I knew, and her jaw dropped down, and she literally went (gesture), she said you're gonna have to unlearn all that stuff, 'cause I had learned all of my Japanese in really naughty places, 'cause as a teenager in Japan if you're an American, nobody knows how old you are, so my friends and I used to hang out on the streets of Shibuya [Tokyo, Japan] and Shinjuku [Tokyo, Japan], this beer joint and that one, then talking to the people who worked there, so that's where I picked up what Japanese I knew and this was not considered appropriate to the--
Speaker 1: That's not the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) diplomatic corps, yeah so you're gonna have to do
Speaker 1: --doesn't wash in the (unclear) of protocol is what I'm trying to say.
Speaker 2: --we're gonna have to do--job, that's right, have to do a laundry job on you--
Story_ID: 327229
Speaker 1: One of the favorite stories with people that speak Japanese is this, this very senior American business man has a delegation of Japanese counterparts with him one day and they're talking in his office and when the guys start to leave he sort of raises his hand and says mata mite ne, which means essentially come back again, but the only time when you hear that is when the bar girls chase you out at closing time (laughter).  This is the form of the come back again, so they knew where he'd picked up his jap.  So, I had to, I had to start over again.  I did and I went to Japan, spent two years there in the embassy from '69 [1969] to '71 [1971] at the conclusion of which tour I thought I was gonna go off to study labor affairs at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the group in Japan, 'cause Japan was going to be my specialty.  They wanted me to go on to Yokohama [Japan] to our advanced language training school, which everybody who specializes in Japan eventually does.  I mean that's where you learn how to read it, read it, which is really difficult.  I'd been six hours a day, eight hours a day for six months before I went to Japan, then we had one hour lesson every day while I was there for two years every working day, and I was just at about professionally proficient level, which is a grade three in Japanese.  Now if you did this much time in French or Spanish you'd be really good, but in Japanese you gotta go to the next level of school, which I ultimately planned to do.  But, they--I, I thought I'd been offered a position in the labor training program at Harvard, which would have then made me a specialist in labor affairs, therefore always sent to urban cities where they had a labor movement and labor unions as opposed to say an agricultural back water, which is what I was trying to avoid in the [U.S.] Foreign Service.  And once I turned down Japanese, accepted that, then they sent me a note back and said oh, you misunderstood, you're too young to go that program; that's for a guy in mid-career not somebody so early.  We're gonna send you to CORDS [Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support Program] instead: Vietnam.  So they're gonna send me to Vietnam in the pacification program in, in 1971.  Now this is when the Marines [U.S. Marine Coprs] were leaving.  So the Marines were leaving, I'm going, what's wrong with this picture.  Most bachelor Foreign Service officers in those years were sent, were on, sent on loan to CORDS, the Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support Program, Vietnam.  In fact, in my class in the Foreign Service there were eight bachelors.  Four went to CORDS and, and then four of us didn't.  So, I was going to go on the bounce back on the second round.  So, I, I didn't like that very much.  I came back to Washington [D.C.] in '71 [1971] with an assignment to go to Vietnam language center.  I started studying Vietnamese, Vietnam training center they called it, in preparation for this assignment and I couldn't find anybody that would even discuss this assignment with me.  This is the way the personnel system worked.  There was no person responsible for this decision, so if something happened that you didn't like there was no way, where to go to get it reversed, you know.  So, I felt very vulnerable in a professional sense that these things can happen and you can't do anything about it, but--so, there, there was one set of things going on.  First, I go to Vietnam center, and, interestingly, now things are reversed.  By this time, I very much doubt that the war [Vietnam War] is in anyway sensible, especially the longer I studied at the Vietnam training center because now I see that you know Vietnam was created as the Chinese pushed people south, so they moved south through Vietnam and the strongest ones in Vietnam pushed other people further south.  So, now in Vietnam over the centuries, you develop a country with three large groups, the Tonkinese in the north, the Annamese in the, the Vietnamese in the south and for centuries now the northerners are trying to subjugate the southerners because that's where all the food is grown.  So, what gets overlaid on top of this is an anti-colonial move in the '40s [1940s] followed by what we see as a communist insurgency in the '50s [1950s] what in fact could be seen as a simple historical movement of centuries old brewing.  And so now at the Vietnamese training center we have these sessions and people talk about the war and I get up and I'm the only one saying, I'm still the only guy you know on the other, on the other side of whatever it is, I'm the only guy, and I became a pain in their necks and they finally, they finally--I thought it was ridiculous to be in there because it looked to me like the war was over and before we finished they took all the Foreign Service office that were in this group and took us out and sent us back to the state department [U.S. Department of State].  So, I went into the state department for two years beginning in '71 [1971].  I was working in the educational and cultural affairs bureau.  I had three essential jobs there.  I was doing regional programs there.  I was the Malaysia/Singapore desk officer, and I was overseeing the Fulbright Fellows Program for East Asia.  So, I was doing those three things for two years, but the whole experience with Vietnam and the assignment to Vietnam made me skittish about the Foreign Service, so I decided to get an insurance policy against it, and that's when I went to B [business] school.
Story_ID: 327230
Speaker 1: Okay now what's B [business] school? What's--
Speaker 2: Business school.
Speaker 1: Oh, business school, okay.
Speaker 2: I took a leave of absence from the [U.S.] Foreign Service.  I intended to go back actually.  I took a leave of absence, but I took the leave of absence, though they called it a leave without pay, as opposed to trying to get them to pay for it I paid for it myself, and went to B school for two, business school for two years to get a M.B.A., which I thought would be my insurance policy against the vagaries of the Foreign Service, 'cause most people who did what I did, I mean if you're focused on being in the Foreign Service, you study foreign affairs, history, economics, stuff like that which doesn't make you employable outside very much.  I mean, you, and you can't very well sort of quit the U.S. Foreign Service and say, okay, I'll go work for the French Foreign Service or the (unclear).  There's only one employer there, so if things are working out you've got a problem.  So, I wanted to have an insurance policy and, and wound up going to business school to get one--
Speaker 1: Where did you go to business school?
Speaker 2: I went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's not easy to do, I mean--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --so is there a story behind your getting into Harvard Business School?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time I applied to three business schools, Harvard, Chicago [University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], and Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  Those are the three best ones, at least that what I thought then.  And by this time you gotta realize unlike my high school career and my beginnings at Purdue [Purdue University] by the time I left Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] I was covered in academic glory, you know, I had done quite well.  Then, you know, I'm in the Foreign Service, and I speak Japanese which makes me fairly unique black guy in 1971.  So, applying to business schools, which was an arduous procedure, and then I had to take the ATGSB [Admission Test for Graduate Study in Business; GMAT], now that sort of an aptitude test for business study and I did pretty well on that and then I applied to these three schools and I got into them all.
Story_ID: 327231
Speaker 1: So, I applied to these three schools, went to visit Chicago [University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] and Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  It's interesting 'cause Chicago I went out there it was the, it was in February.  When I got out of the cab at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and the hawk came off the lake and I said what am I doing here?  This was just too cold.  But I got in there and they had arranged for me to get a full fellowship from a local bank.  Then I went to Stanford and I had a meeting with the dean of admissions there, and at the end of the meeting he says well you're in.  I said in, I mean isn't there a committee?  He said I'm the committee you're in.  So, I went back to Washington [D.C.], I got a call from him and they, they said that they would cover my expenses at Stanford 'cause they knew I was paying for this on my own, if I would come out there.  So now I then called the people at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] I said okay look I got, I applied to Harvard, Chicago, and Stanford.  I got into all three and Chicago and Stanford are offering me a, a you know to pay my expenses.  They're offering me a ride here, what are you offering?  They said we let you in didn't we (laughter)?  So, I said yeah I went there, so I went to Harvard.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I picked Harvard because the other schools were really good schools, but when I got, when I went out to Chicago and I had one of those, I was, a student was assigned to take me around and we were sitting in the pub there and he was saying that people weren't particularly close.  It's a very academic school and they weren't particularly close to each other.  At Stanford they were, but everybody who graduated from Stanford or 90 percent of the people stayed in California and so Stanford is a great school, but it didn't have a very wide alumni network, at least not at the time, at least I didn't think so.  But, at Harvard, which sort of operated on the section organization, you know, you go into a section of eighty people and that's who you go to school with your first year.  You get to know them really well, the graduates go every place to the four winds, so the alumni network is quite strong, so I said I think I want that, I want the, the residue of it, the breadth of it, so I went to Harvard.  In fact, our president was in my class.
Speaker 2: Okay, George Bush [President George Walker Bush]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yep, yep.
Speaker 2: What was he like?
Speaker 1: I didn't know him.  He was not in my section.  We were in the same class, but not in the same section.  I didn't see much of him except at the pub, but my, one of my neighbors here in La Jolla [California], his brother was in the section with him and said he was a pretty good guy.  I mean, and so I have nothing bad to say about him.
Story_ID: 327232
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or--that served as mentors for you there while you were going to school?
Speaker 2: No I don't, you know I, I'd say by the time I got to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] I was thirty-one, you know, I was sort of like not mentorable in that way.  You know I've had--by this, by this time you know I have people in the [U.S.] Foreign Service that were, who were older who and some who even knew my father [George Levi Knox, II] who were advising me and looking out for me and ultimately at Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] I had those relationships again, but Harvard was not that kind of place, at least not for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had some really good teachers, but none to whom I be, with whom I became close like I had been close to people at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and other places.
Speaker 1: Okay was there any, any stories from the Harvard years that stand out that you--?
Speaker 2: No it--I remember it as a tremendous grind, but interesting you know I guess, you know you go, I showed up on a Tuesday and registered, I didn't know anybody there, and they give you a stack of cases and here's your schedule.  You know your classes begin tomorrow and this is your first class and your first case and so I read it.  It was called Hesper Silver.  It's--if you ask any Harvard Business School student mid-'70s [1970s] about (unclear) they all cringe.  It's the first marketing case and the first case I had.  You go into class on the first day, eighty people, you're sitting with eighty people you don't know.  The teacher walks in and he says okay Mr. Houseburg [ph.], I remember Mark Houseburg, start today's class.  So, seventy-nine people go ahh, and one guy named Mark Houseburg is choking to death in the back row, 'cause he doesn't know what to do you know.  And so they sort of lead you through it, but you didn't know what was happening.  I think that was Wednesday.  On Friday night, I went home and got in bed, and I got out of bed on Sunday night, I slept for two days out of this tension of it all, and it was sort of like that 'cause I was older and this was new.  I, I remember going to my first big--all activities at Harvard Business School was organized by student clubs, the international business club, the marketing club.  I became president of the international business club in my second year, but the marketing club gave the first big due which was a, a session with the brand team from I think it was Quaker cereal that had done this new Life cereal where the kid, where Chuck, Mikey doesn't eat anything, okay so this is the Mikey team right. So, the Mikey team came down to talk about what a rocket this product was and the place was packed full of people.  So, seven hundred of us are in there to hear this story, and they're going on and on about you know the product and the advertising campaign and I'm sitting there thinking what am I doing here?  You know I've been working on the reversion of Okinawa [Japan] to Japan, and I have been you know on my way to Vietnam talking about great world events and I could not figure out what I was doing sitting at Harvard listening to this presentation about oatmeal or whatever it was.  It took me half, but I was plugging away, you know I knew that this would be a good thing for me to have, but I hadn't caught it, you know.  One of the reasons I went to B [business] school as opposed to say journalism school or law school was that I felt when I was in the [U.S.] Foreign Service I was really good at making things happen.  You know here we are at point A, I wanna get to point B, so you know and, and the Foreign Service was really much more I thought observational, you know, I'm observing what's happening.  You know we're not necessarily making things happen.  I was a doer, so I went to B school.  This is where doers go as opposed to say J school, journalism school, where I can write about what doers do.  And, but I hadn't caught it in that first year, so it was kind of a frustration.  Towards the spring--and it took me probably the full two years that I was there to, to, to transition from the Foreign Service to the business world psychologically.  I spent the summer between my two years at McKinsey [McKinsey & Company, New York, New York] as a summer associate.  McKinsey, you know, the big consulting firm, which was helpful 'cause there the guys were really sharp, everybody is on it and the problems their dealing with are pretty big, or at least they're complicated and they're big in the sense that they're complicated and not big in the sense that the difference between war and peace you know, but there are complicated problems, so that was fascinating to be in.  But, it took me two years to get over it.
Story_ID: 327233
Speaker 1: You finished [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: In '75 [1975], okay.
Speaker 2: I went to work for McKinsey & Company in New York [New York], and the same office to which I'd been assigned as a summer associate the year before.
Speaker 1: Now this is a big consulting, a consulting company.
Speaker 2: Yeah McKinsey is a management consulting firm.  At the time, there were six really big ones.  McKinsey, Booz Allen and Hamilton [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.], A.T. Kearney.  I can't think of them all now.  There were six at the time, six hundred consultants in offices around the world.  Actually in, in the mid-'70s [1970s] to go from B [business] school to a consulting firm was the big thing.  That's what you really wanted to do 'cause they paid the really big bucks.  You know I think I started at twenty-five grand [twenty-five thousand dollars], man I was just really kicking it at twenty-five thousand, something like that.
Speaker 1: That in the '75 [1975] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was twice what I was making in the [U.S.] Foreign Service you know.
Speaker 1: People out of college were making like seven (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh man I was, I was flying baby.  So, but I wrote to Foreign Service when McKinsey made me their officer, and I said look would you consider--they, they had sent me a letter saying okay we're ready for you to come back, now these are three, you can pick from one of these three assignments.  You can be executive assistant to the assistant secretary of state for economic and business affairs.  This is a really good bureaucratic job in Washington [D.C.] for a guy my age.  You can go to the U.S. Consulate General in Alexandria, Egypt, as a commercial officer, a fascinating possibility, or we'll teach you Portuguese and you can go to the Consulate General in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil].  I was a bachelor at the time.  I'm saying wow God, oh man this is just too good, you know.  So, but my concern was okay so I go to Rio then where do I go.  You know it's sort of like you know after you got me to come back and then what happens you know.  So, what I did was I sent the Foreign Service a letter and asked them if they would consider extending my leave of absence for a year so I can go to McKinsey and try it out.  If I don't like actually working in the business environment as opposed to studying, then I can go back to Foreign Service, and they said no it's time to fish or cut bait, so I cut bait and let and went to McKinsey, which sent me back to Japan.  So, I was at, in McKinsey in Tokyo [Japan] and New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, all sorts of things.  We were doing--then I was doing some work for in product mar- market strategizing for General Electric.  I don't think it's at this point bad to say who the client was.  When I went to Japan, I was doing another product market strategy study for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries [Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.].  We were trying to fix their air-conditioning business.  I did some pro bono work for the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] trying to help them wean black colleges [HBCUs], six black colleges, from a program that they had going and in fact one of the six presidents, the presidents of these six colleges came to meet with us seriatim, all together, one of whom was the president of my school [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  That was great to have him see that I actually had a job, was working, you know, Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Jr.], a great guy.  Did some work for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], for the Japan Society.  So, there were a lot of fascinating things to do in addition to just figuring out how to make better air-conditioners and stuff.
Story_ID: 395508
Speaker 1: So, (unclear) the McKinsey [McKinsey & Company] experience with Japan being back in Japan, in fact they sent me over three months early before the study started so that I could go back to language school again and work on my vocabulary 'cause I didn't know, I mean I, in--Japanese is so hard a language and so specialized that you tend to develop a vocabulary around your professional focus, so you learn how to talk about politics if you're going to the political section or arts and culture if you're going to be at one of our cultural centers, and I didn't know, I didn't have a business vocabulary, so I had to in and learn how to say (speaking Japanese), which is a balance sheet.  You know who would have learned that.  So, I spent three months studying that and other sort of fascinating language differences around business.  I was there for the study, came back, stayed at McKinsey two years and then left to go to work at Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.].
Story_ID: 395509
Speaker 1: Let's go back to McKinsey, Japan [McKinsey & Company] for a second.  Just, it seems to me there should be some good stories someplace about people getting the wrong message, especially when you're dealing with Japanese and English business--
Speaker 2: Yeah well that's--
Speaker 1: You had these two very aggressive business--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --personalities you know meeting there.  Japan had really blossomed by this time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --everybody was going over there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the Japanese cars are flooding the U.S. market--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --electronics are starting to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know food the world market, you know.  What was that--
Speaker 2: Well, it was fascinating to me because I remember when I'd been out in the [U.S.] Foreign Service, Foreign Service I was there from '69 [1969] to '71 [1971] and I'm back there with McKinsey in 1976, it's five years later.  Early in my time there in the embassy in '69 [1969] or so a delegation of [U.S.] Congress people come out from the U.S. and they're doing this, and in fact they were being led by Gus, Augustus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins], a black guy from Los Angeles [California], and somehow I got to be in charge of taking them around--there were seven or eight of them)--and we are out at a television assembly plant right.  So, I'm watching these TVs coming down the line, and they come down and at the end they slap a label on it and it says Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  And I said why are they putting a Sears label on here?  Says well no one would buy it if they thought it was a Japanese television.
Speaker 1: And these TVs were for Japanese customers?
Speaker 2: No, they were sending back to the states.  They were gonna send back.  So what, you know what was happening is there were some, they were assembling these things in Japan because the labor was inexpensive and people knew what they were doing, but the point is that between '68 [1968] when I'm there in the embassy and '76 [1976] or '77 [1977] or whenever the heck it was, that I go back there for McKinsey you know you have Sony [Sony Corporation] become the preferred brand.  You know when I was there in the embassy in '68 [1968], one of my language instructors, a very young guy the thing he wanted most in the world was a Mustang [Ford Mustang].  By 1976, forget it.  I mean in those six years, although it of course it took, you know, a run up and on for a lot longer.  I mean the Japanese contribution to consumer economies around the world had just, ex- exploded.
Speaker 1: The cameras.
Speaker 2: Cameras, anything in, in optics, electronics, and automobiles.  It was even steel, you know, I was, I, I, let's see know, yes when I was out there in the embassy I went to, I forget why I was going, I may have been with these same congress people, we'd go to a rolling steel mill where they--you know what that is, you know where they make steel on a rolling process basis.  It's sort of like highly automated steel making.  Japan is now killing the U.S. with steel, you know, it's not just Japanese cameras, it's Japanese steel that's killing U.S. steel (unclear).  So, they've got this rolling steel.  All their steel mills are rolling steel.  One of the reasons is 'cause we blew them all up in the war, and then they built them and they were all modern and new, right.  I leave Japan after the embassy, I'm back in Washington [D.C.], I'm traveling around the country with a group of Ja- of, of Asian politicians.  I mean these were all members of their various legislatures from around Asia, and we're at a steel mill in West Virginia and they're making it the old way, and I'm saying to myself and they're talking about getting killed.  I said well look at all these--I'm saying to myself look how slow this is.  Look at how many people are involved in this, you know, but we can't make these changes because we can't.  I mean, there are too many vested interests in the way it is as opposed to this way.  So, they were killing us.  The same thing happened in these other areas, in electronics and automobile there was a big change, so I did see that when I was having--
Speaker 1: Wiped out the television--
Speaker 2: Wiped them out.
Speaker 1: --industry in the United States.
Speaker 2: Wiped them out yeah.
Speaker 1: Zenith [Zenith Electronics] was the last one (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Automobiles, Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation] is still one or two.
Speaker 2: In terms of quality, beating us on quality.  I remember in those days what was the precursor I think I it was the precursor to I, I, I, I own a  300ZX [Nissan 300ZX], you know.  The early name for that was Fairlady [Fairlady Z] or something like that.  And the Japanese spent all of their time sitting around trying to figure out names for their products that would mask the fact that they were Japanese, 'cause if it sounded Japanese no one would buy it, but that's all changed.  It's amazing.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But, I did see that while I was there.
Story_ID: 395510
Speaker 1: Was Japanese culture particularly instructive to you as an African American, being a minority from this country did you learn anything specific about, you know, what a minority can do by observing the Japanese?
Speaker 2: No, I'd have to say no.  I don't think there was anything about Japan that was instructive to a black person in a way that it would not have been so for someone else.  I, I, I don't think so, at least I didn't think so.  And it wasn't like look at these brown people go, you know brown people go.  Look at these not only because they're Japanese do not think of themselves as part of a great brown mass in this world.  They are, their own self concept is very unique unto themselves and they don't feel particularly connected to black people or Chinese or somebody like that because they happen to be not white.  So, I didn't, I didn't take anything away from that experience in Japan that was unique to me as a black person as opposed to being any, some other foreigner there.
Speaker 1: Okay, on the other hand did you, how did you feel as a black person in Japan?  How did, how did--
Speaker 2: I felt like a foreigner just like I feel like a black person in Mississippi in 1982, 1962 rather.  But, to Japanese you know the word for foreigner in Japanese is gaijin, who is a gaijin just like that gaijin.
Speaker 1: So they didn't make any distinction between the two.
Speaker 2: Well now, now but for me now they could thought I was an Egyptian for all I know, because I did see that the Japanese could make a distinction between gaijin and kokujin which is a black person.  But, I didn't, I didn't get that, but it didn't matter that much.  I mean it's not that they were particularly hostile to people, but they, you know in their own sort of sorting--Japanese sort people out, you know, they, in their own language when you study Japanese you find that their, their language is about sorting people out.  You know, where do you fit versus me?  You know, what forms of address do I use?  Do I take a, a, a lower position.  Do I take a higher position?  Do I act like we're equals?  And this is how you mess up in speaking Japanese with the Japanese is taking a wrong position in the conversation.  So, they are sorters out of people.
Speaker 1: They're very class conscious?
Speaker 2: Well, sort of.  You know Japan is a very formal and structured feudalsociety, very rigidly feudal society.  In fact, that's one of the theories about how they got to be so good at business was that if you were in a business class you could not get out of it, unlike say China, where you could test your way, you could become part of the mandarin, mandarinate, so if you have a richly mercantile family, and you've got a really smart kid, he studies really hard, he passes the exams, and he becomes a mandarin, a civil servant, you know, so you can educate yourself out of this class in a way.  But, in Japan this was not possible, so all of this talent kept getting recycled, and this was one theory this was why the Japanese had beginning in the mid-19th century began to zoom ahead of Asia was because of the rigidity of their social structure.  Wasn't so much, I guess it was class, but not in the Indian caste system and not in the British sort of hierarchical system.  In Japan, it seemed, it felt different to me.  The difference between the samurais and the business people (unclear) everybody because you could really be stuck in the business class and become head of Zaibatsu, I mean, you're worth a gazillion dollars.  I mean, this isn't like this is keeping you in a backroom somewhere.
Speaker 1: But it is keeping you within a--
Speaker 2: But it keeps you within a structure you know.  It did.  That's probably not so much true anymore.  In fact, I know it's not true anymore, but during the time of Jap- in Japan's growth starting with major restoration in the 19th century that was what contributed a big part to it.
Story_ID: 395511
Speaker 1: How did you get involved with Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]?  I think you had an uncle (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My uncle worked there.  I, I got recruited to Philip Morris by a search firm, but my uncle, my uncle was working there at the time, had, was approaching retirement by the time I got there, but he had started there as a salesman in the late '40s [1940s].  In fact, his brother-in-law, my uncle's wife brother was the first black salesmen least that's what, the brother's name is John Sanderford [ph.] says that he was, and I assumed that he was.  And then he wanted to go into politics, so he left job, gave the job to my uncle, so, now my uncle is the second guy in like 1948 or '9 [1949] or something like that, and he made a career out of it, retiring in '78 [1978] or '79 [1979] or something like that shortly after I got there, but he was there and a hugely important guy there for thirty some years.  Fantastic guy, Herbert Wright, my son's two middle names, Reed Herbert Wright Knox [Reed Knox] is my son.  My uncle became my father.
Story_ID: 395512
Speaker 1: And he [Knox's maternal uncle, Herbert Wright]--you know a lot of this stuff that goes on now between--in fact the Urban League [National Urban League] used to give an award in his name, the Herbert Wright Award [Herbert H. Wright Medallion] was given by the Urban League to people in corporate America who, you know showed the most connection to the aims and aspirations of the Urban League.  Well, part of this was 'cause my uncle started this stuff, or a lot of it, getting companies to go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention or the Urban League, set up booze and act like they care and to make contributions, et cetera, and Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc..] was, really was a caring company.  It was actively involved in, in civil rights issues, you know took a big risk.  In fact, the company, which hardly gave any money away in the '50s [1950s], who didn't have any, gave some money once to the Urban League, and the chairman of Philip Morris was shown in a picture giving a check for five thousand dollars to the Urban League, and this started a boycott of Philip Morris' products in the South.  They were throwing stuff from stores out in the streets, and if you drove around in a car with a Philip Morris sign on the back they would throw rocks at it.
Speaker 2: This reminds me, what you just said just reminded me of a photo a saw at the Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of a little guy who played the bellhop in the Philip Morris--
Speaker 1: Johnny, Johnny Roventini.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Call for Philip Morris.
Speaker 1: Call for Philip Morris, Johnny Roventini.
Speaker 2: He was given a check--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to the Schomburg Center--
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: --was given to Dorothy Hudson [ph.] and standing next to her was J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] the historian--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and writer--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 395513
Speaker 1: What is the origin of Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]?  We think of tobacco companies as being southern, you know, that's where they grow tobacco (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, Philip Morris was back actually a person.  There was a man named Philip Morris Esquire and he was a tobacconist in London [England].  I've seen pictures of his shop, and he started selling cigarettes when they discovered that the British troops coming back from the Crimean War.  Up to that time, you smoked tobacco in a pipe you know, had learned how to roll them from the Turks.  So, he started selling cigarettes at this shop on Bond Street.  There is some argument about what year it was, but it was 1840s, 1850s, something like that.  Then the company got a royal warrant.  I think it was from King Edward, King Edward [King Edward VII], the son of Victoria [Queen Victoria], so that'd be Edward the VII I think it was.
Speaker 1: So, now the one that married the American.
Speaker 2: No, no that was, that was the, that was his grandfather.  So, Edward, the son of Queen Victoria would have been the VI or VII, I forget, and then the, then the one who married Wallis Simpson was Edward VIII, so this must have been Edward VII okay.  I think that's right.  At any rate, it's one of those, one of the guys, one of those Edward guys.  So, he gives us a royal warrant and that's why the Philip Morris logo now has a, a crest that looks like the crest of the British monarch because that was the crest you could use if you had a royal warrant.  So, the company became quite successful in England and started exporting cigarettes to the United States, and that's how an office was established, somewhere in New York I guess it was, received these exports and market them in the United States.  Now, at the same time Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] is president and the trust busting begins.  So they're now going through the first part of the century busting all these trusts.  The oil trust gets broken up.  You know John Rockefeller [John D. Rockefeller] can no longer own all the oil there is, you know, so there have to be some other companies, so the oil and gasoline industry begins to diversify.  The tobacco business in this country was run by a guy named James Buchanan Duke, Buck Duke, out of North Carolina, and he controlled the tobacco trust, the American tobacco trust.  I don't know if that had a formal name, but he was in control of it, and the government breaks that up.  At this point, Philip Morris the, the U.S. end of the English company incorporates itself in Virginia.  I think it was in nineteen, in the early teens, as the trust gets broken up and becomes an independent company and that's the Philip Morris we know.  It struggled for many years because even though there was competition, presumed competition in the industry now, still was dominated by the remnants of the Duke family, which became the American Tobacco Company.  And as I said the company struggled for years through, well struggle, it was doing okay, but it wasn't it wasn't do, it wasn't behaving in any way that would lead you to believe that it would become what it became.
Story_ID: 395514
Speaker 1: That didn't happen, in fact some people got, who were distributors of Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] products in the '40s [1940s] got very rich when the company went to them and in order to make payroll once sold them some stock at a reasonable price and the guys would buy the stocks so the company could make payroll and now this distributor who got that stock in the '40s [1940s] is sitting on his boat somewhere or his son is, his grandfather, his grandson may even be a philanthropist given the money and they made so much money off of them.  But, the company was, you know, trying and sort of succeeding until the '50s [1950s] and sometimes in the '50s [1950s] Philip Morris buys Benson and Hedges and acquires in that purchase Joe Cullman [Joseph F. Cullman Jr.] who becomes chairman of Philip Morris, creates Marlboro, the Marlboro campaign begins and all those things and the company takes off.  So, by now the late '50s [1950s] Philip Morris is the first U.S. tobacco company to internalize and we start going, setting up international operations around the world, first one to do so, which was now Philip Morris International [Philip Morris International, Inc.], a huge, a hugely successful operator.  It expands to industrial concerns like everybody else did in the '60s [1960s] thinking that conglomeration met that if you're a tobacco company you ought to own the railroad, you know that sort of thing, so it gets into the industrial businesses making paper and paper products.  It buys a Mission Viejo [Mission Viejo Co.] company and gets into real estate development.  It acquires razor blade and, and we owned Burma-Shave for a time and a razor blade company I can't remember the exact, I can't remember the brand name now.  Buys the Miller Brewing Company[CA1], the Seven Up company, then we divested Seven-Up and the industrial businesses, bought General Foods [General Foods Corporation], acquired Kraft [Kraft Foods Inc.], bought--(unclear)--and now Philip Morris has, which has changed its name to the Altria Group [Altria Group, Inc.] is the largest consumer goods company in America and the largest food company in America.  Its revenues are dominated by food.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah the cigarettes have declined I guess--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah they, they've, the consumption has declined overall.  Philip Morris' market share has gone up, so if you're, you know, it's going down you're going up so there holding steady.  It still makes a lot of money.  At one time, Philip Morris' free cash flow, free cash flow, which means after you paid everything how much money do you have to decide what to do with.  Its free cash flow in a year was larger than the next ten largest consumer goods company combined, which included Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], Coca Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia]--it was a lot of money.
Speaker 2: That's a lot of money.
Speaker 1: That's why, you know, everybody, all these lawyers want it (laughter), but that's another story.
Story_ID: 395515
Speaker 1: What was your story there?
Speaker 2: What was my story?  Well I went there in '77 [1977], 1977 yeah to be manager of internal management consulting.  They wanted to establish and internal consultancy capability, so I went from McKinsey [McKinsey & Company] to Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] to do that.  After two years, I was asked to go down to the corporate affairs department to take over what they call their financial relations there, which was dealing with the financial community, and I didn't want to do that.  I thought it was off track, and it was public affairs, it wasn't marketing finance it was off track, but I looked at the list of people who had that job and because it involved working so closely with the chairman it tended to be helpful to them in their careers, so I said I'll take that job because I'd like to stay here at this company.  It's off track, but this is a place I'd like to be.  So, I took that job and they continued to give me more and more to do in that function and I stayed in it for the balance of my time at Philip Morris.  I got promoted to vice president in '88 [1988], I think it was, 1988, and then so I was in a fairly senior position there from '88 [1988] until I retired in 2001.
Story_ID: 395516
Speaker 1: Now is there, is there a highlight, highlights from your stay there [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are lots and lots of those.  The, but what would some be.  Having said that there are highlights I have to think of one now.  It was a very, you know, working on the two acquisitions, General Foods [General Foods Corporation] and Kraft [Kraft Foods Inc.] were, was quite exciting, I mean, it involved lots of maneuvering and backstage stuff and it was fairly complicated.  It involved all of our most senior people, so that was a lot of fun to do that.  Let's see, almost all of these acquisitions and the vestiture stuff I found fun.  There were a lot of nasty things which could be highlights too, because they were so--I wouldn't call them highlights I would call them memorable episodes which made it kind of a fund, an interesting place to be in my function, which had to do with the external world when we were under attack by legions of lawyers who were bringing lawsuits against us while we were being demonized by the anti-tobacco industry to be in the, on the other side of that was an interesting challenge.  I had this conversation with a friend the other day, did I feel bad, and I said no just because they--there were attempts to demonize you didn't mean that we felt like demons.  You know, we felt like we were under attack for wrong things, and people were wrong headed and there were other motives, and it was kind of a challenging place to be in the public affairs function.
Speaker 1: Now was, Philip Morris wasn't the company that was charged with spiking the cigarettes with extra nicotine?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, that spiking, it was the whole industry; I guess we were the ones.  Yeah, that was the big spiking thing, 'cause there was, there was a lawsuit about that, which we won.  Spiking had to do with--see we make, now I'm a little--this is, I gotta be careful here this is a legal issue that the company is still facing, but you know you can take, you can take nicotine (unclear) where if you washed tobacco to clean it, the nicotine comes out with, with the cleaning agents, water and stuff.  When you add it back, is that spiking?  Or if you can say look what we have here we've agreed to make a cigarette with eight milligrams of nicotine and if I just, if, if I add back eight and leave that ten am I manipulating it in order to make it consistent.  You know this is the issue as opposed to the presumed allegation which is sort of like there is no nicotine in a cigarette unless you put it in there, and it's just not true.  You can take it out.  We had a product that we completely took the nicotine out just like we took caffeine out of coffee to make decaffeinated coffee.  It's kind of a process, and nobody bought it.
Story_ID: 327243
Speaker 1: Was Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] the company in that movie that they were, the movie ['The Insider'] that came out about the, the guy that blew (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's not--I didn't think it was--
Speaker 2: No, no, he worked, that guy worked for Brown and Williamson [Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company] yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right I thought, I didn't think it was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Wigand is his name, really a wonderful guy.  Philip Morris  is a, a, a really great company and was a great place to be, and I had a great job there because in addition to the things that I was talking about being on the firing line, which made it an intellectual and emotional challenge we were also hugely supportive of things that I was interested in and I got to be very much involved in them 'cause of the contribution's program reported to me and I was chairman of our political action committee and all of these things that require, that involve outside involvements also came my way and in particularly I guess what, when I think back on all of it, what particularly, what gives me particular pleasure and memory now is the, is the involvement of Philip Morris with the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York], which involvement began before I got to the company.  But while I was there at Philip Morris, I went on the board became chairman of the board of the museum and with help from Philip Morris was able to do a lot of good for that institution.  We were bit supporters of many of their exhibitions, did a lot of their advertising for them, you know, and I think the company in that involvement and all of the things that it had done over the years in the arts was really a great place to be.  In fact, when Newsweek did a story about the most, fifty most important individuals in the arts in America, Philips Morris was the only non-person named who had said, described as the corporate metiche and that they let me extend to the Studio Museum, which is one of the great institutions in the city and in the country.
Story_ID: 327244
Speaker 1: Anything else about Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] that you--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I thought it was a great place for black people to be.
Speaker 1: When you were there, what was, were there very many black folks there when you, when you started?
Speaker 2: There were not a lot, I mean, I think there were, there were two guys in particular, [HistoryMaker] George Lewis, and Tom Shropshire who were senior to me who were at Philip Morris Industrial and Miller Brewing Company, respectively when I joined.  And there were others in management positions, and Philip Morris was generally a good place for black people to be.  It had its ups and downs just like every company, but I think it was trying pretty hard to be right, and heck they promoted me which as you know is a great place.  It comes down to what happened to you.  You know what happened to me was okay.  I thought it was, I thought for, for African Americans it was a company that gave you a shot, and that's all you can ask for really.
Story_ID: 327245
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Gee that's a big one (pause) well it doesn't take much to, to find pain in the growing disparity between the haves and have not in our community.  I mean, we're, you know some people are really zooming ahead and others are it seems to me you know as behind as we ever were and it doesn't seem to be a way out.  I, I guess I'm hopeful, I can't feel to be hopeful, but the, but I don't see a lot of signs of it.  I'm not saying we're headed to hell, you know, but a lot of the things that we thought would happen, you know, the schools are now desegregated, we got open accommodations, and we got voting rights, all these things we're gonna fix everything and haven't fixed a whole lot, you know.  There's still this disparity in our community and I, I don't know how to fix it.
Story_ID: 327246
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done up to this point, I mean, what would you--is there anything that you would do differently, any major thing?
Speaker 2: No, I would do everything the way I did it.  I would leave the [U.S.] Foreign Service because if I hadn't left I wouldn't have met my wife, and as much as I would like to have--I was sitting with, you know when I think back on you know the job, the career I wanted, Gail [Gail Reed Knox], my wife, and I were visiting one of my old friends, service friends who was at that time the U.S. ambassador to the Philippines, and I'd known him for thirty years or so, and we we're sitting up in Manila in his study and they had said, they were saying geez this is great, you know the life you have, look how well you're doing, you know, this is in the private sector.  And I'm thinking to myself, yeah you'd like to have my money, and I would like to have your career.  That's what I want.  But, I don't regret it at all.  You know I don't miss, miss it, it didn't have, I mean everything, everything that's happen to me in my life has been an advance, you know.  Whatever has happened to me I always felt moved me forward in some way, and so I don't, I wouldn't go back and change anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I might do this or that differently, but I wouldn't change any of the big things.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know your father [George Levi Knox, II] died before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --got started with your career--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what, what did your mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] think about, about (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, when I told her that--her big problem was when I told her I was gonna leave the Foreign Service to go to B [business] school, she thought I was absolutely insane, because you know you can't get these jobs, you know.  You get a job like that you're supposed to lock into it with your teeth and fingernails and everything else and not leave.  She thought I was nuts, but I think she was proud of me.  But and if she had not been she would never had said so, so I don't know, but I think she was.
Story_ID: 327247
Speaker 1: Tell us how you met your wife [Gail Reed Knox] and tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: When I was in the, in the, in the [U.S.] Foreign Service, I mean I'm sorry when I was an intern [in the Foreign Service Scholars Program] in Washington [D.C.] that summer I was talking about I got to be really good friends with a guy, and he became my best friend--he lives in San Francisco [California] now--and at a point he thought he and his wife, then wife thought, that I ought to really meet this woman that he knew who he'd grown up with in Mount Vernon, New York, and so he arranged for us to meet.  That's how I met her.  So, I owe him that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have two children?
Speaker 2: We have two children, Reed [Reed Knox] and Gillian [Gillian Knox], and Reed is my wife's maiden name.  So, we're trying to re--keep all, keep all these names close to us.
Story_ID: 327248
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, as I said before, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Gee that's too big.  You should have let me know you were gonna ask me that one.  Well, I think my legacy will be in my children [Reed Knox and Gillian Knox] with how ever they turn out.  I mean I, when, at my mother's [Yvonne Wright Knox] funeral two years ago I got up to talk and I said that we were her legacy you know that she didn't build a building or she hadn't done all these great things, but that the way we turned out was I thought okay and a legacy for her, and I think the same thing about me.  I've done a lot of things that interested me and some of them benefited others, but I would hope that in the end when my children or grandchildren are looking at this tape and thinking about the person that was their forbearer they think that I was a straight ahead person who did the best he could.
Speaker 1: Okay and is there anything that we haven't touched upon that, that you think you need to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  No, I think we've covered the waterfront pretty well.
Speaker 1: There's always something though.
Speaker 2: There's always, well there are lots of anecdotes that could have been mentioned, but--
Story_ID: 327249
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Gee I would just like to be remembered.  You know the--I don't think I have an ego that big that would get me to that point of how to be remembered versus just being in somebody heart, in the hearts of my family and the people I knew.  That's what I want.  Somebody asked a Chinese sage you know how old are you?  He said I'm ten thousand years old, I'm the product of everyone who was my forbearer and I wanna make sure I take that and to pass it along, and that's what I wanna do.  We were standing when we took my mother [Yvonne Wright Knox] to Indianapolis [Indiana] to be buried next to my father [George Levi Knox, II], this was two years ago, and we were standing in the cemetery and I realized there were five generations in my family in that spot, you know my great-grandfather [George Knox] I talked to you about and my grandfather [Elwood Knox], uncle, aunt, and my father over there, and that was so invigorating to me to, to be a part of that particular continuum, and I hope I made a contribution to it and when my children [Reed Knox and Gillian Knox] and their children think about it I hope they think so, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I appreciate you sharing your story with us.
