Story_ID: 559347
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Paul, P-A-U-L, Lowe, L-O-W-E, Knott, K-N-O-T-T, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Knott]
Speaker 1: All right.  And you, you usually go by Paul Knott, right?
Speaker 2: Usually, yes.
Speaker 1: And I've seen it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most people call me Paul, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I see it was A. Paul.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any reason why you don't like Albert, or don't use Albert as a first name?
Speaker 2: No, just go by Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay, you like Paul better?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have any nicknames or anything or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or just Paul (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In college, they used to call me A.P.  Well, some people still call me A.P., yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 23rd, 1935, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Physician, business entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 14th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 300 North LaSalle Street in Chicago [Illinois], the location of my office.
Speaker 1: Okay, 500, 505 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 5--I'm sorry, 5--500--505 North LaSalle, Suite 300.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry about that.
Speaker 1: No problem.
Story_ID: 559348
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up, you know, sort of thing, and they only require a brief answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Chili.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Warm, the sea and sand.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What's up?
Story_ID: 559349
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E, Meredith, the middle name, M-E-R-I-D-E-T-H [sic.], Scott, S-C-O-T-T [Fannie Scott Knott] that's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth would be December 21st, 1901.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Normal, Alabama [Normal, Huntsville, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Normal, Alabama.  Is there a story behind that name, Normal, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a school [Huntsville Normal School; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] there.  I think there still is; it's Nor- Normal--I, I don't remember what they call it or what they called it, but there was a training school for black kids back then because her mother--my mother's mother and father were teaching there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know they trai- they used to call teachers' training schools normal schools, but I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Normal, yeah; but this was in Normal, Alabama--yeah, Normal.  There is a Nor- I--there still is a Normal, Alabama, and I understand there's still a school there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and, you know, what do you know about that side?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother was half-Cherokee Indian [Native American], and I understand her father was white. I don't, I don't know.  Her name was Allen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born in approximately 1876, 1877--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --somewhere in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, Arthur Scott, I don't know much about him other than he was born around the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your grandmother was half-Cherokee and her father was white?
Speaker 2: White, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--okay, so she was half-white and half-Cherokee is what you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she wasn't black at all, that you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I know of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I can't exclude that entirely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of funny things happened in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're absolutely right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's hard to sort it all out; it's hard to sort it out for anybody.  So, your grandfather, his name was Scott?
Speaker 2: Arthur, Arthur Scott.
Speaker 1: Arthur, Arthur Scott, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were telling us about him.  Now, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was a teacher.  And something I remember my grandmother; her name was Lula, Lula Allen [Lula Allen Houston]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just to back up for a minute--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and her father was a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It just came--was a doctor.  Now, whether he was white or what-whatever, you know, he was a physician back then, whatever qualified you to be a physician.  Then, when--in 19--my mother was born in 1901, December 21st, I think I gave you that.  Then, they moved to Chattanooga, Tennessee for better opportunities, and my grandfather opened a blacksmithing shop in Chattanooga which, at the time, specialized in fixing springs and melding and welding springs for carriages, and later on, cars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was one of the first black entrepreneurs in Chattanooga.
Story_ID: 559350
Speaker 1: What else about that side of the family?  Any stories passed down about what life was like?
Speaker 2: They lived well.  My mother [Fannie Scott Knott] had a sister, Arthurine [Arthurine Scott Collins], and they were able to send--my mother went and graduated from Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and my sister--I mean her sister, Arthurine went and graduated from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and Arthurine married David Collins [Ludie David Collins], who was a Fisk Jubilee Singer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they travelled through Europe together.
Speaker 1: Now, for those who watch this and don't know, the Fisk Jubilee Singers were formed as sort of a fundraising arm of Fisk?
Speaker 2: Of Fisk, yeah.  They're singers, and they travel to raise money for the, the college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were world famous, I know that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) World famous, yes, because they, they traveled through Europe and--because I can remember David telling the stories of being presented before the king and queen of England and et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any--is there any real good story he tells about being over there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That had to be (unclear), you know.
Speaker 2: I was, I was just a kid because I would visit Chattanooga [Tennessee] in the summertime and, as a kid, I would go--David took over my grandfather's [Arthur Scott] business when he died, and so I would go to work with David at the blacksmith shop because I can remember being there.  Matter of fact, I still have the scar on my leg where some--where I got burned (laughter) once with a sparks from the--because they put these springs in fire, and I wasn't watching what I was doing and I got burned once; I got the scar on my leg now.  But I was just a little boy--maybe, I don't know, seven, eight years old, something like that.  So, I don't remember much about what he used to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear him sing?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard him sing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he had that deep baritone voice; I can hear it now, that deep baritone voice.  He was, he was a singer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait.  Yeah, I, I did, because he sang in the church choir.  I, I can remember vaguely going to church to Chattanooga occasionally, and hearing him sing in the choir.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so he toured with them--what, was it in the, in the 1890s?
Speaker 2: That would have been before--no, wait a minute now; my moth- no, that would have been in the twen- that would have been in the '20s [1920s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my mother was born in '01 [1901], and I think her sister was a year or two older than she--or three--so, this would have been in the--as I remember now, my mother finished Talladega in about '20 [1920], '21 [1921].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: She finished then about '20 [1920] or '21 [1921], and Arthurine was still in Nashville [Tennessee].
Story_ID: 559351
Speaker 1: Because my, my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] was in Nashville [Tennessee]; he went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  He finished Meharry, and he was there.  My mother [Fannie Scott Knott] was visiting a friend in the hospital when she met my father in Nashville.  That's the way that--and that would have been--my father finished Meharry in '26 [1926], so it was around that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up that she passed along to you?
Speaker 1: She traveled around quite a bit.  She--after Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] she, she taught at Claflin University [Orangeburg, South Carolina], she taught at Prairie View in Texas [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  I think Claflin's in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right, so that's a lot of traveling, yeah--from Claflin to Prairie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then she went to graduate school at Columbia and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--Columbia, New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  So, did she go to--
Speaker 1: In education, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.  So did she get her master's in education, or did she--
Speaker 1: I think she, I think she, I think she had a master's [degree] maybe from Columbia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the famous Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was back in the early '20s [1920s].
Story_ID: 559352
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for a second, then we'll--can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: The same as mine, Albert Paul Lowe Knott, Sr. [A. Paul Knott, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 8th, 1902.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  Where was he born, first of all?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His, his father was Albert Scott Knott [Albert Knott], and his mother was Luella Lowe [Luella Lowe Knott], and both of them were from East Tennessee, and they had both met at Morristown [Morristown College, Morristown, Tennessee]--what's equivalent, I understand, of college now, Morristown normal school, or teachers college, or something like that.  And they graduated in the same class in 1898, May of 18--their graduation day was May 8th, 1998--I mean 1898, and they were married in May of 1901--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they migrated to Pittsburgh for better opportunities, so both of 'em were trained as teachers.  My grandfather put some time in medical school, but couldn't afford it in those days; now, what school I, I don't remember, but then when he got to Pittsburgh, he became a, a policeman.  So, from what I understand, he was the first black policeman in Pittsburgh, and he stayed in that occupation for years.  Now, his father--he, he was born in eight--he--both my grandfather and grandmother, Luella and Albert, were born in 1877.
Speaker 1: They, they were born almost right after the official start of Reconstruction, I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, Albert's father was a veteran of the Civil War; he was a sergeant, which was considered an officer then in the, in the Civil War, and--
Speaker 1: Did they pass down what unit he was in?
Speaker 2: No, but I do remember he was--fought in and around Chattanooga [Tennessee], and I've been on Lookout Mountain in Chattanooga--outside of Chattanooga with my father.  We were looking at the caves where his grandfather had told him stories about where he had hidden to escape the Confederate troops, because if he was found, he would have been shot right away.
Speaker 1: Right--or worse.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, he had hidden in the caves up on Lookout Mountain.  But I do remember that as a kid growing there, and looked at some caves up there.  After the war, he was given a tract of land outside of Oak Ridge in East Tennessee, town called Gaston [ph.].  I believe the town was named at--his name was Gaston, I believe, and it's--the town of Gaston, Tennessee was named after him.  It's still there.  And he later became the A.M.E. [American Methodist Episcopal] bishop of East Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--he's A.M.E. Bishop Gaston, right?
Speaker 2: Gaston Knott [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that would have been in--yeah, that would have been just after the--well, that would have been in the 1870s, something like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 559353
Speaker 1: I don't know much about my grandmother's [Luella Lowe Knott] side.  I mean--well, that would have been my--yeah, my grand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your great-grandmother, yeah--right?
Speaker 1: My father's mother--I don't know much about--yeah, my grandmother; I don't know much about her side of the family other than they were--the Lowes were from the Knoxville [Tennessee] area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, are there any stories passed down from that side that are interesting?
Speaker 1: No, not that I can think of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had a cousin who was, George Davis [George L. Davis], who was a historian on that side of the family, and he did a family tree on that side of the family.  He's dead now, but George had gone to Oxford in England [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], and he was chairman of the history department at A and I State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University] maybe twenty years ago, and he did a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which is now Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: A and--Tennessee State, yeah.  They used to call--I don't know--I used to call it A and I, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tennessee A and I, right, right.  You don't hear that name that much anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that, that's what I remember it as, yeah.  I mean I've been there a bunch of times and I always remember A and I State, yeah.  Right down the--yeah, down the street from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and right down centennial avenue, yeah.  So that's, that's the only part I know there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 559354
Speaker 1: Your parents [Fannie Scott Knott and A. Paul Knott, Sr.] met in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: In Nashville, correct, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father was doing his residency in--
Speaker 2: No, he--I'm, I'm not--I'm a little unclear on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he was still a student [at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]; he graduated in '26 [1926], but he went--he did his graduate work--he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (unclear).  Not at St. Louis [Missouri], 'cause only a couple of places, when you're black, that you could go to.
Speaker 1: That you could go--Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], Homer G. Phillips (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] in St. Louis, Provident  in Chicago [Illinois], Harlem [Harlem Hospital; Harlem Hospital Center] in New York [New York], and there was a, there was a house--I can't--it escapes me in Philadelphia, where a lot of doctors went--trained in Philadelphia.  He, he trai- he went to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So if you were black, you really couldn't get in these other places; they were almost (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, you were shut out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Even in my day in Chicago, early on, you were shut out.
Speaker 1: Right, we've heard, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can tell you about that--
Speaker 1: Okay, we will.
Speaker 2: --when you get there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, when your parents met, how long was it before they got married?  'Cause you were talking about your mother traveling so much, and it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they got married in--they were married in 1930--'30 [1930]; in August of '30 [1930] or '31 [1931], I don't remember, just--maybe it was '31 [1931], August of '31 [1931]--August 20th, 1930.  They were married in Chattanooga [Tennessee], but the story was that my father was always chasing my mother, so finally he caught up to her and they got married (laughter) at my mother's home.  They, they had a marriage in, in the home.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause she did travel a lot now; she's a, she's at Claflin in South Carolina [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], then at Prairie View in Texas [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was--Prairie View, New York, Boston [Massachusetts], yeah, so--yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was--
Speaker 2: So I guess my father was persistent, so that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, I know he was persistent, I don't guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what brought 'em to--well, your father was returning back to his home town of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?  Is that why?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --because his parents--everybody was there, they owned property there, a home there.
Speaker 1: So did he set up practice there?
Speaker 2: He set up practice in Pittsburgh, yes.
Story_ID: 559355
Speaker 1: Can you describe growing up to us?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Was there a particular neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived in the Hill District.
Speaker 1: Hill District, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure you heard of that, yeah.
Speaker 1: August Wilson's made it, you know.
Speaker 2: August Wilson's Hill District, yeah.  It was a little after my Hill District, but it was, it was a community; a lot of people knew people, and people stayed in that community.  Well, actually, it wasn't much, much, much else you could do but stay in your community.  The school system was good, good school system, and the school system, I understand, in Pittsburgh is still good, one of the best, but outright prejudices.  I don't remember too much in Pittsburgh, other than when I went to YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp, I experienced a lot of racial prejudice, being one of two blacks there, and I went to a predominantly white grade school, and when other kids would have birthday parties and things when I was a little kid, I would never get invited--I remember that.  And my parents [Fannie Scott Knott and A. Paul Knott, Sr.] would explain why.  Then, in high school it was a little different.  The racial complexion in high school was--at the time, Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was a famous high school.  At one time, I guess ten, fifteen years ago, it was rated as the best high school in the United States; the racial complexion was something like 30 percent black, 70 percent white, but socially and politically I had excelled there, because I became the first black student council president in 19--1951.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't wanna go too far too fast, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 559356
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember when I was in kindergarten.  Life was good; I didn't have--I didn't, I didn't, I didn't know of any problems and had enough to eat every day, nice place to stay, so life was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I can remember that, you know, feeling secure.
Story_ID: 559357
Speaker 1: And just back to this firs- this other question I asked.  I probably asked it too soon, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood, the sights and the sounds are the streetcars, trolley cars up and down Center Avenue, in front of my house.
Speaker 1: They ran on tracks in those days, right?
Speaker 2: They ran on tracks, yeah--trolley cars, they call 'em--electric cars, because they had--they were attached to electric cables, so I remember the trolley cars.  And the smells in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] were from the steel mills.  That's before it was cleaned up.  It always smelled, the steel mills, and they'd back the furnaces down and back 'em off at night and next day you wake up and you get all kind of soot and dirt in the house and have to clean the window blinds, and my mother [Fannie Scott Knott] was always doing that--I remember that, yeah; couldn't keep anything clean.
Speaker 1: So, it's just the general atmosphere of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was an industrial town that smelled like it, and it was cold and--matter of fact, we had a little coal mine in our backyard, but it wasn't--you go there and chip coal out in the backyard (laughter).
Speaker 1: Really, there's actually coal coming up out of the ground?
Speaker 2: Yeah, coal out of the ground, yeah.  So, that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 559358
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about--oh, yeah, sights and sounds and smells.  You said Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] smelled like an industrial steel town.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember that (unclear).  I mean it was an industrial town, all the steel mills and especially during the early '40s [1940s] 'cause Pittsburgh produced more steel than Germany and Japan combined.
Speaker 1: Did you have relatives that worked in the steel mills at all?
Speaker 2: No, my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] had before he went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have any stories about how blacks were treated in the steel mills?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember any.  I, I was aware of the prejudices that went on through some personal experiences I had, as I'd mentioned before, going to YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp and going to school.  Then, I was aware of the fact that my father--they tried to draft him into the [U.S.] Army.  Well, he was--he, he was in the [U.S.] Army Air Corps Reserve, and then they tried to draft him as a doctor and he refused to go, because of the way blacks were treated unequal, and they made all kinds of threats, but he still refused to go, so they just let him alone.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he--I would think he'd be beyond draft age at that--in 1941.  Well, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. No--well--
Speaker 1: Well, he'd be right around--
Speaker 2: He--well, as a doctor, he was around, he was around forty.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a doctor, and I can re- oh, interesting.  When I was a kid, my mother [Fannie Scott Knott] and father were active in--not civil rights, but just active in what was best for blacks and--because I can remember some of the people that used to come to dinner to the house.  I remember once Eleanor Roosevelt came.
Speaker 1: You know, that's pretty big, Eleanor Roosevelt (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was a time she came; it was--I don't--can't remember how old I was; I was pretty young.  Oh, I remember.  Wendell Willkie was running for president, and I guess she was campaigning; I guess Wendell must have been a Republican as I remember, yeah, and she was--is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--and so she was campaigning in Pittsburgh, so one of the places she stopped was at my house--I mean at, at dinner with my parents.
Speaker 1: Now, were they politically connected in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: Not, not really; they weren't really, other than if you were a doctor in those days you had--you stood out in the, in the black community, and there was some respect in the white community, too, because my father was able to get certain things done that couldn't otherwise happen.  But I remember she was there, and George Schuyler.  You've heard of George?
Speaker 1: Yeah, George Schuyler, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The reporter.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  see, because the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] was a block away from where I lived on Center Avenue, okay?  So George was there, his wife [Josephine Cogdell Schuyler] and his daughter Philippa [Philippa Schuyler], who was a pianist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a child prodigy, wasn't she?
Speaker 2: She was a child prodigy, yeah--I remember that.  I don't know if that was the time Eleanor Roosevelt--I don't--no, I think that was a separate time they were there, yeah, because there was always big preparations--my mother and my father, and lectures on "Behave yourself," and (laughter) "Don't do anything strange," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, they--
Story_ID: 559359
Speaker 1: Now, did they have like a--one of the--well, so you grew up in a fairly large home, I guess, a home that was impressive enough to entertain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in those days, yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but it was one that had been built by my grandfather, actually.  He had built it, then my, then my father lived there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then my grandfather had died there, too, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He's the one who came out of the Civil War, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: I'm getting--
Speaker 2: No, my father's father's father was in the Civil War, my great-grandfather [Gaston Knott (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then this was Albert Scott Knott [Albert Knott] who was born in eight--19--1877, and he died around 1939, '40 [1940], so I remember when he died, so that would have made him--'40 [1940], yeah; he died in his early sixties, yeah.  I remember he used to live--we--he used to live in the house when I was a--I remember the day of his funeral; I was just a little kid.  I remember that.  I mean I was--I would've been about five years old.  Oh, something else that I remember very vividly is, I was six years old December 7th, 1941.  We were--my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] and I were driving from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  We had a farm about thirty-five miles north of Pittsburgh, and we were driving and he had the car radio on.  He had one of the few cars with a radio then (laughter).  He had the car radio on and they were--this was about one o'clock in the afternoon and they were talking about the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] and what was going on.  I remember that, and I, I was wondering if we were gonna get bombed in Pittsburgh; that was my fear, and then my father explained to me, best he knew, what was going on because we didn't know there was gonna be another war until the next day when, when it was declared.  But we had listened to the radio and he explained things to me.  That reminds me something else.  My father was always interested in current events.  He read every newspaper he could, every magazine.  And when I was a child back in--three, four years old, in the late '30s [1930s], 1930s, I can remember he had a shortwave radio in our attic, and we used to go up and he'd tune the shortwave radio in, and I can remember hearing Hitler [Adolf Hitler]; I was impressed.  I mean I could--he was shouting in German, but he would go up--my father would go up and tune Hitler's broadcast in on shortwave radio back in the 1930s.  I can remember that and other things, but those, those kind of things impressed me.  And I took up the same interest because all through the war [World War II, WWII], by the time '41 [1941] hit, '41 [1941], '42 [1942], I was the first one at the door to grab the morning paper to read what was happening.  I mean at six, seven years old, I could--I had taught myself to read 'cause we didn't learn it in school.  But I could--I was reading the newspaper about what was going on in the world and war.  But I, I inherited that interest from my father, I think.
Story_ID: 559360
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet Robert Vann [Robert Lee Vann]?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No--now, let's see.  Robert--Mrs. Vann [Jessie Matthews Vann] I knew very well; she was friends with my parents [Fannie Scott Knott and A. Paul Knott, Sr.], and I knew her very well.  And I used to go see her on my own and stop in and see her, very, very gracious, nice lady.  I had--actually, I had asked her to sponsor me on a project to go to Africa like--I was like seventeen, eighteen years old--to do some reporting 'cause I wanted to go to Africa to see what was going on over there.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--do you remember the reports that J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] used to make to the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] about Ethiopia and--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Vann actually made J.A. Rogers a correspondent, you know, to the Courier--exclusive to the Courier, and paid his way to Ethiopia.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember it.  But, see, I tried to get her to do the same thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was wondering if there was a connection.
Speaker 2: And I've got a letter from her somewhere where she wrote me this nice letter.  She said, "Paul [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Knott]," or something to the effect, "you gotta, you know, wait a little bit" (laughter).  But I, I was--I did that--oh, that was in my freshman year at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], so I would have been seventeen, eighteen years old, following my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Where did you wanna go in specific?
Speaker 2: I don't--I'm trying to remember.  (Pause) Oh, I wanted to go to Central Africa.  At the time, I was interested in, in Central Africa, the Congo, and all the stuff I'd heard about Dr. Schweitzer [Albert Schweitzer] and what he was doing there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But later on, I changed my mind; that's another story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 559361
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a young fellow growing up?  You were--you said you were more--you were interested in politics and, and what was going on in the world (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not so much politics; I was just interested in what's gonna--history, what's going on, and I mean at the time, I didn't realize what--how--what a fluid time I came up in, but to look back on it I mean it's impressive when I think that here we are with the Iraq War; it's lasted longer than the Second World War [World War II, WWII], and all--and I mean I was through the Second World War and all of the stuff that went on; I was just a kid and just reading about everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: At a grade school in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a teachers'--there was a teachers' training school for University of Pittsburgh, Frick [Henry Clay Frick Training School for Teachers, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  F-R-I-C-K?
Speaker 2: F-R-I-C-K.  Frick [Henry Clay Frick] had been a big industrialist in Pittsburgh--same guy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was a teachers' training school.
Speaker 1: Connected to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: To University of Pittsburgh, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I was out of the district, but my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] swung some influence, whatever, so I could attend school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you like school?  You, you mentioned something just a few minutes ago I thought was strange, that you all weren't taught to read until after age eight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, well we started to read in the first grade for--I mean when I was in the first and second grade, I was reading the newspaper, so we had advanced that far.  I'm just thinking back; I mean at the time, I didn't realize it, but no, we were--it was a good school.  I, I don't remember what--I guess probably by third grade, kids are supposed to read, aren't they?  (Laughter) I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Well, I think by second grade you should be--you know, they start in first grade, you know, reading simple things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: These days, in kindergarten, they start you reading, if you're--if they're in the right program, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--so I was in kin- yeah, I, I can remember--well, I can remember reading, and I guess probably when I was four or five years old I was reading some things because I can remember reading about 'Gone with the Wind' because my grandmother [Lula Allen Houston], my mother's mother, put--she'd wash the floor in the bathroom and then put down newspaper, and I can remember crawling and 'Gone with the Wind,' all the big stories about 'Gone with the Wind' movie, and I was reading that, because I can remember going to my mother [Fannie Scott Knott] and grandmother and asking them, "What is all this 'Gone with the Wind'?  Can we go see it?"  'Cause I'd always like to go to the movies, but we couldn't because if you're black, you couldn't go to the--couldn't go downtown to the movies, so--this was in Chattanooga [Tennessee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd have to go
Speaker 2: This was in Chattanooga.
Speaker 1: Oh, in Chattanooga.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: They didn't have a balcony set up?
Speaker 2: No.  I remember, I remember--no, you could go to a black movie.  But I, I can remember going--just reading that, and so I had--and then 'Gone with the Wind' came out in 1940 [sic. 1939], so that had to be around that time; I would have been about five years old, but I, I can remember reading that.
Story_ID: 559362
Speaker 1: Well, did you have a favorite subject in school, as a--in, in grade school [Henry Clay Frick Training School for Teachers, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, I think--when I think back to grade school, I think I was pretty, pretty--I think I was bored; maybe from not enough to do.  I mean like electrical shop, and anything mechanical, I loved that.  But the other stuff I did, I did just enough to make a good--I mean I made, I guess mostly A's, or A was the top grade then.  But we'd have these placement tests, and I was just bored and I remember the multiple choice things.  I don't remember what grade it was in, but maybe around the sixth or seventh grade, given one of these tests, and I just randomly marked all the boxes off (laughter), and got up and left.  I wasn't a rebel (laughter), but I did that, I remember that.  So, they couldn't understand so they, they put me, put me back a half a grade or I guess I was in one of the grades with the, the slower kids, and that upset me, so then I excelled, and after that I skipped a grade.  So, that was that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Were there any particular teachers in grade school that stand out, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I can remember some.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember my math teacher; the first one comes to mind is Miss Succup [ph.].  I remember my kindergarten teachers, Miss Spring [ph.] and Miss Schaefer [ph.].  That's unusual; that's, that's sixty-five years ago and I still remember them, yeah.
Story_ID: 559363
Speaker 1: Were you engaged in activities?  Did you study music or play sports, or any of that kind of stuff when you were--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took piano lessons for about ten or eleven years, and my sports I played, I played--it's unusual in those days, but as a kid I played ice hockey, and I was by far the only black kid involved in that where I did experience some more prejudices, but there was a nice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that came out of that experience at Frick [Henry Clay Frick Training School for Teachers, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I mean being around all the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --mostly, mostly white kids at Frick, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And we weren't far from Duquesne Gardens [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] which was the home of the Pittsburgh Hornets, which was a professional hockey club at that time in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and they had pewee hockey or junior hockey, and I started to play there, being like the other kids.  But I became pretty good at that, and then I started to swim in grade school competitively, and also for YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and I was a competitive swimmer all through high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], grade school, and college [Yale University, New Haven Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you specialize in?
Speaker 2: Breast stroke, breast stroke.  Well, first breast stroke, and then in college, butterfly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 559364
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Schenley [Schenley High School], in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: That's S--
Speaker 2: S-C-H-E-N-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were saying this was about--school was 30 percent black, 70 percent white?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was one of the top schools in the country?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--ten, fifteen years ago, it was credited one of the top schools, and my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] was in the first graduating class from Schenley, 1920, he graduated.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that remembered your father from--?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't think so.  Let's see, I went, I went to Schenley in '49 [1949].  (Unclear) is '29 [1929]; yeah, that's an interesting question.  I don't know, I don't--it never came up, never came up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were very, very few black people at Schenley in 1920 'cause I've got a picture of my father's graduating class, and I think he was the only--he was about the only male, and there were two or three black ladies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how was it for you at, at Schenley?  Well, you said you had a good social--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, I was--participated in sports.  When I was fourteen or fifteen, I was doing cross country, and I was good at it except, to run in state championships, a big disappointment was that I had to be sixteen.  I remember that, and I think I could've won, but I couldn't run 'cause I wasn't old enough (laughter).  And then we had an excellent track team of which I was co-captain of the track team and several, several runners, and the fellow who was co-captain with me, went on to win medals [sic.] in the Olympics [1956 Summer Olympics, Melbourne, Australia].
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of them?  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Arnold Sowell [Arnie Sowell], S-O-W-E-L-L; he, one time, was the best middle distance runner in the world.  Donald Johnson [ph.], he was middle distance.  There was a white fellow, I can't remember his name right now; he went to the Olympics. That's all I can remember now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we had a good swimming team.  So it was cross country, swimming, track--yeah, those were the--I think those were the three, three big ones.  So, like, I was captain of the swimming team, captain of the track team.  I think that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, as captain, you probably set an example, I would guess.  You'd be the person, I guess; the coach was choosing you for captain.  Did you train a lot, or did you practice a lot?
Speaker 2: No, well, in those days, what we (laughter), what we did was--it was a cool thing not to train, or not to appear that you were training.  It was a cool thing to smoke cigarettes (laughter), and get out and, and beat another team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But we, we trained a lot, yeah.  But I mean we could've done a lot better.
Speaker 1: Had it been not for the--
Speaker 2: But we didn't, but we didn't have to 'cause I mean we were just naturally; we could run, we could swim, and do all those things.
Story_ID: 559365
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers in, in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], or during your teenage years, that you would consider like a mentor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--probably the teacher that had the most influence on me was a Mr. Carlon [ph.].  He, he was the electrical shop teacher and also, yeah, he was my homeroom teacher for a while, too.  But he was a guy that liked to do a lot of things.  He was--built his own boat and electrical things.  Taught us how to do a lot of things, so some of the stuff he taught me I still remember, I mean I still use in almost daily use.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any sense of when you were in high school that you wanted to be a doctor at all, or were you thinking about that at all?
Speaker 2: Well, that kind of was a funny thing because my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] had brainwashed me (laughter) into being a doctor.  I mean that's all I'd do; I mean I'd go to--he'd always talk about coming home, I mean, coming--going to school, coming back and taking over his practice, and I'd go to the hospital with him.  I'd have to make house calls with him, so he'd always make sure I was along, so I really didn't think seriously about this until it was time to come out of college.  Is this really what I wanna do?  And when I was--I applied to--so I said, "Well, I'll apply to one school."  Well, first of all, when I was going to college, of course he wanted me to go to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] which was his school.  But then the rebellion started to come out--teenage rebellion.  I said, "No, I don't wanna do this."  And I had heard about Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] because it was a great--was the greatest of swimming schools, and also a guy that I looked up to a lot that was older, Byrd Brown, had gone there and--
Speaker 1: So, so Byrd Brown had--how much older than you, I mean?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Byrd was seven years older than I was; it was seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He died two years ago, and to hear the--you probably heard of the name, yeah; very well known guy.
Story_ID: 559366
Speaker 1: You thought about--you considered Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] because of your friend Beard Brown--Byrd Brown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Byrd--and also because, because what I had heard about the swimming.  So, actually, as I remember, I think Yale (laughter) was the only school I had applied to.
Speaker 1: Now, that's amazing.
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah; I think--and I can remember going to talk with the high school counselor who was directing everybody to what schools to go to, colleges, and all that.  I remember her name was, Bernetta Andrews [ph.], was her name, and I remember.
Speaker 1: Was this a black counselor, or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, white counselor; this--we ain't got there yet (laughter).  Yeah, this, this was back in six--yeah, this was almost sixty years ago.
Speaker 1: So, most of your teachers were white, or were all of 'em (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, shoot.  Yeah, all--I didn't--no, there was no black teachers there.
Speaker 1: At a, at a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at a training high school for the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, Schenley, Schenley [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: No, no, this is Schenley, it's a public high school, right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Public high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: But there was no--there were no black teachers at Schenley.
Speaker 2: No black teachers, no; that was unheard of.  Actually, the first black teacher in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was the father of my best friend when I was growing up, Paul Peeler, P-E-E-L-E-R [Paul Lawrence Peeler].  He was the first black teacher in Pittsburgh.  He was a music teacher, but that was back in the early '40s [1940s] when he got that appointment as a music teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was--I started Schenley in 1949 through nine--I graduated in '52 [1952], so there were no, no black teachers, no assistants; I remember any.
Speaker 1: So what did your counselor tell you?  Did she encourage you, or--
Speaker 2: No.  She said (laughter), she said, "You better apply to University of Pittsburgh or something. Yale?  What the--?" You know, that, that was, that was way over her head and so therefore, of course, was over my head, too.  "What do you need to apply to a place like that for?"
Story_ID: 559367
Speaker 1: We were speaking about no black teachers in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. The first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, especially in Schenley [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], yeah.
Speaker 1: The first--yeah, the first black teacher was Paul Peeler [Paul Lawrence Peeler].  Did I, did I say this on tape before?
Speaker 2: I think you did.
Speaker 1: Okay, Paul Peeler, okay.
Speaker 2: He taught music, right?
Speaker 1: Right, taught music.  Okay, now, before--it was about--at least fifteen years ago, it's somewhere around the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], I was visiting Pittsburgh and my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] and I were driving in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and I said, "Hey, I, I hear Jimmy Robinson [James Robinson] is--a black guy--is principal of Schenley now."  My father said, "Yeah, that's right."  I said, "Let's stop by and see him" (laughter), "and see Schenley."  So we stopped and went to see Jimmy at Schenley High School, and that was the first time either of us had been there since I'd graduated back in 1952, and it was interesting, because Jimmy's father and my father had been best friends, and because my father relates a story that when Jimmy was born how proud his father was, and woke him up in the middle of the night to say that he had a son, and then when I was born, my father didn't call Jimmy's father but went over to his house and banged on the door (laughter) to let him know that he had a son, so that's how close we were.  But Schenley--at the time Jimmy Robinson was there, because of some secondary school innovation at the time, had made it an outstanding school, and where other schools were, were copying.  Even here in Chicago [Illinois] they were looking at Schenley and, and copying some of the things they were doing.  It was considered the best public secondary school in the country at the time, so that was--that's the transition it had made, and there were plenty of black teachers and administrators and all at Schenley when we did go there to visit, approximately 1990.
Story_ID: 559368
Speaker 1: Did you graduate from Schenley [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with honors or anything, or did you--I would assume you had pretty good grades to get into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had--I think I graduated with high honors which--all high honors 'cause I think the only--I don't remember.  I, I think I had all A's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it--what do you think determined that you would get into Yale?  I mean, you know, was it a test you took, or the way you wrote your application, or what do you think it was?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  In those days--I don't remember.  I don't think we had to take like the--I don't think they had the college aptitude test, did they?  And this, this is almost sixty years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was nothing like the ACT and SAT, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) ACT or SAT; I don't think (laughter), I don't think they had that then, yeah.  But I do remember I had to write a, a paragraph of something--I don't remember what it was but something I considered silly--write a paragraph or a paper on why you wanted to go to Yale, or what, what you want to do with your life, or something like that, one of those standard kind of questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also I, I--probably the fact that I was black, because how many black fellows in those days applied to go to Yale?  I think that had something to do with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, probably was not a lot (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, because there were only originally three in my class, and we increased to four in my class when somebody transferred in their second year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --an African fellow.
Story_ID: 559369
Speaker 1: So before we leave high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], now, were you a class officer or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I, I chose not to run for any class office and ran for student council president.
Speaker 1: So--well, you--what did you--you did run for student council.
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I ran for student--I was student council--ran for student council, became student council president.
Speaker 1: You became student council president?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was student council president.  So--there was another fellow, black fellow, he's dead now, Joe Sanford [Joseph Sanford], and Joe and I privately met, and I don't remember whether we flipped a coin or what, as to whether he was gonna run for class president or I was gonna--and he was--or who was gonna run for what, because we knew we had the backing and we could win whichever one we ran for, so it was decided outta that meeting that he would run for class president and I would run for student council.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had two different, two different positions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Any other--any stories or highlights from high school before we move on to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No, except that I was the first black student council president.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 559370
Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Fannie Scott Knott and A. Paul Knott, Sr.] excited about you going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], or how did they feel about it?
Speaker 2: Not really, I don't think so.  I mean my father's thing, he just wanted me to get in--get to school, get a medical degree, and that's where, that's where his was focused and my mother didn't have much to say about it, yeah.  Yeah, well, they were sad to see me leave town when I left town.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're going to a place where you don't have many connections, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I had no connections; I had never been to New Haven, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know, I didn't know anything.
Speaker 1: I know a lot of teenagers today take college tours; they get on a bus and they tour five or six schools and maybe ten or eleven (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, their mommies and their daddies take 'em, yeah.  It wasn't like that in those days.  When I went to New Haven, I'd just turned seventeen, and I had--my mother had helped me pack up my stuff in a, a footlocker, and I had my Schwinn bicycle, my old reliable bicycle, and a friend of mine, who was older than I was, was driving over the road trucks at the time, and he came and picked me up in his truck--in his 8-wheeler, or I guess a 16-wheeler, and we went to the Jersey City trucking center [Jersey City, New Jersey] that Saturday night, Jersey City trucking center, and he met up with another guy there that was going north through New Haven, to take me to New Haven.  So, he dropped me off on the street corner of New Haven that Sunday afternoon with my footlocker and bicycle, and there I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's an interesting way to go, to, to travel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I hitchhiked to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you--well, what was your reception like at Yale?  I take it from what you said so far that they've always had one black student, two black students, maybe, in the class?
Speaker 2: Well, then it was pretty, pretty, pretty thin back then.  In my class there were three of us to start, but I knew of a fourth one but he didn't claim to be black, and his mother was white, so.
Speaker 1: Well, how did he define himself?  I mean did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't, he didn't define himself.  I mean he just stayed away from us black guys and wouldn't socialize or would hardly speak or try to get in a conversation with him and he'd click you out right away.  But it was interesting, it was interesting because his, his father and my father had gone to medical school together (laughter), and later on when I came to Chicago [Illinois], I was helping his uncle out in practice, and his uncle would always ask me, "Oh, you knew my nephew."  "Yeah."  But I mean that's the way it was; I mean it's still that way.  I mean I--was the fiftieth reunion, and back in June it was still that way.
Speaker 1: Now was he--did he consider himself white, or did--well, was he passing, or what was he doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think he, he considered himself white, and he was passing, too; he just didn't, didn't want us to blow his cover.  But he went on and became a successful doctor, gynecologist, and--but at the time, what he had--he had gone to an exclusive Yale prep school, Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts]; he'd gone to Andover and then came to Yale.
Story_ID: 559371
Speaker 1: Now, was, was Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] like an all-male school when you started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All-male, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it still?  Is it--it's mixed--
Speaker 2: No, no, it's--yeah, women, yeah.
Speaker 1: But in those days it was all-male.
Speaker 2: All-male, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there a female equivalent or something?  I know Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] has Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Well, it used to have Radcliffe, but it's all integrated now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, I was up--I was just at--in the fall, I was at Harvard and Radcliffe, and I was talking to some of the students and they were telling me, it was kind of a revelation after not really being involved there in almost fifty years, what had happened, but Radcliffe is no more; it's all--the girls all go to classes at Harvard now, and they, they don't get a Radcliffe diploma; they get a Harvard diploma now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What was your--what was the question?
Speaker 1: No, what was the female, I guess, counterpart to Yale (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay; it's quite a few of 'em then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any black young ladies (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there were a few, there were a few.  An interesting thing in my--I vividly remember going freshman year.  They'd have these mixers, so we had a mixer before football where, where girls were coming from Vassar on blind--they would meet by numbers with the freshman boys from Yale.  The freshman girls from Vassar would come over and you were--everybody was given numbers, and they would hook up by the numbers, and so I said, "That sounds interesting."  So, I said, "Okay, I'll do this."  So there was another black guy there and I talked him into it.  "Well, let's--come on, let's do this."  He said, "I, I know you think we should really do it."  I said, "Yeah, come on, let's do this, see what happens."  So, I'll never forget, that Friday before the Saturday meeting, the freshman dean, dean of students, called us to his office.  His bottom line was, how can we do this?  "Suppose you--you're gonna be there and it might be very object- objectable to whoever you're matched with to be with a, a Negro."  We were Negroes in those days, not black--to be with a Negro and I mean we--, "Imagine what her family would say about Yale," and all this (laughter).  And so I steadfastly said, "Well, I can't do this; I mean I, I gotta be treated as an equal."  But in those days I was very, very hard about something.  I did mention another significant thing that happened when I was about fifteen.  We had gone--I was in high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and we'd gone to a--I belonged to this thing in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] group and we'd gone to this meet, get together, jamboree, or something in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, and I and two other black fellows--they were brothers--we went to this restaurant and they wouldn't serve us.  And then the guy said--the manager or whatever said, "I'm gonna call the police if you don't get out, 'cause we just don't serve blacks here."  And I, I can remember, I just sat there with tears running down my eyes and saying, "I don't care, go call him."  But that's the way I, I felt; I wouldn't, I wouldn't move.  And I was just as stubborn with the, with the dean at Yale.  Then, my friend, he caved in, and I was hanging out there by myself (laughter), and then I said, "Well, I guess discretion's the better part of valor."  And I said, "Okay, do what you wanna do."  So, what they did is they still let us participate, but they--there were no black girls in the Vassar freshman class, so they had gotten two girls that were juniors that were black--I think one was a junior and one was a senior--and put them on the bus to bring 'em over.
Speaker 1: I guess they were really thrilled to meet two freshmen (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, that's, that's what happened, and that was, that was pretty interesting.  So we played the role; we were gentlemen and took 'em to the football game and escorted 'em to the dance that night and I guess the next day put 'em back on a bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did--
Speaker 2: But that was, that was a hard pill to swallow.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did--
Speaker 2: And today I still wonder if I hadn't given in, what would have happened.
Story_ID: 559372
Speaker 1: This was--now, was this like in the, in the air in those days?  I mean this is early--it's '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: It was 1952 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before Brown.
Speaker 2: October, 1952.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, before Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and--
Speaker 2: That was in April of 1954 [sic. May 1954].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was before--well, there, I know there were some sit-ins prior to '60 [1960]; the one they talk about in '60 [1960], but had you--
Speaker 2: No, there was no--there was, there was no, there was no movement.  Actually, in 1952, there was a movement on the Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] campus spearheaded by some Jewish fellows for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and at the time, they got enough people recruited that it was the largest college chapter of the NAACP in the country.
Speaker 1: Spearheaded by some Jewish fellows on campus (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, were your parents [Fannie Scott Knott and A. Paul Knott, Sr.] members of the NAACP back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I remember they used to--I used to always read the--as a kid, I'd read The Crisis.  You remember that, The Crisis?  I don't know if it still comes out, but--
Speaker 1: It does.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They have a pretty nice edition of The Crisis that comes out now; it's been revitalized, it's a slick magazine, it's a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I remember The Crisis; it, it was always white, on white glossy paper 'bout this size (demonstrates), small, and it had two little blue lines across the top, two little blue lines across the bottom.  I mean I read it all the time; it was part of my childhood.
Speaker 1: After-- that's when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was the editor, right--Crisis?
Speaker 2: Yeah, before he, before he ran off to Africa, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you get involved in the NAACP chapter on campus?
Speaker 2: No, not really, no, I didn't because it was a feeling that--it was a very--you felt that the people trying to do this was just a--the attitude was very paternalistic, as I recall it, and I felt that I recognized it at that time, if you know what I mean.  It's just very--the paternalistic, "Hey, let's take care of these poor little black people."  It's very paternalistic, and that turned me off.  I mean I'm seventeen years old, but still I was turned off.
Story_ID: 559373
Speaker 1: Now, what was your major at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Human culture and behavior.
Speaker 1: Is that like a, a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's psychology, sociology, a bit of history, anthropology, really.
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I was thinking.
Speaker 2: But the major is human culture and behavior.  My degree might be in anthropology, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took enough courses to equate a master's in anthropology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Why were you so attracted to anthropology?
Speaker 2: It was just very interesting--the study of people, the origin of people.  My thesis, which was like a master's thesis, was entitled something like, 'Magic, Science and Religion' [ph.] and I'm combining--looking at the ancient people of (Unclear), and I studied a particular people in South America--the particular Indian [Native American] and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who were the--some of your teachers at Yale?
Speaker 2: I didn't really have anybody that was outstanding.  I mean some courses there were world known names but I, I never had anybody like that.  In the, in the, in the, some of the sciences zoology was, was a Dr. Trinkaus [John P. Trinkaus] which was, was a well, very well known guy, and chemistry I can't think of the guy's name; he was very well known--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but nobody that had any extra special influence on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No behavioral scientists or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a, a favorite behavioral scientist that you read about, or whose work you read?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, I don't even know if we--if, if, if the terminology of behavioral science or--was out then.  I don't, I don't know; I don't think it came until the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought it probably was out then, but--
Speaker 2: I don't--it might have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was all psychology, psychosocial--psychosocial they called it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was--you know.
Speaker 2: Dynamics of psychology.  But it was no Dr. Comer [HistoryMaker Dr. James Comer] there then.  Well, you know Comer's at Yale now--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but he's the big behavior guy, but not then.
Story_ID: 559374
Speaker 1: Were you thinking about, you know, this leading to medical school at a certain point, or being--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually, medical school--I, I felt while I was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] it was best; now whether I did this because I just wanted to stay out of all the hard sciences courses, or I really believed that it was best to get a liberal education, a place like Yale was the place to get it, so part of both of those.  So, I didn't--a lot of sciences I didn't take.  I took liberal arts courses, so when it came time to apply to medical school, there weren't very many medical schools that I could apply to, because in those days, there were pretty stringent requirements for sciences.  I took, for example, my senior year, I took the two sciences that I--organic chemistry and physics, in my senior year, so I--in my organic chemistry, we had the option of taking exams throughout the year, or taking one exam at the end of the year, so you know which one I chose; take the one at the end of the year (laughter).  And when it came time to apply to medical school, then I realized that medical schools, most of 'em, focused on that organic chemistry grade, and I wasn't even taking that 'til my senior year, so I had applied to--so only one medical school I really wanted to go to, and that was Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts].  So I applied to Harvard; I didn't hear anything, then I got on the--I went up there and got interviewed, and while I was there, through a contact of my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.], I met Dr. Henson [sic. William Augustus Hinton], who--a black fellow that had been on the faculty at Harvard and he had discovered one of the first tests for syphilis back in the early 1900s, the Henson test [sic. Davies-Hinton test].  But I talked with him and corresponded with him; that was of interest.  So, finally, everybody is getting accepted or rejected to Harvard, and then finally, it was late in the spring of '56 [1956] that I got rejected, but I wasn't too concerned about that because I had looked at pursuing anthropology and I had applied at a couple different places; one place was to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] to study there at the Pitts River Museum [sic. Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford, England] and focus on Central Africa because I'd heard so much about Dr. Schweitzer [Albert Schweitzer] and what he was doing there, and so I was kind of fired up about that until later on, I found that Schweitzer was--his treatment of people over there, Africans, was paternalistic, very paternalistic, and so again I got turned off (laughter) and I changed my mind about that.  But, I was interested in going to Oxford, but at the time, my father made good sense.  He said, "Hey, if you don't--if you go over there to Oxford, you might get drafted," 'cause they were drafting back in those days.  So, I said, "Well, let me scratch around, get medical school," so Seton Hall in New Jersey [Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey] had just formed a medical school and they were starting their first class, so I went down and talked to them, and they told me that they were, there were no prejudices, and that everybody had an equal basis, an equal opportunity, and all this stuff, and I believed 'em.  And they said, "Okay, we'll take you if you make a 75 [percent] in organic chemistry."  So, I said, "Okay," so that was a deal.  So, I got back and the test was an all day test; you could go in and come out when you wanted to, so I got a 77 on it.  I don't--that was probably providential, but I got a 77, so that automatically put me in a medical school.  So then, I went on to Seton Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Which is now the New Jersey College of Medicine.
Story_ID: 559375
Speaker 1: How was it being the only black in your graduating class?  I mean, how were you generally treated?  And you mentioned before we came in that you were at a fiftieth reunion--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some people actually apologized.
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't the only black; there were--we started out with--there were two other blacks in the class, and in the sophomore year, a third one--I mean a fourth one joined us, so we graduated--four of us graduated in May of 1956.  (Pause) Let's see--it was difficult; I mean we were--or at least I was isolated, and maybe I helped isolate myself some, but--
Speaker 1: Did you have a separate dorm room, or did you--how many, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I had, I had a--my freshman year I was in a single room, as all of us were, because they didn't know what to do with us but put us in a single room; then my sophomore year I had a roommate, and then sophomore, junior year roommates, and then my senior year I had--
Speaker 1: What did you get, white roommates, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, white roommates, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then senior year was--I had about six roommates, all white--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so things kind of changed as you were going through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we made friends and picked up, picked up people.  But the attitude was that Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], during the '50s [1950s], 70 percent of the students came from affluent secondary schools, Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts], Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], the big name aristocratic schools, and they were what you would call aristocrats by birth, and my feeling is that most of them did not know how to deal with black people, because they had never experienced any black people.  They had never had any experiences at all.  Now something that's hard to believe--I'll tell you a story.  This was in my--I think it was in my senior year.  There's one fellow that I knew, he had become one of my roommates; he was from Louisiana and from a wealthy family, white family, and he--one day we were in our little living room alone, and he asked me something; he was kind of embarrassed, but he asked me--he said he had heard, had always heard that black people had tails, and that now we had rudimentary tails, and was that true, like monkeys?  Now here was a guy that--he was a junior at Yale, so he wasn't dumb; he just didn't know.  This is what he had heard; this was his conception, that black people had tails or rudimentary tails.  I mean that actually happened.  So, that, in way, reflects the attitude.  So I wasn't accepted, never, into their society, or things that they did because they wouldn't know what to do with me.  How could they invite me to a social position--to a social function?  It would be too awkward for them.  And, matter of fact, freshman year, there were a group of guys in my dorm that used to play tricks on me; I don't remember specifics, but just little things--but it was funny to them.
Story_ID: 559376
Speaker 1: On the occasion of my fiftieth class reunion in--this past June, June of 2006, I had several people that commented to me about, in an apologetic kind of way, in the way that they had--in their encounters with me.  The first one that will give you kind of an idea of how people thought in those days was, there was a--I was sitting in front--first day I was there it was just--it was the afternoon, and I was sitting in front of my old dormitory on the freshman campus, just resting and reflecting, and there's--fellow that walked up with his wife, and he said, "Are you Paul Knott [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Knott]?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Yeah, I'm Reed Johnson [ph.]."  I said, "Oh."  He said, "You are the first person I ever met at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] that Sunday night that I came, and you were here, and I thought that you worked here.  And remember--I don't know if you remember fifty-five years ago, but I had asked you for some directions and things."  And I said, "Yeah, vaguely, I do."  "But," he said, "I, honestly, I thought that you worked here; I didn't expect to see anybody black here.  I mean I was outta Chattanooga, Tennessee and that was it."  And so we ended up talking, and all through the reunion we talked, and so--and his tone was apologetic that he had thought that I'd worked there, and he admitted that he never, in the time--the freshman year that we spent there, it was awkward for him to have any kind of rapport with me at all because it was--all of his training and all of his upbringing did not include black people, and black people were always second, second citizens, even though we had things in common which we tried--or I tried to talk to him about: he was from Chattanooga, my [maternal] grandmother [Lula Allen Houston] was from Chattanooga, I knew Chattanooga then, but it never worked.  And he had become mayor of West Palm Beach [Florida], and a successful lawyer and all that, and he's invited me to come down at any time to visit him in West Palm because I'm in and out of Florida quite a bit, I told him, and he said, "Hey come.  We got an extra condominium that's not in use; come on and stay anytime you want."  And he sincerely meant that.  And as we were leaving the last day we were there, his wife came up to me and again invited us down.  So that, that was one, and another fellow, Dave [ph.], came up and he was just laughing, he said--so glad to see me--says, "I gotta apologize for the way we treated you in that dorm when we were freshmen.  We used to always play these tricks on you," and he said, "But I gotta apologize; I, you know, really didn't mean it, and as we get older, we realize that everybody's the same."  And I, I believed him.  Then, in, in talking to some other people, like I had an interesting talk with a fellow that's a United States senator now, 'cause there were several classmates that became senators, and we had--well, we had lunch, once, dinner together, 'cause we ate together a couple of times.  He was saying how--and his daughter is married to a black guy, so--black guy in the service.  So he was saying back then, he did not realize the--that there's really no difference, and it was strange for him to see me because he had never seen any black people before--never knew anybody, never met anything, but he said I was the first one that he knew.  And this is a United States senator; he still sits in the [U.S.] Senate.
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: --sort of removed from everyday life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were removed, yeah.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But now he's tuned in; I mean his daughter's married to a (laughter)--.  I asked his wife how did she accept it?  So she said, "Oh, you gotta be proud of 'em, you know."
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 1: But I don't guess that's--yeah, I don't--well, I don't--nowadays I don't guess it makes any difference.
Story_ID: 559377
Speaker 1: So did you get involved in the social life on campus at all, or did you--were you able--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there was no social life, no, because I mean, everything--guys would be flying off here and there, and going this place and that place, and there was only something--they were always doing something exciting, but it didn't include me.  Of course, in those days I wasn't invited to join any of the fraternities or any--because a lot of fraternities and organizations had--that were national had restrictions on any blacks, and some--or even Jewish people belonging to them.
Speaker 1: Now, did poor whites have a problem with that environment, too?  I just imagine (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, there was--see, there was--
Speaker 1: --the rich are networking working with each other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well see, they were all networked; they all knew each other from before they were born, so to speak, but there were no, there were no--there--you, you couldn't call--you'd call 'em--wouldn't call 'em poor, but they'd be middle-class; they would go--they would be from good high schools--say New Haven High School [James Hillhouse High School, New Haven, Connecticut] or Hamden [Hamden High School, Hamden, Connecticut], New Haven High School, or public high schools in New York [New York], which were good, or Los Angeles School of Perform- the high school of performing arts, and places like that.  But they were from top notch or--from Chicago [Illinois] we had quite a contingent from New Trier [New Trier High School, Winnetka, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But nobody from Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter) or (Unclear) or something, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I was asking if the poor whites had any trouble.  I guess they really--
Speaker 2: But what I'm saying is they really--I, I don't think they were, I don't think they were--
Speaker 1: --but not really poor. Okay.
Speaker 2: --what we consider poor whites now; like anybody from Appalachia or something like that, I mean there, there were--nobody--there were none.
Speaker 1: None, okay, all right, all right.  So, by the time you were a senior, you said you had like a--you were in a integrated dorm situation [at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 559378
Speaker 1: You had taken enough courses for a master's degree, you were saying, in your field (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we were--I guess we started--I took you back.  We were talking about how you got into medical school, I mean, applying to medical school and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had applied to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but for a while, it was the only one I applied to, you know, because, I don't know, it was just that way, for whatever reasons; I mean I only applied to one college, you know (laughter).  That was really playing Russian roulette, but that was it.  And in medical school, the same thing that, that was--'cause I went to medical school in fifty--yeah, the draft, the draft was right on us.  That was in the middle of the Cold War.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the thing about it is, and what my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] pointed out to me was--and then that I realized, is that the draft boards, and particularly the one in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], they would draft all the black guys to make their quotas and leave, and wouldn't draft the white guys.  I mean this is what went on.
Speaker 1: So the idea is to keep a large standing army, I guess, for the Cold War (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this was in '56 [1956]; yeah, the Cold War.  That's when things were building up.  See, the Korean War had ended and now they were--the Korean War ended in '53 [1953], and a lot of guys, I mean--that's another thing.  I can remember a lot of guys that went to high school were killed in the Korean War because they called up Pennsylvania National Guard, 28th Division [Pennsylvania Army National Guard, 28th Infantry Division], and I can remember, as a kid, I was just in--maybe--this was 1950; I was just in high school.  Korean War started what, June 25th, 1950 when they came across the Yalu River?  That was June 25th, 1950.  So, after that, was in the fall of that year, 28th Division was called up and a lot of the kids in the neighborhood, the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], belonged to the National Guard because it was kind of the glamorous thing to do, plus they made a little bit of money, and a lot of these were still at Schenley [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and as I can remember, my cousin who lived--first cousin who lived right next door to me, he had joined; he was a big kid and he had joined, and he had joined when he was thirteen, the National Guard, and I think he, he was about fifteen then when he got called up.  And I can remember his mother coming over to beg my father not--to do something, not to let him go because they were lining their trucks and their tanks and all their stuff up on the, on the main street that ran by her house, because his father would not stop him, because he couldn't stop anybody just on age, but his father wouldn't stop me 'cause his father had fought in World War I [WWI] in France when he was fifteen as a black, as a black kid in France at age fifteen.  Matter of fact, his father had won the, the French Cross of War [Croix de guerre], so my cousin went off to war then, and we can re- I can remember in high school assemblies, you'd have an assembly once a week, and they would read off who was wounded, and occasionally who was killed in Korea.  And it was--you just couldn't--as a kid, you couldn't comprehend of, you know, other kids getting killed in a war.  Then after that, in '56 [1956], you had, you had all the problems going on in the world in Africa, and there's all kinds of stuff--you think stuff is going on now, but back then (laughter) that's all--there were, there were half dozen wars going on around the world in the middle '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: So the French started fighting in Vietnam (unclear) the Vietnamese (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Dien Bien Phu [Battle of Dien Bien Phu] was the end of French--the France's net fell in 1954 when the French were out; that was in '54 [1954] when Ho Chi Minh overran Dien Bien Phu [Vietnam].
Story_ID: 559379
Speaker 1: Well, medical school.  Now, how did you manage to--
Speaker 2: Well, that was in fifty--well, yeah, I started in '56 [1956] and finished in '60 [1960], 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're at Seton Hall [Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Jersey City, New Jersey], New Jersey (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seton Hall which is now the New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were you the only black student at that--
Speaker 2: No, there were several, there were several in my class I can think of.  Yeah, at least three--three or four of us, yeah; maybe five.  I'd have to really think and count up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you--was it what you expected, or were you prepared for it?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah; I mean it wasn't--we were living in Jersey City [New Jersey], and it was a new kind of life where you had to go out and find your own place to live; there were no dormitories, and it was only a, a subway ride or a short car ride to New York City; I mean you just got to cross the Hudson River under the--cross over or go under the Hudson River, and you were in New York, so--but I was familiar with New York after living in New Haven [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any, you know, stories from medical school days?
Speaker 2: No, just experiencing life in the big city, learning the--learning New York and learning to survive.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what was Harlem [New York, New York] like in those days?  Did you go to Harlem much?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, Harlem was still a place to go to.  Everybody used to meet at the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York] on Friday and Saturday night.  You've heard of the Red Rooster, I'm sure (laughter), the Red Rooster at 136th and Seventh Avenue.  Then, there's a hotel--oh, the Hotel Theresa [New York, New York], one thing, outstanding thing I remember about that, once in the--was in the summertime of 1959, I believe, Fidel Castro came there with his--all of his guys.  A friend of mine went over there and we met 'em all at the Theresa Hotel, but this friend was leftist leaning at the time.  Although Castro hadn't proclaimed himself, he was leftist leaning at the time.
Speaker 1: That was right after Cuban independence, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in fifty, '59 [1959].  I mean I was living in New York then and going to school, living in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a lot of interesting people around then, you know?  Was Castro, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--his birthday's when?  Yeah, tomorrow (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tomorrow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Martin was there in New York then.  Those were interesting times.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Malcolm X?
Speaker 2: I never met Malcolm, never met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And let's see--when was he--I guess he was there then, yeah.
Story_ID: 559380
Speaker 1: Well, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was--the first time I met Martin, though, was--I knew him summer of 1956.  I met him in Atlanta [Georgia], yeah, but then after that, he was in New York [New York], yeah, 'cause he'd gone to school in Boston [Massachusetts] and he came to Atlanta.  His father [Martin Luther King, Sr.] ran the--was the Wheat--yeah, Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]; it was at Borders.
Speaker 2: Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: It's Ebenezer, yeah.  And then Billy Borders was--father [William Holmes Borders] was at Wheat Street, 'cause I knew Billy Borders [William Holms Borders, Jr.], Reverend Borders' son.  I don't know where--I haven't heard Billie in years, and that's--and so that's the way I met Martin, 'cause everybody was friends.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you knew him casually.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was he like?  I mean, you know, there's so much, you know, we read about him now, and of course he's a (unclear) all by people now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he was a, he was a regular kinda guy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a nice guy; he was a regular guy, you know?  I mean he liked to have a good time.
Speaker 2: Well, what was his--I know he had a tremendous wardrobe.  I know people--writers have written about all the clothes, all the suits he was buying.
Speaker 1: I don't remember that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, see, that was later on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I knew him a little bit when he came to Chicago [Illinois].  That was in--that was when he used to march every day in Chicago, but that was in--I think it was before '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: He came here in sixty--yeah, it was '66 [1966].  I think he was--the summer of '66 [1966] he was here, I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah--where he stayed on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They were throwing bricks out there.  I remember Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had this little van we used drive around in, but that's another story; that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we haven't gotten there yet.  We were just talking about his personality and stuff.  So, you used to just socialize with him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he was a regular guy; I just, I just didn't know him socially; he's a--but I knew him before 'cause he would have been--let's see, he's about--I think he's 6 years older than I am, 'cause I remember he had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was born in '29 [1929], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 6 years, that's right, okay, 6 years.  So, yeah, he was 27, 28 in '56 [1956]; that's when I first met him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then--like when, when--and then he went--he went to Montgomery [Alabama] and--was that '58 [1958]?  Fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: Well, no, fifty--bus boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] was like '56 [1956], '55 [1955] or '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Oh, the bus boy- wasn't it after that?  It was '56 [1956]?  'Cause I remember when I met him in Atlanta, he wasn't, he wasn't a big name then, but the Bus Boycott made him a pretty big name.
Speaker 2: It did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I guess that was '55 [1955], wasn't it?  Fifty-five [1955], '56 [1956], yeah, was the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it just happened overnight, pretty much, when he wasn't well-known, and then he jumped into the--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 559381
Speaker 1: It was Montgomery [Alabama] that was hell, so I was in Montgomery in 1950.  I was fifteen, and I was in Montgomery; I remember Montgomery--pretty rough place, but anyway (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you have--was that the first time you'd been down south like that, in Montgomery, in those days?
Speaker 1: No.  At first I was a little kid; I, I used to go with my mother [Fannie Scott Knott] and my two sisters [Patricia Knott and Sylvia Knott Simmons]; we'd go visit my [maternal] grandmother [Lula Allen Scott] in the summertime, so that was interesting.  We'd get--we--my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] put us on a train in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and we'd go to Cincinnati [Ohio], then we'd get on a train in Cincinnati, and the train would go across the Ohio River, and it would stop halfway over on the Ohio River going across into Kentucky, because all the black people had to go to the black car, which was not air conditioned, and I can remember that ride in that car.  It was terribly hot in the summertime--no air conditioning, nothing, and they'd have the windows open and dust would be flying in there.  And what my mother used to do is always pack us lunches in shoe boxes, and so we'd eat and--because she refused that we--that she was subjected to eating in the dining car, because in the dining car, they had a green cloth where blacks would sit in the corner, and they'd pull this green curtain around 'em.  I don't know you ever heard of that, but I, I mean I even remember the color of it; it was green.  They'd pull a green curtain.  Have you heard, have you heard of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you'd be separated.  I've, I've heard similar things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, and pull that little green curtain around you (laughter).  And my mother would never go for that, and then we'd be so thirsty because in those days, you didn't have cans of Coke [Coca-Cola], or a bottle of Coke, or something that you could carry with you, and there was no ice.  So, the, the guys on the train that would serve us sandwiches and drinks, they were called butcher boys, and the butcher boys would get on one stop, and then get off on the other, and they'd bring their stuff.  And the butcher boys--it was like, I don't know, I guess equivalent to Kool Aid nowadays; it was this red punch they'd mix up, but they'd mix it in the sink in the bathroom (laughter).
Speaker 2: In a train (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), 'cause we'd be sitting across from the bathroom, and we'd watch--'cause I--when you're kids, we want something to drink.  My mother would say no.  She'd have a thermos bottle, you know, but that wouldn't last very long and--'cause you had thermos bottles in those days, but then the butcher boy would be mixing stuff up in the sink and then dip it out into us, to us, then they go throughout the car selling to the black people (laughter).
Speaker 2: In the bathroom sink.
Speaker 1: In the bathroom sink, yeah.  Now, I, I remember that's--that happened.  But see, I don't know how many times we traveled to Chattanooga [Tennessee], but it's been far more than one time in the summertime since, you know, I was five, six--four, five, six years old going down there.
Story_ID: 559382
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--now medical school at Seton Hall [Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry; University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New Jersey, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you--what branch of medicine did you decide to specialize in, or did you have to choose a specialty?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't choose a specialty because in the day--in those days, after medical school, you did a rotating internship because many states, in order to get a license, you had to get a--have a rotating internship.  I was first; however, I was first licensed in Maryland.  I took the test for the Maryland license in May of 1960, and I got licensed in--I was licensed in Maryland upon graduation from medical school in May or June of 1960; I got--I automatically got my license 'cause I had passed the, the Maryland exam.  But for Illinois you needed a rotating internship, most states you did.  Georgia you didn't need a lot of the southern states you didn't need an internship, but back then you did need it, so your only focus was to get into an internship, and then after an internship, you looked at doing a residency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I guess you were able to get licensed in the State of Maryland?  Did you move to Maryland?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh--but no, I did my internship at District of Columbia General Hospital [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then following that, I came to Chicago [Illinois] to do a fellowship in cardiovascular diseases at Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], spent two years there.  And then I spent two years at the VA at--Veterans Administration Hospital [Edward Hines Jr. Veterans Administration Hospital] in Hines [Illinois], suburb of Chicago.  Took a plea- my eligibility for internal medicine, but it also made me eligible for cardiology, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--what were some of your--I mean were you--now, these are mostly in integrated situations, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Except, when I came to Michael Reese, I was the first black house officer they had there, although there had been an intern there, but they didn't know--before me, which they didn't--they, they weren't aware that he was black, I understand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, matter of fact, I, I never got a straight answer on that.  That was Eddie Gibson [Edward Lewis Gibson]--Harry Gibson, T.K. Gibson [Truman K. Gibson]--Harry Gibson's son.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you end up settling here in Chicago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why did you--
Speaker 2: I just came to train in 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in Washington at D.C. General Hospital from '60 [1960] to '61 [1961], and I came here in '61 [1961]; '61 [1961] to '63 [1963] I was at Michael Reese, and then '63 [1963] to '65 [1965] I was at Hines.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you just decided to stay in Chicago 'cause you liked it here, or what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether I liked it or it was just too much trouble to move; I seriously thought about going to California and doing my residency and training there, and then going into practice with a friend of mine who was a pediatric cardiologist in Los Angeles [California].  I liked it a lot out there, but it was just maybe too much trouble to move.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at this time you weren't married or anything, right, or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--no, wait.  No, I got married while I was in night--my first married--I've been married two times.  My first marriage was in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's after you settled here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So did you work as a general practitioner, basically, or--
Speaker 2: No.  When I came out of--to go back some, when I went into medical school, I accepted a commission into the [U.S.] Navy 'cause--soon as I turned twenty-one I accepted a commission into the Navy, and so I was in the reserves [U.S. Navy Reserve], and I used to go summertimes and breaks for active duty for training, so I still had to complete some time for active duty, so I, I just went on active duty after I completed my residency in '65 [1965].  So I went on active duty until '67 [1967], which--yeah, that gave me eleven years, and then I was able to get out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause at the time, Universal Military Training Act [Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951] required that you, you, you have to be in the res- you could be in the reserves or active duty for eight years.  After eight years, they couldn't hold you for anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 559383
Speaker 1: I've been told that you were very much attracted to the Playboy Mansion here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  Is this true?
Speaker 2: Who told (laughter)--?  No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No?  It's not true?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I had a lot of--I had a lot of friends there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a lot of friends, and I, I was, I was going with a girl that was, I guess--well, she used to be a Bunny [Playboy Bunny], and then she was, she was an editor for WE magazine, and worked for Playboy magazine--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I had a lot of friends there, so I used to--and then Hefner and I became friends, Hugh Hefner, and used to go over there for movies on Sunday afternoon and--just part of the crowd.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But now he had a--Hugh Hefner produced a--who started here in Chicago; he produced a TV show called 'Playboy After Dark' I think it was--
Speaker 2: I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and in those days, in the early '60s [1960s], I was in high school; my brother was in--just finished college, but I remember that the whole persona, what it means to be cool and all this, was coming out on the Playboy in part, you know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was a cool thing to do, to have your Playboy card, yeah--your metal card, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I know in Dayton [Ohio], and I think there was one in Cincinnati [Ohio], a Playboy Club in Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one of those, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, start to develop all over, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: I had the card, but never any money to go there (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you what was it like being a part of that crowd, that Playboy crowd.
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause we see on television--Bill Cosby was the most prominent black person you'd see in the 'Playboy After Dark' piece.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you--yeah, well, I used to see him at the house over there sometimes, but yeah, it was a lot of fun.  I mean there--I had a lot of fun in those days.  There was one--there was a musical, 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] do you remember that?
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Hair,' right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Hair,' okay; where you had all the nudity in it, and so it was--everybody was talking about it, and so they used to come over there, and then they needed a doctor (laughter), so Hefner suggested I be their doctor, the company doctor, so I got appointed to company doctor, and I had a lot of fun doing that 'cause we'd go to shows and sit in the shows in the--downtown, the theater down there, and so it was a lot going on--met a lot of people.  And then I met a lot of people in Los Angeles [California], and that was through my girlfriend.
Story_ID: 559384
Speaker 1: Now, were you--in those days, so you were in private practice as a physician, I guess, then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did--I was doing private practice working at various places, various administrative jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess now everything is so different now, with these HMOs [health maintenance organization], and people usually attached to those and there so many specialists now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I admire anybody that--any doctor that can survive in the atmosphere nowadays.
Speaker 1: How is it different?  I mean just from the point of view of a doctor, how is it different?
Speaker 2: It's like when Medicare came into play in the late '60s [1960s], I signed up for Medicare, to see Medicare patients.  Some of the doctors around town, my friends, said, "How could you do such a thing?"   Because the government controlled socialized medicine; that's what Medicare was viewed as.
Speaker 1: Just a fear of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --an encroaching socialized medicine, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, it was, in those days it was called socialized medicine, so that's what happened.  I said, "Wow."  I mean this was, this was, this was the attitude. When I--but when I first came to Chicago [Illinois] and became involved on the medical scene, there were less than twenty black physicians in town.
Speaker 1: In Chic--
Speaker 2: In Chicago, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With the size of--
Speaker 2: The size of Chicago.
Speaker 1: --and the black population being 47 percent or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Less than twenty.
Speaker 2: There were about--maybe twenty at the most.  This was in 1960, '61 [1961].  I mean, that's the way it was.  And there were no--outside of Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], there were very few--some hospitals had token blacks on the staff, some hospitals like big teaching hospitals--University of Ch- well, not the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], but Presbyterian, Northwestern [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], there are no blacks.  I joined the--I was a full staff member at Presbyterian-St. Luke's [Presbyterian-St. Luke's Hospital; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], which was an amalgamation of two hospitals, Presbyterian and St. Luke's.  In 19--I got invited to join there in 1967.  There were only two black doctors that had privileges there, Larry Keith, a pediatrician, and Clay Jones, a pediatrician; there were only two black doctors.  I was the third black doctor that had privileges at Presbyterian and it's--and it, and it was that way for quite a while.  There was nobody at Northwestern.  Then, your other community hospitals, nobody.  It was all-white.  This was before the Filipinos and the Indians came.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, I remember the--
Story_ID: 559385
Speaker 1: It was really tough up until, I think, in the '70s [1970s], about '75 [1975], Reverend Louis Rawls decided he was gonna start a hospital for black doctors, so that's when he started Tabernacle Hospital [Tabernacle Community Hospital and Health Center, Chicago, Illinois].  He got Andy Thomas, Dr. Andy Thomas [Andrew L. Thomas]; he's been dead for quite a while, but he was, he was a forerunner in all this; he was a real fighter.  Andy and myself and we started Tabernacle.  I think it was in like '74 [1974] or '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: So, you were one of the original doctors who had started, I mean, was part of Tabernacle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was, I was the original doctor, yeah, Andy and I.
Speaker 2: So this is Lou Rawls, Reverend Lou Rawls; this is the singer, Lou Rawls' father, right?  Is it?
Speaker 1: They say no.
Speaker 2: They say no?
Speaker 1: No, they say no.  I, I, I can't answer that; I don't know.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  They had the same name.
Speaker 2: I see, I see.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Reverend Rawls was a big name in town.
Speaker 2: Right.  Huge church; I've been in that church.
Speaker 1: Tabernacle [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  So, actually, so Tabernacle Hospital was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We started that and we started that in, I think it was 1974 or '75 [1975].  Didn't last very long, but the idea was to give a black doctor a nice place to practice, and at the same time, Bethany Hospital [Advocate Bethany Hospital] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] had pretty well opened its, its doors up.  Bethany in Garfield Park--they were accepting black doctors there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but places like Columbus [Columbus Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and Lutheran General [Lutheran General Hospital; Advocate Lutheran General Hospital, Park Ridge, Illinois]  and--no black guys.
Speaker 2: Now--'cause I know I never heard of Tabernacle; I lived here twenty-nine years, and it was like--it was after this, after it closed.  I came here in '77 [1977], so it was gone when I came here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it closed maybe in '77 [1977], '78 [1978], yeah; it was 'bout gone then, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I never heard of Tabernacle.  Where was it located, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: 55th [sic.] and Morgan [Street], 54th [Place] and Morgan.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And was it on a site of a pre (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a previous hospital, it was a previous hospital there, and they took over; I don't remember the name.  It was a--wait a minute.  It was old Englewood Hospital [Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Oh, right, right.
Speaker 1: It was old Englewood Hospital; that was it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  'Cause they had just--that was just demolished maybe five years ago.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Well, you're squeezing my brain now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I just--I was at a ceremony where the mayor announced he was gonna demolish it finally--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --in the neighborhood 'cause people were complaining it was vacant, and I think Richard Dent was gonna buy it for a place for the homeless at one point; he didn't do it, and there were a lot of problems 'cause nobody--a lot of bad things were going on in the, in the open building (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the building, yeah.  I can imagine that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, it's finally knocked down, but yeah.
Story_ID: 559386
Speaker 1: Now, there was something--do you remember something called the--I always wondered about this--the Daniel Hale medical school [sic. Daniel Hale Williams University, Chicago, Illinois].  Do you remember that--this?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: It was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and there was a sign for it; the sign was still up a few years ago, but nobody seems to know what was going on there, Daniel Hale medical college.  It was a black idea, you know, somebody started it but--
Speaker 2: There was a Daniel Hale Clinic.
Speaker 1: Daniel Hale Williams, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Daniel Hale Williams Clinic [Daniel Hale Williams Health Center, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I used to work there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think--yeah, I might have been one of the first doctors there, if not the first, yeah.  That was back in the '60s [1960s] that was started, but that was at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  But medical school, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything.
Speaker 1: All right, I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unless that might have been one of Andy's [Andrew L. Thomas] ideas, I don't remember.  Andy and I were pretty close; I don't--have you heard the name Andy Thomas?  You probably have.
Speaker 1: Yes, I have.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's a mentor of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], one of his mentors.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Well, tell us.  So, you've been a general practitioner in the city for years.
Speaker 2: Not a general practitioner, but an internist and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I've done a lot of general practice just, just working.  For years, I've maintained an office at 63rd [Street] and Rhodes [Avenue], and then 75th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's through the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  I think I opened up, I opened up at 63rd and Rhodes 'cause I went into practice there with a Dr. Gray [ph.] to help him out, an older doctor at the time, and that was in 1962, '63 [1963] when I was still in residency; I was moonlighting.
Story_ID: 559387
Speaker 1: How would you--it just occurred to me--how would you compare Chicago [Illinois] to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in terms of the number of black physicians for the population?
Speaker 2: Well, I think Pittsburgh probably had more percentage-wise, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I was just thinking about my hometown had at least ten black doctors when I was a kid, and this is much smaller than Pittsburgh or Chicago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or, or Chicago, yeah.  But I don't think I'm mistaken, I think I remember that right; there were just--when I got here weren't--there weren't that many black doctors.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the town has a history of not providing opportunities for black doctors (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, maybe.  Well, yeah, because why would doctors--why would black doctors come here and there's no place they could--that I mean they couldn't put their patients in a hospital--they needed a hospital, so why would they come here?  They were shut out of training programs; the only training program they could get into at the time was at Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], which was a good program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's the reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 559388
Speaker 1: Are you--were you involved in cardiology in some way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, tell us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From Mic- well, from Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean I, I, I was trained there because--which--at the time in the early--the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], in cardiology that was the place in the world to be because of the (background noise).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right, okay, so we were talking about cardiology.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well at the time, in the early--late '50s [1950s], or early '60s [1960s], Michael Reese in Chicago [Illinois] was the place to go because of--the head of the department there was Louis Katz, who was like one of the fathers of modern cardiology in the world; he was world famous, well known.  And then also because of the electrophysiology that went on there under Dr. Fred Pick [Alfred Pick] and--oh, I forget the other; it slips my mind right now.  And my interest was in, was in electrophysiology, electrocardiography, and that's why I went there to do a fellowship, which is like a residency.  And so after that, I pursued it; I read electrocardiograms at several different hospitals--at Presbyterian [Presbyterian-St. Luke's Hospital; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  I used to teach in electrocardiography, and so that was my involvement.  Then, I maintained a office where I saw patients which was primarily general internal medicine, but when working in the neighborhoods in those days, you just couldn't be a specialist, you had to take care of--if Ms. Jones had a problem with her heart, you also had to take care of her kids and her granddaughters and everybody else in the family, so--ended up that way, I mean--and then I would moonlight at night; not moonlight, but work at night doing--I would work at Scott Hospital [Ida Mae Scott Hospital], which was a small black hospital on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], seventeen beds at 50th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], between 50, 51st Street and Prairie, Scott Hospital, back in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].  It was an actual hospital which afforded a place for a few black doctors to work.  I'd work there, and we'd make--I'd make house calls.  You'd call in and make house calls at night, so--which could be anything.  I mean I've even delivered babies.  They'd call and no, no one had no prenatal care, and deliver a baby.
Speaker 2: Now, that must have been quite an experience, I mean to (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was experience, yeah.
Speaker 2: Have you only done that once, or--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, it was--interesting thing.  Here at this office last--yeah, before the Christmas holidays I--'cause I see several patients a week here.  I saw a patient, he came in, that I'd been following, and I had delivered both his brothers at home, because his father and mother called me the first time with one of his brothers that I delivered.  I said, "Please don't do this again."  And the next year, they called me again.  "Paul [HistoryMaker Dr. Paul Knott], Mama's sick, she's really sick; I think she's got pneumonia.  Can you come by?"  And I went by there and she was delivering the second kid that I had to deliver, so after--now that happened--but that was just two in one house.  It would, it would happen sometimes; matter of fact, so much so that in my little bag, I'd carry some silver nitrate and some cord to tie off the umbilical cord.  Silver nitrate you put in the eyes.  But that happened.  Now, this was in the '60s [1960s]--'60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you know a Dr. T.K. Lawless [Theodore K. Lawless]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I knew T.K.
Speaker 2: He was famous for delivering lots of babies on the South Side, right?
Speaker 1: No, no, he's a dermatologist.
Speaker 2: Dermatologist?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who is he--oh, I know who--Beasley was the baby--
Speaker 1: Beasley, Ed Beasley [Edward Willingham Beasley], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't know if, if he delivered home--I mean I, I knew, I knew Lawless, I knew Beasley and I'd go to Lawless' office sometimes and then I had--a roommate of mine here in Chicago came, as a dermatologist, came to spend a year with Beasley, I mean with Lawless.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, Lawless was quite a character, I heard, but I--an eccentric--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --as people say, but do you have any stories about any of the doctors--the other black doctors in town, or--
Speaker 1: No, I don't wanna really (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a lot of 'em--T.K. Smith; yeah, there was a lot of 'em around.  Not, not a lot of 'em, but this--
Story_ID: 559389
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, now, as a black cardiologist, were you ever a member of the Association of Black Cardiologists, or--
Speaker 2: No, this was long before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, before that even started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause I think, I think they got started back--oh, they didn't start back until sometime in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know the guy so well, I can't think of his name.  Who started that?  Not King--from Howard [Howard University], from Washington [D.C.].  I can't--I'll--his name'll come back to me, yeah.  It doesn't matter, he started the Black Cardiologists.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Not LaSalle Lefall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Lefall, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not LaSalle, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: LaSalle was a surgeon, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a friend of mine, but he's, he's a surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any sense (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A good surgeon, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the best.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there--did you have any sense in those days that black people were suffering from heart disease at any higher level than anyone else, or did anybody think about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I did with blood pressure.  I, I, I knew--I, I did a study when I was at Presbyterian [Presbyterian-St. Luke's Hospital; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], a couple of guys there, we did a study on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] in a mile square area; it's called Mile Square--in the Mile Square--back--that was back in the '60s [1960s] because I was one of the doctors that formed the Mile Square, Mile Square--oh, no, that was in 1967, yeah; we formed Mile Square Health Center [Chicago, Illinois].  It was the first OEO, OEO, Office of Equal Oppor- yeah, Office of Equal Opportunity health center, I think, in the country.  It was sponsored by the OEO, and I went there sort of half time; half time at Presbyterian, half time there 'cause it was associated with Presbyterian Hospital.  But while there in the '60s [1960s], though, I did a study along with a couple of people where we took blood pressures on people in the community.  Bottom line of the study was that a certain significant percentage, it was over 50 percent, I don't remember the percentages there.  I can't remember where the article was published, but over 50 percent of black people over the age of twenty-one had significant high, high blood pressure, and then I did another little thing aside from that; went back and taking teenagers over--I think over age thirteen or fourteen where a significant amounts had--of, of teenagers had hypertension, and this is--it's a lot more romantic and in vogue now, to talk about and study this because it's, it's being found that there is significant, again, the high blood pressure among blacks--
Speaker 1: Okay.  The implication of what you just said, is it--do you--are you saying that in those days people didn't really wanna know that, or--
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't that; I mean it just--nobody cared to look into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I've always said that the best way to attack, you know, whether now the modern thing is HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] or whatever medical problem, the best way to attack it is through education, whether it's diabetes or HIV infection nowadays, or metabolic syndrome, or things we talk about nowadays, that the best attack, better than medicine, is education, to educate people about it, and let them know about it, let them be aware of it so that they can do something about it, and find out about it--find out if it affects them or their family.
Story_ID: 559390
Speaker 1: Let me ask you how you got involved in yachting and with the tour boats and such.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I've, I've always been interested in boats.  I, I have a private boat.  The first bought I boat--the first boat I bought here in Chicago [Illinois] was 1961 or '62, after I first got to Chicago.  As a kid, I'd been interested in a boat.  Actually, the first boat I owned I was maybe, I was maybe nine, ten years old because we used to--my family, we'd spend the greater parts of our summers the place my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] had bought in Canada, and I would--I learned boating and fishing from the Indians [Native American] on the Indian reservation across the lake from us and there're no black people around, so I'd pass myself off as an Indian and, and made money by taking people fishing as a little kid.
Speaker 1: Really (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and fixing outboard boards, yeah, when I was a little kid, yeah.  I made enough money--and I also worked this boatyard.  I made enough money; I think when I was about twelve years old I could--eleven, twelve, I could buy my own boat, yeah.
Speaker 1: You passed yourself off as an Indian and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there ever a moment when they asked you a question and you had a hard time trying to answer it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that, no, but it was just accepted I was Indian 'cause Indian reservations was (unclear) dark, and I'd keep a hat, but people up there is when--I can remember as a little kid, we--my parents would go to the supermarket and, and I, and I, and I really didn't like to go shopping because I was always so embarrassed, and I felt embarrassed because other kids and other people would come up and wanna touch me and feel my skin. I mean that actually happened (laughter).  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where is this at?  This is--
Speaker 2: North of Toronto, in Canada--a hundred miles north of Toronto.  But back in those days, sixty years ago, there're no black people, and people would come up and they would be amazed; they'd wanna touch me 'cause I was darker than an Indian.  I mean there were a lot of Indians around, but they would wanna touch me and--oh, and the other thing they liked to do was feel my hair (laughter).  That's where we differ from an Indian, but I can remember being embarrassed and just not wanting to go because--go into town because of that, and just in us talking I can remember that feeling now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because of that, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story; that's interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 559391
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], you said you got first boat in '61 [1961], or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah; I bought a boat in six--yeah, I bought a boat in--with another fellow in '61 [1961].  He wanted to get out of it, you know; he went into flying, so I bought his--I--it wasn't a matter of buying it, I was just--me--I had to make the whole bank note; had to keep paying for it.  And then after that, I got another boat and I think another one.  And then, I remember one Sunday morning I'm in bed waking up, and I'm thinking about all this and about how much money I was spending on this boat.  I said, now, that doesn't really make sense.  I'm spending all this money for a boat, and here you can only use it a few months a year, because of the winters in Chicago, and I'd, and I'd recollected an article that I had read about chartering a boat and charter your boat and defraying some of the cost of it, and that got me to thinking, and then--I was pretty naive about it, not aware of all the government regulations and all going into chartering boats, so I knew that there was, and I found out that there was--from just being around Burnham Harbor here in Chicago that there was a charter boat industry here in Chicago, particularly with charter fishing, and this was in 1961.  When I gave up my slips last year in Burnham Harbor, which was the largest of the harbors here in Chicago, twelve hundred boats.  I was the oldest resident of the, of the harbor--I mean of the harbor system in terms of years, over forty years that I'd held a slip, or slips in the harbor system.  So, it grew then, so then by 1984, I wanted to purchase a boat specifically for charter, which I did in '84 [1984], and then the business was so good that I needed another boat.  In 1987, I went searching all over the country for a suitable yacht to certify and get [U.S.] Coast Guard certified and use it for charter, and I found one in Florida and did what I had to do with that boat over a period of a few months and brought it up from Florida to Chicago.  So that gave me two boats, and then I realized those were just forty-nine passenger boats to give parties and birthday parties, anniversaries and things on.  And also, most of our business was corporate business, the banks.  Back in those days, back in the '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s], there was plenty of corporate money around to be spent.  Then I realized that a bigger boat would bring you more; I mean, make more money and do better, so then I bought another boat that was for sale, a 149 passenger boat, the Gold Coast Lady.  We started to run tours on the river and use that for parties.  Then, I realized there were no--a lot of people liked to sail boats and there were no sailboats that you could, could take people out on a charter and have a party on, so then I bought a boat that was certified to do this, a sailboat, and so they gave me four.  And then back in, I think it was 2000, 2001, I bought a 149 passenger boat, the Buccaneer [M.V. Buccaneer], which was a old pirate, like a pirate theme to it, and at the same time I, I bought out Wagner Charter Company, which was the oldest of the charter companies here in Chicago, and another boat they had, the Jamaica dinner boat [M.V. Jamaica], 220 passenger boat; I bought that.
Story_ID: 559392
Speaker 1: So by that time--then 9/11 hit, now, you know, September 11, 2001, and just a lot of things were cancelled; business was bad and I just got tired of trying to hang on and fighting things and just said, "Hey, let's give it up."  So three of the boats I was able to sell; I still have three left now, that I'm trying to sell now that are just in storage, and I just decided it's just too hard to try to run, run the business anymore, and I--I kind of hated giving it up because in a way it was a business I was proud of.  We did well, and it was the best charter service in town because you could go on a dinner boat or you could have a private yacht or you could have a sailing yacht.  And it was and still is the only black owned business on the lakefront or on the river [Chicago River], there's no other--or at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois]--there's none that I know of.  I mean since I'm gone, there's nothing left; there's no, no, no black, no black owned businesses on the, on, on the river, on the lakefront.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In a city like Chicago [Illinois], that's something to think about.
Speaker 2: It is, and there's a, you know, a lot of lakefront, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's used for recreation here in the city.
Speaker 1: Right, and to make a long story short, I mean there were plenty of obstacles I had to go against, the city, the Park District [Chicago Park District].  There just many obstacles and stories that--and trying to maintain it although I, I never promoted it as a black business, but I thought it was smartest not to do that because it just draw more attention and more, more problems for you, so--but nevertheless--and it--that's a whole long story to tell you all the problems gone through to try to stay alive in a business; it wasn't easy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I guess at some point in time, just tired; it's, it's--I've had enough and--
Story_ID: 559393
Speaker 1: With someone with your resources at the time--I mean I saw a picture on the wall, you and Harold Washington.  Were you involved in the Harold Washington campaigns at all, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, we were just friends and--oh, that picture you saw in my office there (laughter), yeah.  That's--we entertained him on a boat once for a little fun.  Well, I had two boats together and we had about--I don't know, the boats almost sunk we had so many people.  We were just at dock with so many people on there (laughter), but it just--we had food and drinks and all, and Harold came and politicians, but I was never politically involved other than just being friends with he and--I guess after--yeah, Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] and I were friends, and Ernie Sawyer [Ernest Sawyer].  But just, just friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 559394
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your invention.  You invented a--well, this is one invention I know about; there may be more, but the Knott Lock.
Speaker 2: Well, it may seem kind of funny (laughter).  I've always just done a lot of things, and one of the, one of the things I, I would say, I'm a pretty good mechanic, well, working on these boats at all times, and I'm a good diesel mechanic and a good mechanic, and I've had several cars stolen so I just thought of this and--this lock, and also working with some fellows that had developed--did various kinds of locks, then I developed this one and got a patent on it.  Which, it's just a brick-locking device and also there's a starter-interrupt switch, so when you turn the key to lock the, lock the brakes, it interrupts the starter so you can't start it.  If you can't start it, you can't move it; you can't move it anyways because the brakes are locked.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Only thing you do is lift it up.
Speaker 1: That's unusual that most of these devices lock the steering wheel now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've seen--we've seen The Club that they advertise.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well this, this beat The Club.  I mean The Club, The Club--most of--you can't show me a Club I can't get off.  So whether you manipulate--either that or you cut it, or cut the steering wheel, so The Club is no big deal.  The Knott Lock, as I call it, you can get it off, but it's so time consuming and hard and you need a blowtorch and--to really get it off.  People would pass up on it and go to something else that's easier to steal.  But why it wasn't a success--actually, outside of the country--you got it into Australia and Germany.  It was pretty successful over there because--but here in the United States, everybody was already tuned into the, the chirp like when you--electronically you would lock your doors and you hear that beep, beep, beep, beep, and everybody was--every housewife--everybody was tuned into that, so that's what killed us there.  That, that just made it very difficult to--and the price we had to sell it to make any profit out of it, it was difficult to do it here because of the, the competition of an electronic device which was nowhere near and protecting your car that the--that our lock would.
Speaker 1: Did you still some of 'em available?  Are they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you still sell any of 'em?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We have some available, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got some in storage, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the kind of thing, you say, "Well, maybe someday."  Oh, I, I tried to sell it and we went to car manufacturers and all, but the truth of the matter, what I found out, believe it or not, they didn't want anything like that because you couldn't steal a car, and that would help their sales and also help their repair--I mean getting, getting their cars repaired and restored afterwards, yeah, so--no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Sounds like the Tucker situation or something, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like the Tucker car [Tucker 48], yeah, same thing, yeah.  That's big business--United States, and that's big business; that's the way things work.  So, they, they didn't want--I mean even to incorporate--they could have very inexpensively incorporated it into their cars--in the manufacturing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a design for the--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah in, in terms of when they manufacture it, because the key chips and everything today that you have, they could be defeated.  Any of these electronic locks I can show you how to defeat in less than a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that venture lasted from the early '90s [1990s] until--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was several years--around, around 1990, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any other--have you invented anything else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never got a patent on it.  I'm just thinking.  One was--back in the early '60s [1960s], which they do it a lot now, and somebody else, I'm sure, has got the patent on it 'cause they do it a lot now, was putting--taking an electrocardiogram in back of the heart by putting electrode down into the esophagus--esophageal electrode.  I was the first to do that; that was back in the early '60s [1960s].  I published that.  But no, I'd say I've only got one patent.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this other stuff, just creative stuff.  I was always the kind of guy that always just liked to do a lot of things; I mean a lot of different kind of things, not satisfied to do one thing.
Story_ID: 559395
Speaker 1: A friend of ours wants you to tell us about the Boule, especially.  And your family's been involved in the Boule for years, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: First, tell us what it is, how it got started (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the, for the Boule, Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], it's a fraternity, was founded by a, a group of professional black men in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1906, and it was developed on the tenets that--of sharing their intellect and their socialization and being able to socialize with, with--as they describe as like people.  There were for doctors, lawyers, you know, started.  And so it developed into a fraternity, I guess--yeah, it would have been the first of the black fraternities; I think Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] was--no, I guess the second.  It seems like Alpha Phi Alpha was formed in 1906, but Sigma Pi Phi was, I think, in '06 [1906]; it--or maybe it was--yeah, I think it was in '06 [1906].  I can't remember which was first.  Matter of fact the, the second chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha was formed at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] like in 1908, somewhere 1909; that's interesting.  The first chapter was at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] in 1906 just as a little offshoot, yeah, 'cause I remember.  But anyway, Sigma Pi Phi and--so what, what they, they looked at from Philadelphia that was the Alpha chapter; the second chapter was the Beta chapter in Chicago [Illinois] of--where they, they incorporated here and started a chapter here, and then Alpha, Beta, whatever comes after that, then New York [New York], and--well, New York was later on, and Baltimore [Maryland], Nashville [Tennessee], where black intellectuals were, Atlanta [Georgia], the big cities, and then moved to the West Coast.  But that's--that was the organization that was built.  And, and Dayton [Ohio], too, yeah; there's a chapter in Dayton.  My father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] became involved with it in the 1940s.  Every other year, there is a meeting of the Boule, and the Boule from the Greek meaning a gathering.  There was--there'd be a national boule where all the chapters would come, they'd send delegates, and it was a family affair, the Boule being very family oriented.  So the first recollection I have of attending a conclave was in 1948.  At the time, the boules were held at historically black college campuses [HBCUs] because that's a place they could meet and didn't have to worry about being discriminated against or they could comfortably meet, and that meeting was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]; the first time it was at Wilberforce, Ohio 'cause Dr. David [ph.] I remember was president then at Wilberforce--Dr. David.  And this was in 1948.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the year, or close to the year, that Wilberforce and the state school, Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], split the '40 [sic.], and I think--was it?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that was afterwards.  I mean it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, so this was before that happened.
Speaker 2: They went across one--Central State, I guess, went across the road.
Speaker 1: Actually, Wilberforce did, actually.
Speaker 2: Oh, Wil- yeah, then one of those.
Speaker 1: --and the home campus stayed over there with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, some who went across, yeah, I remem- something like--no, but this was--I think this was in '48 [1948]; I think there was just one school then.  I think the split came afterwards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dr. Wesley became the head of Central State.
Speaker 2: John Wesley.
Speaker 1: Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley].
Speaker 2: Charles Wesley.  Charles Wesley was head of--and there was--I think Dr. David was president and Charles Wesley was--I remember in '48 [1948], Charles Wesley was there--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: --because I remember him, I remember Dr. David, but again, I was only what, twelve, thirteen years old.  So we met at historically black--and there would be conferences among the men; the men--the members were called archons, after the Greek society, and the women were called archousai after the Greek; I mean they still are.  And that's my first recollec- I think that was the first as a family; now, maybe my mother [Fannie Scott Knott] and father--I don't remember; I had attended something before, but in 1948 is the first time I remember going to anything.
Story_ID: 559396
Speaker 1: And my father [A. Paul Knott, Sr.] belonged to the Pittsburgh [Philadelphia] chapter, the Rho chapter [of Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], which was, which was a, a strong chapter because I think in 1948, the president or the sire [grand sire archon], the, the, the head of it, was from Pittsburgh.  Then, the next meeting every two years was in Montgomery, Alabama, and I remember going there and seeing all the discrimination in Montgomery.  We were at Montgomery State, the school in Montgomery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Montgomery, Alabama, yeah.  And I remember my father wasn't feeling well; I was fifteen years old, and I had to drive all the way from Montgomery to Cincinnati [Ohio] before we could stop to get anything to eat, and we certainly couldn't stay anyplace.  There was no place to stay, and there's no place you could go in to eat; I remember that very vividly, without being really dumped on, so we didn't stop, and I--and my father wasn't feeling well and I had to do the driving, so.
Speaker 2: That's a lot of mileage for a fifteen year old (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Sitting on a telephone book, yeah, to give me a little height in the car (laughter).  I drove all the way back to Cincinnati, and we were trying to get to Cincinnati because in Montgomery, T.K. Gibson, Sr. had been there, and at the Manse Hotel [Cincinnati, Ohio], which was--and Cincinnati wasn't that great of a place for blacks either, in those days.  The Manse Hotel, which was a black-owned hotel, which was a little unusual in those days, the National Association of Insurance Companies [ph.], or something like that, were meeting there, and T.K. Gibson, Sr. [Truman K. Gibson, Sr.] told my father about it.  "Well, come on, get up to Cincinnati (unclear), and I'll reserve a place for you to stay at the Manse" 'cause that's where we're going after we left Montgomery.  So that's what had happened; we made it to the Manse Hotel [Cincinnati, Ohio], M-A-N-S-E, I'll never forget it.  Yeah, we made it to--old red brick building.  We made it to the Manse Hotel, so we were safe.
Speaker 2: Wow.  So--
Speaker 1: That was in 1950.
Speaker 2: So you, you've been in--your father's been--your family's been involved with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my family's been involved, yeah; I, I've been a member for--actually, in June, I was appointed emeritus member, forty years.  Yeah, I'd been a member for forty years in June, so it made, made me emeritus.
Story_ID: 559397
Speaker 1: Now the Boule is different from say an Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or some of the other black fraternities Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and all those (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In what respect is it different?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't like to put it this way, but probably the best way to describe it would be more selective.  I mean I don't wanna give you the impression that I'm an elitist, 'cause I'm not at all, but it's more selective in terms of, of achievements; you know, what, what people have--what members have achieved (unclear), and it's, it's more selective in the invitational way people are invited into it--it's more selective.
Speaker 1: So, in other words, to maybe break it down in a way that you might not, if I was a freshman on college campus and like--I could probably go and join the Alphas--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could, you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and I'd have to reach a certain criteria, but chances are I could probably--if I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could pledge, yeah; yeah, you could pledge.
Speaker 1: I could pledge Kappa or pledge--but, but you have to be invited into Sigma [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you have to be, and until recent years, it's been very, very--nobody ever talks about it.  Like fifteen years ago I couldn't be as candid as I'm being now because it just wasn't done; I was just--nobody ever talked about it.  It wasn't so much it was a secret but that was part of the--I guess part--you could call it persona of the organization.
Speaker 1: Well, it was--created quite a bit of curiosity over the years.
Speaker 2: Yes, because people wondered what, what's, what's happening.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and people have blown it probably beyond what it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and blown it out, yeah.  "Oh, boy.  He belongs to the Boule, big deal," yeah.
Speaker 1: Secret mission going on, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So now you can--well, I don't know, I spoke to the president of the Boule a couple of years ago in Atlanta [Georgia].  We were discussing some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who's that, Cornell Moore [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]?
Speaker 1: No.  Well, he's a--is he a current--no, it's--
Speaker 2: Teamer yeah, oh, Teamer--Charles Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know who you mean; not Teamer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's an educator.
Speaker 2: His son, yeah, his son is with Walsh and Company [Walsh Group] here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think (laughter) of his name.  His son is here in Chicago, yeah--the Walsh construction.
Speaker 1: I don't know what's wrong with me, either, but I, but I--well, but he's (unclear), yeah.  But he just addressed some of the strange things that people think the Boules do (unclear) historically and stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What does the Boule actually do in terms of--I know you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, this was, this was a big, a big--see, for years, the Boule didn't do anything, I will say this.  They didn't do anything other than self-aggrandizement; there's, there's nothing done, there was no contributions, and I had a big problem with this--very big problem.  [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and I, we were having something to eat late one night back in the middle '70s [1970s] and we were good friends, we were talking about stuff and he was a (unclear); he had just come into the Boule.  He said, "What do you guys do?"  I said, "Nothing of really any significance."  He says, "Man, this would be a great vehicle," in so many words, "to do something."  I said, "You're right; I've been trying to move 'em off center and to do something."  He said, "Let's start, let's get something started."
Story_ID: 559398
Speaker 1: You and Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon Jarrett] decided to change right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so Vernon and I--yeah, we said, "Well, what can we do?"  So, we concluded that it was obvious that the only black kids that got any kind of notoriety were if they played basketball or they went to jail (laughter) for something, and that what we should do is find some vehicle to honor black kids that achieved in high school, to give 'em some pats on the back.  So we formulated the idea, let's have a luncheon to honor these kids, and Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] had just--he had just died, so we said we'd call it the Percy Julian Luncheon, and Percy was a staunch member and he was also a--we wanted to--the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] to become more social and make changes, and matter of fact, I had worked with Percy in doing some stuff nationally before in making changes (unclear) so, so what we did is we went to the school system and they had the, the science and mathematic fair at Chicago Public Schools [Chicago Public Schools Student Science Fair], so we looked at a--we asked Dr. Redmond [James Redmond], who was chief of the public schools at the time, and he turned it over to Manford Byrd [HistoryMaker Manford Byrd, Jr.] who was, I guess, second in command of the public schools then, or at least he was the black guy on the spot, so we decided that those that achieved in the mathematics, that was one way to ferret out the achievers if they had done well and done something of a significance in the science and mathematic fair, so we got out of--and that would cover kids in the eighth grade, and high school, and all that, so we got around fifty kids out of that, and we decided--and so we had the luncheon, and that each member would sell tickets or give away tickets anyway, to provide the tickets.  The cost of the tickets would pay for the luncheon and also maybe a little scholarship.  So that was the idea, so we got this all going.  Oh, everybody thought it was a--all the members said, "Hey, that's a great idea, fantastic idea."  So, Vernon had to be away someplace before it started, and I was in South America for a couple weeks before, and I got--and so everybody said, "Oh, we'll take care of getting rid of all these tickets while you're away."  So, I got back here--I remember the, the luncheon was on a Friday; I got back here on a Tuesday (laughter), and there'd been eight tickets sold (laughter), eight tickets.  And Vernon and I got on the phone and, with my girlfriend, we--we'd, we'd been over to my house and we put together a battle plan; we gotta get rid of these tickets and get some people there.  And so we called and twisted arms, and by the time Friday rolled around, we had over three hundred people at the, at the luncheon, so it turned out it went well.  So that gave us good cause to castigate and, and really step on people, "Hey, you guys didn't back this at all and you gotta do this now."   So after that, it was a success.  And now, nationally, every chapter is doing that.
Speaker 1: Is there a name for it now?
Speaker 2: Youth Recognition Luncheon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Every chapter is doing that and, and nationally and, and at each Boule, whether it's in Detroit [Michigan]--well, we were just in Detroit in June.  For, I don't know, at least four or five Boules now, every two years they've had a Youth Recognition Luncheon as one of the keynote events of the convention.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that started back in what year?
Speaker 2: I would say I think it's '74 [1974]; maybe '74 [1974] or '75 [1975].  I think '74 [1974], yeah, 'cause I think Percy Julian died in maybe '74 [1974], and we started to call it the Percy Julian Luncheon in '75 [1975].
Story_ID: 559399
Speaker 1: That was on the movement to make, to make things more relevant, and I'd, I'd always been pushing to do that, and also to make it more diversified.  Because in Chicago [Illinois], I had transferred from the--I was taken in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and then transferred to Chicago back in the '60s [1960s].  I did try to make it more relevant.  I remember that what I did was I took an average age.  An average age of Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] members in Chicago is over sixty, and predominantly they were doctors, and if you weren't a doctor, they were a lawyer, and then you had, I think, two dentists.  I was--but nobody from--there were a lot of other fields--communications, industry, you know, fields--a lot of other fields that blacks were involved in, but the old camaraderie, old brotherhood of just doctors and lawyers, we tried to get away from and was--get 'em able to diversify to do that.  And then Percy, and then Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] was--he was a big influence in the country and also in the organization, and I got with him and we developed a plan with some others that--I forget what year it was; it was early in the '70s [1970s] in New York [New York], the convention was in New York at a Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York].  We got a rule change where we could lighten up some on the requirements, the voting requirements to vote one in--to lighten up on the requirements to make it easier for people to get in because we realized in some chapters like Chicago, there hadn't been a new person come in in ten years or twenty years; you saw the same, same guys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that, that--the, the whole organization has changed now where it's, it's, it's--people from all walks of life now are eligible.  The, the real eligibility you have to have, you have to have a college degree to be considered.
Story_ID: 559400
Speaker 1: We were talking when I first came in about Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and the--this movie, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About 'The Good Shepherd.'
Speaker 1: 'The Good Shepherd.' Yeah.  And I know they don't want you to say too much about it, but is the perception of the secret society in Yale and some of the--and the way the country is run, I mean do you have any comments about any of that?  I'd be remiss if I didn't ask something.
Speaker 2: Well, from what--I'm, I'm not a member of a secret society.  So there is a lot of perception about the secret societies, and some of it is true, and there is, there's a very definite influence in government and what goes on because it's just like--you could say, "Why do graduates of Yale control so much?"  "Why are a significant number of presidents, graduates or have attended Yale?"  It's because they stick together and they cover each other, and that old school tie means something in terms of advancement or getting ahead.  So that kind of thing does work, and when it's in secret society, it's even stronger than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you do know like in--they, they talked about Skull and Bones in that movie.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear). And there was another movie out; I think there were two movies called 'Bones' or 'Skulls' ['The Skulls'] or something like that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they made horror movies or something.
Speaker 2: 'Skulls.' Yeah, yeah, something like that, yeah.  But who knows what happened when John Kerry and George Bush were running against each other?  Both, both of 'em were Bones men.  What kind of (laughter)--that was interesting, yeah.
Speaker 1: That is, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I, I mean I don't know if that's known publicly, but that's--that, that, that's interesting but--I mean it's just a lot of, of--I mean I look at my classmate who, who I went to school with--all the senators, the congressmen, the captains of industry and all that.  My classmates I know the best, but, you know, why is--people don't realize, people don't know.  John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] went to Yale [sic. Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], did you know that?
Speaker 1: No, I thought he was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was a Harvard grad, but he started out at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then all through Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], and Ford was a graduate of the law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], the Clintons [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton], Bushes [President George Herbert Walker Bush and President George Walker Bush]--but it's, it's all Yale.  Cheney [Dick Cheney] went--started at Yale and I think he--something happened to him there.  But that's the legacy.
Story_ID: 559401
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns today for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns for the African American community?  Well, what I've seen over the years is--from starting way back, first thing that happened to me as a boy, as I've mentioned before.  I'm thirteen, fourteen years old, and they tell me I couldn't eat in this place in Johnstown, Pennsylvania and they were gonna arrest me, and they sent for the cops and the cops were outside; I'm just sitting there with tears running down my eyes.  I wouldn't move.  They had to carry me outta there; I wouldn't move, under the threat of going to jail and all that.  And then I look to what I, to what I see now.  We have made a lot of progress, but there's still progress to go, and I think a lot of the progress has to be through education not only of black people, but also of white people, okay?  In the United States today, what we're seeing is, we're seeing an integration of other societies, other races.  Look at all the Asians coming in, look at the, the--all the Indians and the Pakistanians [sic.] and the--like I point out to people, the Indians have the largest middle-class in the world; they are the largest middle-class in the world, and this, this says something.  But here they are--you can't go into a Dunkin' Donuts that's not owned by an Indian in the Unites States; you can't go to a small hotel or motel that's not owned by an Indian; they stick together.  This is what's happening, and they're slowly integrating into American society, and blacks must continue to do this.  I mean we're 20 percent what?  Twenty, 15, 20 percent of the population of the United States?  What I would like to see is a continued integration so that--it's like--maybe to paraphrase I Have a Dream speech, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I was there right in front of him when he gave it in August 28th, 1968 I think it was, in Washington [D.C.]--I'm standing right there.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], yeah.  I was right there, right in front of him.  I was from here, and maybe twenty feet away from him, and when he said--you know he had a--he--the dream that he had is that we can all live together, work together, go to school together without any problems, we'll all be as one.  That's what I'd like to see because--well, you know, believe me, I mean, all kind.  I mean--and Chicago [Illinois] is still bad; it's still places in Chicago--there's--every once in a while you read racial stuff and--that's happened to kids getting beat up in one neighborhood and the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cross those boundary, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And tomorrow is Martin Luther King's birthday and I can remember being with him out in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois] and people were throwing (laughter), throwing bricks.  One brick sort of scratched his head and he says, "Man, I've never seen--."  I was there when he said, "I've never seen the venom and the ferocity and the hatred in the eyes of people that I see here in Chicago."  I mean in all the travels through the South and on the Pettus Bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge] in Selma [Alabama] and all that, he'd never, never seen, seen the stuff that goes on here; I mean the, the kind of stuff; so in Chicago we've got a long way to go.  You read in the papers every day, but we are making progress.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not one that's gonna sit around with a chip on my shoulder and say, "Hey, ain't nothing happening."  I mean we are, we are making some progress, but we got a long way to go.
Story_ID: 559402
Speaker 1: Tell me this.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now?
Speaker 2: That's a question I ask myself all the time.  It's been a good ride; I don't think so.  I mean, there are decisions and maybe I should have done this, and maybe I would have been better off.  I mean, there were some things--I could have been a billionaire by now if I'd have done some things which--that might have--might--I couldn't have swallowed, my conscience couldn't have swallowed, but I'm okay.  I feel I'm blessed; two months I would have made seventy-two years, that's pretty good, and so I feel blessed.
Story_ID: 559403
Speaker 1: I mean, I've had prostate cancer, got operated on for that seven years ago, following that I had a heart attack, a stroke, but I still get around, I still do pretty good, so I've been blessed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it seems like--I wouldn't have guessed that.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't have guessed you've had a stroke.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was a re- that was after my--that's another story after my heart--after my--I had major, major surgery, and it just wiped me out.
Speaker 2: Well, this is a--kind of a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lost a lot of blood, yeah.
Speaker 2: Does it help being a physician when you're getting older?
Speaker 1: Well, when I got operated on (laughter).  Let's see, I was sixty-five, and I'd lost a lot of blood, and I realized that 'cause they did it under local [anesthesia]; I didn't want 'em to put me to sleep 'cause you go to sleep and it's a longer recovery, so I lost a lot of blood and I, I saw where they had replaced a lot of blood with liquids, with--
Speaker 2: Plasma?
Speaker 1: Liquids, not plasma, just with salt and water and sugar and water.  And that night, I was out of breath, and I realized that I had gone into heart failure from all the stuff they had given me, so I called and had a resident come and give me a diuretic to diurese, get rid of all this extra fluid which made me breathe earlier--easier.  The next morning I get up 'cause I'm supposed to get up.  I try to get up, a friend of mine was in there with me and come by to see me, and she'd known me since I came to Chicago [Illinois], and I looked at her and then all at once I couldn't see; that was the first time I had the stroke.  I mean I couldn't see anything.  I went--I was blind for about six or seven minutes, but boy, I did the hardest praying I ever did in my life.  And then my sight slowly came back, but it showed it was--the test I had later on, it was a stroke 'cause I didn't have any blood.  The doctors had bled me down (laughter); they'd replaced all this fluid but didn't give me any blood, and I (laughter), I didn't have any blood, that's why that happened.  So then they wanted to give me all these blood transfusions.  I said, "No, man, no."  I didn't need another Arthur Ashe, and so--with that HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], so I said, "No, just give me some packed cells--two units, that's enough; not four, just two--enough to get me over the danger line."  So being a doctor helped through all that.
Story_ID: 559404
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, now what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I've done a lot of little things, but I don't know what matters now.  The little bit I did, I think, in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], that was something.  Oh, I do remember something else.  Back when I was in the [U.S.] military, I was responsible for laws coming out that no more discrimination on military bases or in military housing--I did all that.  I used to (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you file a case or something, or file suit?
Speaker 2: No, I wrote a white paper; I wrote a white paper.  Went right to McNamara [Robert McNamara] and--was discrimination in housing because when you're black, you couldn't--like at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois], you couldn't find a place to live if you were a black officer, and had to live off the base; there's no place to live.  So I wrote a white paper and went through the channels--secretary of Navy--all the way to the secretary of Navy to McNamara; the defense--secretary of defense.  They formulated a committee of congressmen and all, sent 'em out and interviewed me, and we had meetings, and out of that came a legislation to outlaw discrimination in military bases and military housing, and if you did discriminate, then the government would stop doing business if you--if your store discriminated against blacks or Filipinos, 'cause there were a lot of Filipinos that were included with blacks in the [U.S.] Navy--couldn't do it.  So I did that.  You know, that's when you--so that's one thing I can think of that, that was significant.  That was back in the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 559405
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family as we get towards the end here.  What, what does your family consist of now?
Speaker 2: Not too--immediate family I've got two sisters; I've got--one's a retired school teacher that has an interest in a travel agency and so she travels all the time.  She lives in Washington [D.C.] and New York [New York].  That's Patricia Knott; she's never married, so--Knott.  And then I have another sister, Sylvia Simmons [Sylvia Knott Simmons] that lives in Washington; she's married to Robert Simmons, a heart transplant surgeon, in Washington.  Then I have two children [Albert Knott and Olivia Knott] who are just in college now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a couple of stepchildren; one lives in the Bahamas and one lives in Germany--born here in Chicago [Illinois], and they're all successful businesspeople.
Speaker 1: So you have two biological children and two stepchildren you said.
Speaker 2: No, the--no, two--my biological children are at home.  I was a late starter; they're only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're in college?
Speaker 2: They're only eighteen and twenty, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I have non-biological--I have, yeah, three stepsons.
Story_ID: 559406
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about before I ask my last question--that we need to discuss, you think (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, it's been a lot of years (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Probably a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you've tickled my memory (laughter), and squeezed it so, yeah.  No, I, I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, last question is similar to legacy but a little different.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, as a nice guy who was always willing to give, up to a point.  I mean if somebody needed help, and they actually really needed it, I'm there to help 'em.  And I think I gotta say, too, particularly if they're black, I'm going to try to help 'em--even maybe bend over a little more backwards, knowing that they had to come against some disadvantages.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's--can't ask for more than that.  Thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 559407
Speaker 1: That was in the year of 1935, the--that's my mother [Fannie Scott Knott], and in her right arm which is on our left in the picture is me, and at her left is my older sister which died when she was four or five, about 1940.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm sorry, did you name them?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah he did.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, sir, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother's mother [Lula Allen Houston] on the right, with my mother in the middle, and my mother's sister on the left.  And that picture was taken, and from what I'm told, is my mother was a teenager, so that would have been prior to 1920. I mean the dress looks like the Roaring Twenties, but that would be in--probably prior to 1920; maybe 1918, 1919.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, I'm ready.  Tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: That's my mother's family.  The gentleman in the middle is my maternal grandfather [Arthur Scott], to his left is my mother, and to his right is my mother's sister Arthurine [Arthurine Scott Collins], and sitting is my grandmother--my maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, all ready?
Speaker 1: Oh, let's see, that's a picture of me before my hair turned gray.  I'd say I'd be about two years old, so that be about 1937.
Speaker 2: That's about '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Let's see, that particular boat--yeah, that would have been--yeah, '87 [1987].  Let's see, when did Harold [Harold Washington] die?
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-seven [1987]; yeah, that was, that was in the summer before his death because I just--I bought that boat in Florida and brought it to Chicago [Illinois] in the summer of '87 [1987], so that was the sixty-five foot yacht, and I've got my captain's uniform on.  It's something I didn't mention, but I've got a--I've got an ocean captain's license--unlimited ocean license to carry passengers on any ocean in the world, and that's Harold.  We'd given him a--it was a party, a, a party and a fundraiser back then.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of--Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] was, at the time, was divided; the upperclassmen lived in ten different colleges, colleges being the dormitories, and that's a picture of my senior classmates that lived in the college where I resided, which was Calhoun College, named after John C. Calhoun, the (laughter), the senator, senator from South Carolina, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the--we just point this picture out is that if you can see to the--there's only one black face in there, and that's me sort of just to the--yeah, pointing out, yeah.
Speaker 2: Can you zoom in on it?
Speaker 1: But that points out to the paucity of blacks at Yale at the time.
Speaker 2: Were there any other notable figures there that we might recognize?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I'm sure; I just have to--
