Story_ID: 227360
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Curtis King, Curtis as in Mayfield, C-U-R-T-I-S, King, as in Martin Luther K-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name or a nickname?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't use it professionally.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 20, 1951, Coldwater, Mississippi which is about twenty miles [sic. thirty-five miles] south of Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Coldwater and they call it Tate County [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay 'cause, okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a theater director and producer, I went to undergraduate school at Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi].  Well first I went to high school in Mississippi.  It was a school called Tate County [Colored] High School [Coldwater, Mississippi] which is a school that was a very, very popular school in that part of the South.
Speaker 1: What I'd like to do is we'll get to that probably as we go down to--we get to high school, it's chronological basically so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah but I just wanted to know your occupation?
Speaker 2: Okay, theater director, producer.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?  October 30, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At The Black Academy of Arts and Letters [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: In Dallas, right?
Speaker 2: In Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 227361
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If it ain't broke don't fix it.
Story_ID: 227362
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna ask you about your family history, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jonah King] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, McGhee, M-C-G-H-E-E, that's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And her married name is King of course?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, I'm--I don't know that and actually I don't wanna give it 'cause she doesn't like to give her date of birth.  Place of birth is Mississippi, I think in Tate County [Mississippi] I believe.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that county?
Speaker 2: T-A-T-E, Tate.
Speaker 1: Oh, Tate, okay, Tate County, all right now what do you know about the ancestors on her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: My grandfather which is her father, my grandmother [L.A. McGhee] is her mother, and my great-grandfather which was her grandfather, we call him Papa.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there stories about what Mississippi was like or what their lives were like back in the you know, back I guess if, they would probably go back to the 19th century right, in terms of?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, my great-grandfather Papa was born in the 1800s.  I remember him very well, I remember when he died because he died in my grandmother's, in my grandfather's house.  It was my grandfather's father so I remember Papa used to tell us a story and he was crazy about my mother.  He called her Sister.  I don't know a lot about other than you know any other detailed stories about Papa.
Speaker 1: Okay what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather was a farmer, they had land in the South.  My great-great-grandfather was married into a family, it was a very large family, I'm not sure how many children there were but that's how the family--they had a gristmill, and don't ask me what that is, had a sorghum mill and a sorghum mill is where they made molasses.  They had a cotton gin, and they had like a big corn farm and had a lotta land.  So it was a--that side of the family was a very prominent family, and so my grandfather inherited you know some of the stuff as a part of an heir or whatever of the part, of the side of the family.  Now that part I remember my grandfather telling us that because when we were growing up every Christmas we would be in Mississippi and we would go out to my grandparents' house.  They lived in like well they call it the country and we would go out to the house and Big Daddy, which is my grandfather, my mother's father would tell us the stories about Papa, a very good-looking family and my great-great grandfather also was, let me see my great-great-grandfather who's Papa's parents were, I'm not sure which side, they were, they called Cherokee Indians [Native Americans].  They have very high cheek bones, my mother has you know those very high cheekbones, the hair was very slick, but it was slick but coarse, very coarse kind of hair and so that's how my grandfather's was too.  Now Papa, I remember very well Papa's hair was like, mingling gray but very straight, very straight and Papa looked liked a dark skin Indian.  He was a really tall good looking man.  So I remember my grandfather telling me, telling us those stories about Papa and they kind of--well another thing I do remember they were--it was a family that was a very, very hard working family, they were very high achievers and they believed in having things.
Story_ID: 227363
Speaker 1: Now my grandfather, in the South, you know if you had a brick house, that was something pretty significant and so my grandfather and my grandmother [L.A. McGhee] they had a brick house back in the '50s [1950s] and so that was pretty, pretty amazing. There were five of my mother's brothers, my mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] was an only girl, she was middle, two older boys, my mother the girl, and then two younger boys, and there are two of 'em left.  My mother and a brother, my grandfather passed away, my grandmothers passed away and then of course I had an older brother too.  So my grandfather passed away, my grandmother passed away first in '94 [1994], November of '94 [1994] 'cause we buried her the Saturday after Thanksgiving.  My grandfather died in '97 [1997] and we buried him in April of '97 [1997] and the other thing that was interesting about that is they had been together for sixty years, and I--he wasn't a sick man, but I think because people, they always say that you know when people live together so long, one has a tendency to follow the other, and that was about--it was seventeen months different in there in their death.  That's pretty much what I know about them, very religious, both sides of the family, very, very, very religious people.  Believed in doing people right.
Story_ID: 227364
Speaker 1: And of course in the South my grandfather, they--he worked for, for white people but never took any stuff off of them and I never saw him, you know where you would see certain African Americans in the Deep South you know, when you see a white person coming, kinda get to the side of the street and let 'em pass by--never my grandfather.  He would--when they passed by they would nod their head at him, call him "Mr. McGhee," and he would nod back and call 'em whatever the name was, so you know very respectful man, very respectful.  And my grandmother, this is a kind of funny story, when she would work in the fields, she had a stroke and the doctors had said that she couldn't work in the fields anymore.  So she ended up getting a domestic job, working in homes, white homes and she had worked for this one white couple for probably for about ten years, and so this one particular day she forgot to bring her lunch, so she made a peanut butter sandwich, and when she made the peanut butter sandwich and she got her check, (laughter) the person she was working for took some money outta the check.  So when my grandmother got the check and looked at the check, she say "Oh, Miss whatever the lady's name was," she says, "my check is short" and so she says no.  Now my grandmother's name was L.A., you know in the South you had those initials name.
Speaker 2: Okay so her name was just L.A.?
Speaker 1: L.A.
Speaker 2: L.A., it didn't really stand for anything?
Speaker 1: It didn't stand for anything.  Most of the times initials would stand for something, like my uncle's name was--they called him J.W., but his name was Jerry [ph.] and I can't remember what the middle part of it stood for, but my grandmother's is L.A. 'cause she always made a joke outta the, you know the initials 'cause it always stood for something, but when the woman took the money out for the peanut butter sandwich and my grandmother brought it to her attention that she had taken the money out, and so she says "No L.A.," she said "you know you ate that peanut butter sandwich so I have to charge you for that."  So my grandmother said, "Oh okay."  So when the next week came (laughter) the lady came to pick up my grandmother.  My grandmother said, "I'm not going, I'm not coming back anymore."  She says, "Why, what did I do?"  She said, "If I work for you for ten years and you take money out of my check for a peanut butter sandwich, I don't need to be bothered working with you anymore," and she begged her to come and my grandmother says, "No."  So I'm saying that to say that both of them were very, very proud people.  Extremely proud, very hard working people.
Speaker 2: I just wonder how your grandfather did it though I mean being in that environment?  How do you avoid making those concessions to white people in those public situations you know?  From what I've heard and read they tend to want to make an example out of you if you don't, you know.
Speaker 1: Well it's like the slave song says "Before I be a slave I'll be buried in my grave and go home to my Lord and be free," ['Oh! Freedom'].  And I think that my grandparents were typified, they typified that you know, in that, that the words in that particular song, and they were respected.  I mean everybody respected the McGhee family.
Speaker 2: Well that's the hard part is what I--how they were respected and you know, now this is--we're talking about during the '60s [1960]?
Speaker 1: 'Naw this is way back in the probably the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: No when you saw them, you saw your grandfather interact?
Speaker 1: When I saw them back in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would have to be in the '60s [1960s] I guess?
Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], '70s [1970s] yeah, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], because the high school [Tate County Colored High School, Coldwater, Mississippi] that I went to wasn't even integrated until I left it was in--I left high school in '69 [1969] so it wasn't integrated until like '70 [1970].  So all of that is pre-'60s [1960s] you know.
Speaker 2: Okay during the, during the '60s [1960] and okay.
Speaker 1: You know contrary to what a lot of people always say what they read or whatever, a lot, lot of black people in the South--those who--well black people in the South stood up for what they believe in.  There may have been some of those who didn't stand up because they were afraid, but they, they just, they just, they stood up for what they believed, and then again it was a family that had resources, you know I mean they worked for it, they passed it on or whatever and unfortunately a lot of 'em ended up selling a lot of the land because a lot of people on my grandfather's side of the family ended up moving to the West Coast, to Chicago [Illinois] you know, to the East Coast you know that whole migration piece.  So when they left they wanted out.
Story_ID: 227365
Speaker 1: Okay well did your mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] talk to you about growing up, what it was like for her to grow up?
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother talked to us, my mother was a school teacher and she was one who in that particular generation that went on and got a formal education, and she would say that she had to chop cotton and pick cotton in order to be able to get, to continue her education.
Speaker 1: Now where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to--well she went to like first through eighth grade in the Deep South that you could only--they only had from first to eighth grade.  You didn't have high school, so my mother left home when she was promoted to the ninth grade and she stayed in a boarding school in Memphis [Tennessee] 'cause Memphis was twenty-five, thirty miles from where we lived.  So she graduated from high school in Memphis and at that time when you graduated from high school you could basically start teaching.  So she taught in a two-room school that was segregated, and this is probably in the, you know, maybe '50s [1950s] I would say.  Then the school system kept advancing and they said you have to have you know a college education.  So then all they needed was two years, so my mother went to MI College [Mississippi Industrial College, Holly Springs, Mississippi] and she got a two-year you know education.
Speaker 1: To which college I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Mississippi Industrial College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They call it MI College which is right across the street from Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] in Holly Springs, H-O-L-Y, S-P-R-I-N-G, [sic.] Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah I was trying to think of Holly Springs when you said it was--Coldwater [Mississippi] was near Memphis 'cause we've interviewed a lot people from Holly Springs.
Speaker 2: Holly Springs, yes a very popular place.
Speaker 1: Rust College and that's where.
Speaker 2: Rust College, Leontyne Price and those people went, but so she went two years.  Then she went back and finished a four-year degree because at that time the segregated schools in the South with the two rooms, they were--people were fighting for integration, so the schools were consolidated and so she left the two-room school in the rural South and moved into like the urban part of the city and then that's when she became--she was teaching first grade there and she worked in what they call Senatobia [Mississippi], S-E-N-A-T-O-B-I-A public schools, and so she had a four-year degree.  Then when integration--that, they were still segregated as a matter of fact, but they were phasing out all of the two-room schools in the rural South because most of those were church schools, so they phased those schools out and then they became public--all those rural schools consolidated and became public schools, and when they became public schools, still integrated, I'm sorry, still segregated then several years later after the 1970s early '70s [1970s] or whatever, the schools became integrated and then that's when you had some real difficult challenges and things like that.  So they were requiring teachers who had been teaching school for 15, 20 and 30 years and had been graduating all kinds of students that were major you know, had gone on and done major things in their lives, in their careers, but they required them to go back and take the Mississippi teachers exam or whatever.  A lot of African American, great African American teachers that had been in education in the South just retired, but my mother stayed with it.  And so she took the national teachers exam, it wasn't national, it was some other kind of examination, but anyway she took this exam.  She passed it, then she went back to school and got her master's [degree] from Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] with a concentration in reading.  Now at that time my mother was probably maybe fifty-something you know, but she went back, she was the--one of the very few teachers in her generation's, generation of teachers that went on to grad [graduate] school and hung in there and things like that and ended up getting you know, doing extremely well.
Story_ID: 227366
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: J-O-N-A-H, Jonah like the biblical character, Jonah and the whale in the Bible, King, K-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think he has a middle name either.
Speaker 1: And where was he born and when was he born?
Speaker 2: Well, and I'm not really sure, I think he was born in Tate County, Mississippi, I think he was born in the same place and I don't remember his birth date actually.
Speaker 1: You don't know the year (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They were like, it was like in the '20s [1920s] or something like that, '20s [1920s], '30 [1930].  Both my mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] and father--it was sometime between 1920 and '30 [1930].
Speaker 1: Okay all right and well what do you know about the ancestors on his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, actually not very far because my father's parents both were deceased when we were born, so all I know about them is what they say you know, and he called his dad Papa and his name was Dan King, and his mother's name I can't remember her name, but I remember them talking about Dan King and there were, let me see, there were ten brothers and sisters.  Let me count and make sure, okay all of 'em had biblical names which is very ironic, very interesting.  The boys, Isaiah, Aaron, Jeremiah, Jonah; those are four, then there were two twins that died shortly after they were born.  They called them Moses and Joseph, so there were four, six; then the girls Mary, Joanna, Eunice and Deborah.  So there were four girls, so that's ten kids, so there were eight of the children that were born, I mean born so actually ten but two of 'em had passed away, so the ones that we knew were the four brothers and the four sisters.  Now all of them are gone with the exception of three sisters, so it's one sister gone and then the three brothers, it was one brother left.  So three sisters and one brother, so four deceased, four are still living.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have any stories that they passed down through the family about life in Mississippi you know of?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, that family was a very--all I, the only thing I remember is my father always saying that you know, 'cause he went to the [U.S. military] service and he always said that when, upon his death bed of his father he always says, "You boys make sure you take care of your sisters."  Now the mother died, his mother died when his baby sister, her name was Deborah, they call her Debra who lives in Chicago [Illinois], she was a probably like, it's somewhere between a year and two years old, two years is stretching it so somewhere between a year and two years old.  So when the mother died, the oldest sister Mary ended up raising the youngest sister which is Deborah.  So she raised her really like her own child.  So my father, they always say that you know, "Papa used to," they called him Papa, "Papa said that 'You boys take care of your sisters'," and so they all kinda stayed in this little huddle you know there in Coldwater [Mississippi] because three of the sisters lived in Coldwater until the one moved to Chicago, and that was the youngest one.  And so these brothers just always took care of the sisters and it was a very strange kind of (laughter), it was a very kind of strange family actually, well not strange, different because like when I guess well we always say is that well when what Papa didn't tell you all is that when you get married you need to take care of your family, your responsibility.  So it was, there was, a lot of those things kinda happened with that side of the family.  I don't know a lot about that side of the family only because the death of my grandparents on that side of the family, so I knew more about the immediate family.
Story_ID: 227367
Speaker 1: Okay what do you know about your father [Jonah King] in terms of his growing up and you know and how did your parents meet you know?
Speaker 2: I have no idea how they met, it would be an interesting question.  I don't know how they met, my father went to the [U.S. military] service so when he became an adult he left and went to the service.  I think, I'm not sure I think he stayed four years in the service.
Speaker 1: Now was he in World War II [WWII] or the Korean War?
Speaker 2: No World War II.
Speaker 1: World War II, okay.
Speaker 2: When was World War II, was it in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Forties [1940s].
Speaker 2: Forties [1940s]?  Yeah daddy was in there, he was in World War II.  World War I [WWI] when was that, in what?
Speaker 1: World War I that's 1917 you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay World War II, he was in World War II that's right.  So he--after he got out of the service then he started working you know doing stuff, but then he, you know, he, my father they were hard working people too.  They were different kind of achievers than my mother [Elizabeth McGhee King], but they believed in working.  I mean they worked very hard, they believed you know in having things.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well, so well, so what did your father do for a living then basically?
Speaker 2: He was, he worked with what they called Public Works, like he worked for an oil company for years and years and then he left the oil company and worked for a rice company (laughter), maybe that's why I love rice so much because he use to bring--I mean they use to package rice and whatever.  So he worked there for a long time and then after he left the rice company he just did his own thing pretty much as a farmer 'cause we had like eighty acres of land in the South, you know, during that time so he just basically worked the land doing farming kind of things.
Story_ID: 227368
Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your brothers and sisters and--?
Speaker 2: No sisters, have three brothers, my oldest brother, there are four of us.  My oldest brother is deceased, he died in '94 [1994], I'm sorry he died in '95 [1995].  Then my, one brother under me; he has six kids and then my youngest brother has one son and my third brother works for the federal government.  He lives in Kansas, then my youngest brother is one step from being an admiral in the [U.S.] Navy.  All of us are educated you know, we had, we didn't a choice.  You either went to school or you went to the [U.S.] Army, the--I'm the only of the three that didn't go to the Army, [U.S.] Air Force, what you call it, the [U.S.] military.  My oldest brother went to the military, stayed two years.  My third brother under me stayed four years and my baby brother has been in there twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're like second from the oldest?
Speaker 2: Second from the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 227369
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up.  Did--do you have an earliest childhood memory, a first memory?
Speaker 2: Like what for example?
Speaker 1: Well I don't know what's the first thing that you can remember?  Do you have a first, some people don't have a first memory, but if you have one what is it?
Speaker 2: I don't have a first early childhood memory actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I remember one time my mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] told me that I was at the table, we were eating and I liked to have my way, and said that my father [Jonah King]--I was trying--I wanted something and my father said I couldn't have it, and I started crying and he then he told me to shut up and I took the spoon and threw it at him and then he whooped my behind (laughter), so she said I never did that again.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  My mother said I was like two or three years old and I said, "Well what did I do?"  She said you screamed and hollered and then I ran to her and then she said and daddy said, "Don't pet 'em, make 'em sit down," you know and I just sat there and I just, you know how they do sometimes, let a kid just cry.  So she said I must've cried for like thirty minutes, you know, but you know you do it these days you end up in jail.
Speaker 1: Different times, so in your household, your household consisted of you and your brothers and your mother and father?  Did your grandparents live there?
Speaker 2: Four boys, my father and my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandparents live there too or just--?
Speaker 2: No, my grandparents lived about six or seven miles from where we lived, on my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 227370
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Maypop, I don't know if you remember what that is, it's a kind of a fresh fruity kinda smell.
Speaker 1: What is Maypop, is it a plant or?
Speaker 2: It's kinda like a plant, it's almost like, it looks a little citric kind of a fruit and it was kinda like a wild fruit and you would eat those when you were in the cotton fields, but they have to be really ripe, but they were really good, very sweet.  You eat 'em and then spit the seeds out.
Speaker 1: What do you call 'em muscadine now, is that the same thing?
Speaker 2: No, Maypop, M-A-Y-P-O-P, a muscadine is like a grape you know but those were there--a good plums, ooh, I mean big plums.  We use to go plum hunting as they say.  Blackberries, you'd go blackberry hunting, so blackberries, plums, maypops, persimmon, that was another one.  They would eaten by possums or possum (laughter), but they were good too, I mean you would get a persimmon I mean when it'd be really good and ripe and sweet and they make persimmon preserves and plum preserves and muscadine wine and blackberry wine and it's real funny 'cause when they go make these wines, they would get 'em in the spring and summer and then they would boil them--grapes, you had grapes too.  You had to climb up these huge trees and get these grapes, and then--
Speaker 1: The vines would be all the way up in the trees?
Speaker 2: Oh the vines would be up in the trees and these grapes would be, but the grapes were so tiny.  Not like grapes that we eat in the store, these were just very--they almost look like, like little seeds or something you know, but then they would boil them and then they would let them simmer for several months and then they would drink the wine during the Christmas holiday, and I always wondered why the wine had like a little twang to it.  I use to thought they put you know alcohol in it, but they didn't they put vinegar in it, and it had like a little twang or something to it.  So all that smells you know, and then sounds, I mean you heard of course Aretha Franklin, when we were growing up you heard Aretha Franklin, Gladys Knight, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and the Miracles.
Speaker 1: Is this on a record player or on the radio?
Speaker 2: No, this is, well both you know at that point they had a record player that you could spin 45 and 33 albums [LP record] and you heard The Caravans, all The Caravans, and then it's another gospel, several gospel groups you know, Joe Mays, and then you heard jazz artists, Louis Armstrong (laughter), Duke Ellington all those artists, you heard a lot of them.  So music was in our house I mean it was there.  Sights, sounds--what did you say sights?
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells yeah.
Speaker 2: Smells its--sights you know we traveled in the summer.  My parents [Elizabeth McGhee King and Jonah King] would always take us on some kind of a vacation, the first vacation we went on was in Pennsylvania.  Is that where Niagara Falls is?
Speaker 1: 'Naw New York.
Speaker 2: In New York, yeah.
Speaker 1: You have to go through Pennsylvania though probably from Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right (unclear) and I remember seeing that you know it was beautiful.
Speaker 1: Did you drive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they my family drove, and then we went further in the South, we went to Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], you know these are places where every summer we would always go in some places.  This would happen like four or five summers, we had a good time too, but you'd always go see family, you know and then they was, you know you'd stay there for like a week or so, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah a lot of black people from Mississippi in Chicago, and I think it's about 60 percent of the city, I mean in terms of the black population anyway.
Speaker 2: In Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: Chicago, Detroit.
Speaker 1: A lot of people from.
Speaker 2: All those places, yeah.
Speaker 1: Chicago especially.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Detroit is more Alabama, but Chicago has got (unclear).
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 227371
Speaker 1: Tell me like what kind of, what kind of little kid were you?  What did you like to do and what was your personality like?
Speaker 2: Mostly read a lot, I always thought I was kind of creative and mathematics is something I just never could really understand, trying to figure something out, you know.  You have to read the problems you know and then try to figure out (laughter), I just could never, I have a different kind of brain, but creatively I was very good you know always--all of us had to take music.  All four of my brothers, every last one of us took music.  My mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] always say that if you have some culture in you it helps to balance you and give more of a well-rounded view.
Speaker 1: When you mean music do you mean--
Speaker 2: Piano.
Speaker 1: --music lessons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to take piano, all four of us had to take piano.  We had a piano in our house so all of us had to take piano.  So I think the creatively I was more into that you know and then all of us had to cook you know.  My grandmother [L.A. McGhee] actually taught all of us how to cook quite frankly, because we stayed with my grandparents from the time when we were like two, three months old up until we got ready to go to high, to go to school 'cause my mother.
Speaker 1: So you actually lived with your grandparents until you?
Speaker 2: Yeah on, during the week 'cause both my parents worked.  My mother was teaching and my father [Jonah King] was working.  So my mother would come down there and you know come and see us like two or three times a week or whatever, but having to nurse the baby you know 'cause they didn't have a babysitter, so my grandmother served us like a nanny for all of her grandkids on my mother's side of the family.  Oh, let's see, so creatively just you know I think that is--so cooking, we all had to clean up the houses, we all had our turns to wash dishes (laughter)--I hate to do that!  Read, you know we had to study you know you had to be at home at a certain time you know even when we were teenagers (laughter), you know you had to be home at a certain time.  We used to hate that because while were all growing up, my oldest brother and I, we would say to you know all the friends.  They said, "Come on, come on King, come on go with us."  We said, "Well 'naw we can't go, we got something else to do you know."  "Aw come on go."  But we didn't want to tell 'em that our parents told us we couldn't do it you know 'cause that's like, um-hm.  You'd never, you sixteen years old and you mean you can't do this?  All the rest of these kids were going out and doing all kinda stuff and whatever, but at a certain time we had a curfew and we had to be at home you know?  On the weekends it was eleven o'clock, during the weekend days you had to be home at nine and you'd better not dark that door and you--I mean past a certain, your curfew and if you went with your brother you'd better come back with your brother.  There was no if, ands or buts about it.  So that's pretty much our childhood, it was a good childhood too.  Then the other thing is that you know, things that we had you know because again, and I credit my mother with this because--but we had a lot of stuff.  People say well you know were you poor when you were growing up?  No, we were not poor.  Were you rich?  No, we were not rich, but we had everything.  I mean when bicycles you know were popular, we had--all four of us had a bicycle.  When TVs, I mean color TVs came out, we got a color TV you know.  Furniture in the house, immaculate, you know very, very expensive you know but very well maintained.  So a lot of things that other kids were growing up, I mean things that they didn't have when they were growing up, we had all that stuff, like a piano.  We had a piano in our house, I mean we've been havin' a piano in our house ever since I was probably six, seven, eight years old, and so I mean there were a lot of things that we had you know, it's just, it was just, it's amazing that to look back on it now to see.
Story_ID: 227372
Speaker 1: What about school?  Now where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Where did I go to what?
Speaker 1: Grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, Tate County [Colored] High School [Coldwater, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, now was this before integration and all that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, excuse me.  I didn't--we didn't do integration until, it wasn't until 1970, integration.  I graduated from high school in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So integration came after we left.
Story_ID: 227373
Speaker 1: When you were growing up--now you grew up right in the during the--you were a child during the--and a teenager during the height of the civil rights era, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we were, my family, my father [Jonah King] worked in Memphis [Tennessee] and when he worked in Memphis--I'll never forget in 1968 when they had the march for the garbage strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike] that we, my father got trapped in Memphis.  He couldn't, they wouldn't, 'cause at that point they wouldn't let anybody in Memphis and they wouldn't let anybody outta Memphis, and my father was there for like two days without coming home and so he was real involved in the civil rights period, and then on top of that because they were so involved in the period, I saw [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and all these people when they had that march [Meredith March Against Fear] from Memphis to Jackson [Mississippi], those people they were coming straight down 51 Highway [sic. Highway 51] and they would stop at certain places on 51 Highway and sing these songs you know 'Ain't Gon' Let Nobody Turn Me Around,' I mean you heard people and they were standing there, when they get to a certain place when they had the rallies, the people would do the dialogue and they would sing and I'm telling you that people will sing and sing and sing, and you will see the march moving on from one place to another.  They had all their stop points and what was interesting about the march is that if there were 800, 900 people you could be standing there and they would tell you--you could hear the singing from a distance and as the singing got--as the people heard the singing get closer, coming closer to them the people would come out of those cotton fields and they'd be standing on the side of that highway and the distant sound from 'Ain't Gon' Let Nobody Turn Me Around'--that sound with the people that were standing on the side they would pick it up and it was like that distant sound from a close sound would connect and the harmonies were unbelievable, now that was so African I mean I was--I'll always remember that.  I created a concert based upon--it's called Black Music and The Civil Rights Movement the whole thing.  So you heard that distant sound whatever and that, all that I remember.  So we fought in the civil--we were kids though, they'd grab you by the hand and everybody in those cotton fields would bring their childrens, their uncles, their aunts and their cousins and everybody else you 'cause it was about a focus and a direction you know.
Speaker 1: Now '64 [1964] that was like the big moment for Mississippi, I mean that the summer of '64 [1964] when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] organized all those voters in Mississippi and went to the Democratic National Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey].  Do you remember much about that?
Speaker 2: I remember although we didn't--my parents were involved in helping with the voting you know rights and things like that, but again 'cause everything was in the segregated South you know the things that they did and it was just understood that this is what was happening you know and everybody kinda followed what the movement was, what was happening in the movement particularly with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and all of those other great civil rights leaders, so all I remember is being a part of, with my family you know here and in understanding what was going on.  I may have not understood a lot of it but they--they use to always say why don't you understand it, but you understand it better by and by and that was very true.
Speaker 1: Do you remember meeting Fannie Lou Hamer or, or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah Fannie Lou Hamer, actually Fannie Lou Hamer came to Mississippi; I remember seeing her in the movement, in the marches but when I was a student at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], Margaret Walker was my professor and Fannie Lou Hamer came and did a speech, and this was the first time I heard this song like a ship was tossed and driven, oh, 'The Lord Will Make A Way Somehow', "Like a ship that's tossed and driven battered by an angry sea when the storms of life are raging and fury falls on me, something, something, something, then I say to my soul don't worry the Lord will make a way somehow."  She sat up there and the woman would play, she had a musician to play, that played for her and she sang this song before she did her speech and I mean it was unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she could really sing, she's--
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a phenomenal singer, so I met Fannie Lou Hamer.  I met Fannie Lou Hamer twice and the second time, the second time I met her, once again the first time I didn't meet her I just like seeing that person in the movement, but the second time I met her she was in Mississippi and then following her speech they had a dinner, a lunch or dinner whatever it was at Jackson State for students at Jackson State and I was in the room with her. Oh yeah, I remember Fannie Lou Hamer, I remember a lot of those civil rights people.
Story_ID: 227374
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school when you were in school or did you have one?  You said math was not your favorite.
Speaker 2: I'm not gon' say math was not my favorite, it's just that I didn't understand it.  You know I enjoyed algebra, you know but it was more the creative stuff.  You know I would say theater you know probably theater and--
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to some theater in school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah in high school [Tate County Colored High School, Coldwater, Mississippi] they had five productions.  My high school teacher was Wilma Jean Moore and they had five productions and I starred in four of the productions.  I got the best actors award for that in high school, then they had these regional competitions, so I got the regional competition for the best actors award there and they had the state competition, I got the best actors award for that, because the high schools would compete, you know, in your local, your regional and then you could go into the nationals and the national was always in Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: And then that's how I ended up at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: So what kind of plays were you in in?
Speaker 2: There was a show called 'Everyman,' [Peter van Diest] I did that.  The thing I got the best actors award was a play called 'The [Birthday of the] Infanta,' [Oscar Wilde] I-N-F-A-N-T-A, 'The Infanta' and it was about a dwarf who was, had fallen in love with this princess, but the princess was, the princess was to be married to another man because of the--he was a part of this--the man was a part of the throne you know.  Her father wanted her to marry this man, she didn't want to marry this man.  She had fallen in love with this dwarf and the father who was like the king could not understand why this princess was so in love with somebody that was as hideous-looking as the dwarf, and so she had fallen in love with his mind and he said--he was full of poetry and all kind of stuff like that and she broke his heart when she told him that he was--when she told the dwarf Labassu [ph.] was his name, that she was getting ready to get married and he broke the dwarf's heart and the dwarf dies.  He delivers this speech and he dies.  I always get an ovation for that.
Speaker 1: Now this is in high school?
Speaker 2: This is in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's called as a matter of fact one of my best friends, when we got ready to go college we all went to school at Jackson State together and he used to call me Bassu, and everybody wanted to know what the hell is Bassu, you know, but he knew about this role and he said "Man, [HistoryMaker] Curtis [King] did this play, he played a dwarf," he said, "that nigga was bad," you know that's the language he used of course.  Said he was, ooh he was really good, and that's what I did my audition with at Jackson State.  They didn't really have a theater department, they had a theater area but it was a speech communication department and you could concentrate in theater and get a minor in theater.
Speaker 1: So is 'The Infanta' was that an original play by somebody in your hometown or did it come from?
Speaker 2: No, no it came from you know somebody had written it or whatever, you know but it was not--Samuel French or somebody like that.  So it's a good play, I still have the original copy of that play.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 227375
Speaker 1: What music did you, I mean what instrument did you play you said?
Speaker 2: Piano and flute.
Speaker 1: Piano okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact it was funny (laughter) 'cause this new band teacher had come to [Tate County Colored] High School [Coldwater, Mississippi] and they needed some flute players but because I could read music I went home and he let me use the flute and I went home in about a week I was playing flute and reading the music and everything.  So I ended up playing second flute, and he wanted to know how you could learn to do this so fast?  But he never knew that I had taken music too, so I could read the music, it's just a matter of me learning you know how to you know.
Speaker 1: That's still is unusual 'cause not everybody that plays the piano can pick up something else.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) but I, the reading part was the most difficult part just to learn how to be with the finger, the flute and then I went to Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and I played second flute in the band.  I only did it for like a semester 'cause it was too grueling for the rehearsal, you know, marching band.
Story_ID: 227376
Speaker 1: Tell me about the last days of [Tate County Colored] High School [Coldwater, Mississippi], now were you involved in all the social high school stuff, did you, you know run for class office or anything like that or were you (unclear).
Speaker 2: Let me see I--actually, I can't remember what I--I got the best actors [award] I think I remember that and I can't remember what else it, but it was something else.  I was one--I was very popular I'd have to say, I'm not being egotistical but I was extremely popular and everybody thought I would excel as an actor you know, that's what people remember.   I graduated with honors in high school.  I graduated with honors at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and I graduated with honors of course in grad school [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] too.
Speaker 1: Now so you knew you were going to college and when you and were?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a choice.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know so you go to college or you go to the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay so Jackson State seemed like a good alternative?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't really, at that point I was trying to get in school somewhere else but if I remember correctly, I didn't make enough on the ACT test.  I took it like twice, and it was a like 17 or 18 or something like is what I could make, so I ended up going to Jackson State, one the best things that could've ever happened.
Speaker 1: All right, now you said--well tell us about Jackson State, we have to talk about Margaret Walker Alexander too at some point.
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: But what--did you like Jackson State?
Speaker 2: I loved Jackson State, it's a great school, there are lot of great people that went through Jackson State and a lot of great people are still going through Jackson State.
Speaker 1: Name some.
Speaker 2: There's a woman named "Tommie" Tonea Stewart.
Story_ID: 227377
Speaker 1: You were naming some of the people that came through Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Cassandra Wilson, I don't know if you know her, she's a great jazz singer.  She came outta that program, Margaret Walker, of course I said, [HistoryMaker] Curtis King, "Tommie" Tonea Stewart, she is a wonderful actress.  She did 'A Time to Kill' with Samuel L. Jackson, you know are some of the people that I can just think off the top of my head that went through Jackson State.
Speaker 1: This is 1969?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], I went there in '69 [1969] and graduated in '73 [1973] and then went (unclear) school, and then of course that's when I met Margaret Walker.  I'd always studied Margaret Walker's work had already, had always read 'For My People' you know, and this is an interesting story, because when I first got to Jackson State somebody said that Margaret Walker was on the campus.  I was in the registration line, I said, "Margaret Walker's on Jackson State campus?"  They said, "Yeah," so I finished registering and went over to the language arts building and there was a room about the size, half the size of this office and there were two women sitting at individual desks.  The woman was sitting at the front desk and then there was a desk behind the woman at the front desk in this room, and so I went to the lady, I said, "Excuse me," I said, "Mrs. Curry [ph.] right?"  Little name plate, yeah, I said, "is that Margaret Walker?"  And Margaret Walker, she had her head down and she raised her head up, she says, "Yes, I'm Margaret Walker, why?"  And I said, "Oh my God I've have never met a living writer," and she says, "well I'm very much alive" (laughter). and I was just standing there and I was stunned, I mean I was like blown away because Langston Hughes, Paul Laurence Dunbar, Margaret Walker, John O. Killens, you know all these people that my high school [Tate County Colored High School, Coldwater, Mississippi] teacher Mrs. [Wilma Jean] Moore who was very well, you know versed in writers, and that's what she taught 'cause she taught me literature.
Speaker 1: Did you all read 'Black Fire[: An Anthology of Afro-American Writing,' Amiri Baraka and Larry Neal] is that, did you have that as an anthology?
Speaker 2: We didn't read 'Black Fire' but we had some of [James] Baldwin's stuff you know, Richard Wright, you know I knew Richard Wright's.
Speaker 1: Another native from Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Mississippi, a native Mississippian, now he didn't go to Jackson State, but Oprah Winfrey is a Mississippian, you got a lot of great Mississippians now.  Morgan Freeman, Mississippian, Leontyne Price, Mississippian, I mean you got--Mississippi got some humongous, Eudora Weldon [sic. Eudora Welty], Mississippi, but that--when I got there and I just literally started working with this, with Margaret Walker and the first year I didn't do a lot, but the second year I got involved in the program that she bought.  It was called Summer Arts Institute on the Life, History and Culture of Black People [sic. Institute for the Study of the History, Life, and Culture of Black People; Margaret Walker Center, Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  I met [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, Sonya Sanchez, [Historymaker] Maya Angelou, John O. Killens, [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, Charles White, Romare Bearden, everybody you could think of came to that Summer Arts Institute, Lofton Mitchell, and at that time Lofton Mitchell play, 'Bubbling Brown Sugar,' was being you know pulled together to go to Broadway.
Speaker 1: And he was also writing anthologies on black theater (unclear).
Speaker 2: On black theater, he had the black drama anthology that was prolific and so I said oh, my God I'm in the sea with all these great people and I just start volunteering my time at the, with Margaret Walker.  So I ended up taking all these classes from her.  I took a course called creative, it was a creative writing class.  I took a course called Literature of the Bible.  I took a class called Poetry in the Old Testament.  I took a course called Psalms.  I took a course on Baldwin (laughter) with her, it was like ooh, mind boggling.  So I just, just, she says you know the way you get to where you're going is just stay in the way.  So that what I did, I stayed in the way and I just met all these people.  I met people, people, people, people and so my relationship with her became profound which brings us to why I even, you know, getting an education at Jackson State in undergrad [undergraduate] school.
Story_ID: 227378
Speaker 1: So she [Margaret Walker] was a keynoter for this conference in Chicago [Illinois] and there were four students that were selected, three students selected and myself, a woman named Emma Jean Browning [ph.] was a Miss Jackson State at the time, she went on a got a master's [degree], not in theater; it was in education and a guy named Gene Young [ph.] who went onto school and got his Ph.D. from Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] I believe.  We went to that conference in Chicago.
Speaker 2: So you were seniors then at Jackson [State University, Jackson, Mississippi] (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No we were juniors.
Speaker 2: So juniors in '72 [1972], oh okay all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were juniors at Jackson State and that was my first being on a flight and I was excited you know and at that point I was writing you know plays and not doing a lot of acting you know, but more writing than anything else and I went to that conference in Chicago and when I got to that conference that was sponsored by Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois] and the University of Chicago School for Continuing Education [The University of Chicago Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies, Chicago, Illinois], everybody in music, theater, dance, film television, literature and the visual arts that you could think of, they were at that conference and it was a week.
Speaker 2: What was the name of it?
Speaker 1: It was called a [The National] Conference to Assess the State of Black Arts and Letters in the United States, and it was, it was mind boggling.
Speaker 2: Now was it sponsored by the.
Speaker 1: University of Chicago School for Continuing Education and Johnson Publishing Company.
Speaker 2: Okay, but what I'm trying to get at is was the Black Academy of Arts and Letters [New York, New York] involved in that (unclear)?
Speaker 1: The Black Academy of Arts and Letters was actually the organization that presented the project and it was sponsored by those two entities that I mentioned.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But it was a piece that was put together by the Black Academy.  Dr. C. Eric Lincoln was the president of the Black Academy and John O. Killens was the vice president, but you had Cannonball Adderley, you had [James] Baldwin, you had Sydney Poitier, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, dancers like Alvin Ailey, [HistoryMaker] Carmen de Lavallade, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder.  You know writers, Charles White, visual artist [Ernest] Ernie Crichlow, Charles White, [Romare] Bearden, Jacob Lawrence (laughter) you know.  I met all these people, I mean I met all these people, I mean I was so overwhelmed because I had already studied a lot of these people's work in the black studies program at Jackson State and to have had the opportunity as a student to be able to have met these people was mindboggling.  That's still mind boggling for me you know to be--but that's where I got my inspiration and I was, as a student I was just walking around there, not getting autographs, everybody else was getting autographs.  I didn't want no autograph, I was asking people for their addresses and their phone numbers and I had this little green book now with all of these people's addresses and phone numbers that they put in my book.  I mean what could they say you know?  Here's a little kid from the South you know, that probably was like nineteen, twenty years old running around here asking somebody for their addresses.  So once, I can't remember who it was somebody asked me, "My address, what do you want my address for, you mean my autograph?"  I said, "No I mean your address," I said, "I'm interested in keeping in contact with you," and when I got to grad school [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] and found out that the Black Academy was no longer in existence it just tore me apart and then I kinda launched out on a personal venture to see what actually happened to it and that's how I ended up inheriting a lot of the stuff.
Story_ID: 227379
Speaker 1: All right so the Black Academy of Arts and Letters [New York, New York]--so you were inspired by that in '72 [1972] that meeting [The National Conference to Assess the State of Black Arts and Letters in the United States] in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what did you do after the meeting when you got back to Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Well when I went back I went back to Mississippi, of course I graduated from college [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  I started writing even more, I was so inspired 'cause I was gon' be this great producer and director that's gon' be one of the what they call "fellows" of the Black Academy, me and all this other great sea of artists and scholars and I got a--I did a play called the 'Sharecroppers' which still is being done you know with some high schools around the county and I got honorable mention for that, and then I did short stories and poetry that got published in one of my pieces of poem was published in [The] Crisis Magazine you know and I always used my professor's name Margaret Walker's name (laughter) because it always was an entree for me and they said well okay if he's a student of Margaret Walker, he must be--then so people they, they liked what I did 'cause I was--again I stayed in the way but I left there to the South and then when I graduated from Jackson State I came onto to TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas].  I had four fellowships, well I had one fellowship offer that I got.  I was afraid I wasn't gon' get anything, TCU was the first one.  I accept that so then right after I got the fellowship offer about two weeks later the University of California [Santa Barbara] in Santa Barbara [California] which is where Tommie [Tonea Stewart] went to school, I call her my sister and then Margaret Walker with the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and then I had one to Idaho State [University, Pocatello, Idaho], but I had already accepted the one at TCU so I came onto Texas.
Speaker 1: That's Texas Christian University?
Speaker 2: Texas Christian University.
Story_ID: 227380
Speaker 1: --Before we leave Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] though, a couple of things I wanted to ask you about, now I know during the time you were there and you probably know, you may not know anything about this but, but Walter Payton was there I think playing football.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we graduated together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah Walter Payton and I graduated, we were in the same graduating class.  He was a football star then.  He's a Phi Beta Sigma [Fraternity]; I'm a Phi Beta Sigma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we you know we knew each other what people don't know that's fraternity, African American fraternity, but no he was.
Speaker 1: Because he was the greatest running back in NFL [National Football League] history I thought I'd ask about it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah definitely good people, brother, I know his brother very well but Walter was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Eddie Payton right yeah.
Speaker 2: And you asked about great people, that another great Mississippian, and another great Jacksonian, is Walter Payton.
Speaker 1: And also there was a lot of trouble in Jackson State around 1970?
Speaker 2: In 1969, '70 [1970]
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When they had that big shooting I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's when two students were shot and killed by the [U.S.] National Guard.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In Mississippi right?
Speaker 2: Well we had, that was my first, my freshman year there and it was in the spring of '70 [1970], and 'cause at that point Jackson State, Lin--was it [John R.] Lynch Street?  I think it was Lynch, well maybe not Lynch Street, I can't remember the name of the street but the street, a main thoroughfare went directly in the middle of the campus and that's when those National Guard shot right into the building, one of the buildings where I lived.  It was Stewart Hall and?
Speaker 1: Who were they--when, to your recollection who were they trying to, who were they shooting at, I mean was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah the kids it was a race riot.
Speaker 1: --was anyone shooting at them?
Speaker 2: No, no but the kids had rocks and stuff like they were throwing outta the windows at--it was riot anyway and it was a part of what was happening in the rest of the county and I think the kids got killed up in there, they were in Alexander Hall, I can't remember the specifics but I was there at the time and my mother [Elizabeth McGhee King] and my father [Jonah King] they were so ooh distraught like what happened?  And everybody was calling 'cause and people got their kids so we never had a chance to finish.  At that point they didn't even have semesters they had quarters.  So we were in our third quarter which was the final quarter of that whole school year so we never had a chance to even finish that quarter 'cause most--everybody went home, almost near.
Speaker 1: Did you ever, did your parents consider putting you in another school, or were they--how did they feel about that?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't consider 'cause at that point you know you go one place just like someone else, you don't know.  They didn't consider that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My parents were very you know "focused," you know I mean when you're out there and you leave you know what to do to behave yourself.  It was kinda funny because the first year they, they you know we tried to get grants and loans.  We couldn't get any of that so they had to send, they had to actually send me to school.  So my mother took a second job and the third quarter I mean I was almost like flunked out, my mother called me and she says--that's the end of the second semester.  The end of the second quarter, she says I don't know what you're doing but whatever you're doing just know we are not gon' keep paying money wasting money for you to go school 'cause I know you doing something you don't have any business doing 'cause you graduated with honors and she says if you fail the third semester, just know that you gon' be, you're coming home.  Let me tell you that was the third, I'm sorry third quarter.  Shoot, when my grades came in, I had one A, four Bs and a C, and from that point on the rest is history, 'cause I was definitely not going back to Coldwater [Mississippi] (laughter), there's no question about that.  I wasn't going back to Coldwater, so my career just went, everything just moved on up.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 227381
Speaker 1: All right so let's get you to TCU [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] now, so you went to TCU to major in?
Speaker 2: In theater.
Speaker 1: Theater, okay.
Speaker 2: The fellowship was in theater and they had a theater program there that's how I ended up in Texas.
Speaker 1: So did you measure in, major in speech at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: It was speech, it was speech and speech communications is what they called it at Jackson State.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what--how did you find TCU?  Now this is your first integrated school I would guess right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, TCU they only had, there was no blacks in the theater program.  I was the first black that graduated in the theater program from TCU and then there was a one black woman from Nebraska, Omaha, Nebraska that was in the undergraduate program, Sonia Williams [ph.].  She did graduate as a matter of fact and it was just so funny because when I went to TCU these kids had gone to Europe, you know it was a big thing to go to London [England] and be with the, I mean to study at the Koppen [sic. Covent] Garden [London, England] you know or be with [Theatre Royal] Drury Lane [London, England] you know and all that stuff and then would come back, and they'd come back from, I was there in the fall and they'd come back from their summer, but their summer was on summer doing summer stock and then doing you know Europe, all over Europe and stuff like that you know, and me I'm from the South.  All I has was Tommie [Tonea] Stewart and a Margaret Walker and Melina Dowd [ph.] and a Beatrice Moore [ph.], these are all my great professors, and they had all come from Northwestern, they'd come from great schools, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], University of California, NYU [New York University, New York, New York] so I had the best, but the interesting thing about that when I went into those classes I knew what they had given me even though I may not have been, we may not have had all of the great lighting equipment and great sound equipment, but what they gave was enough to sustain me to be able to deal with that program.  At one point I felt you know a little intimidated because I'm in a totally different kind of an educational environment you know, and that's in an environment that's all pretty much, I mean that's non-African American.  I mean nobody, 'cause I was in grad, the other person was in undergrad school so we didn't have any classes together so all my classes were with whites you know students.
Story_ID: 227382
Speaker 1: Oh were there any helpful professors there [Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] or people that really you know tried to--
Speaker 2: Dr. Sorensor, Sorensor, S-O-R-E-N-S-O-R [sic. Dr. George W. Sorensen] something like that, and there was a woman who was in, who was the secretary to the dean of graduate school.  Her name was Ms. Berlinder [ph.] or something like that.  She was very helpful because I wrote my thesis on 'A Raisin in the Sun,' [Lorraine Hansberry] from a black perspective because at that time they were saying that 'A Raisin in the Sun' could have done well had it been done by a non-African American cast because the storyline about it, it just happened to have been a black family.  That mean that the story it was so well written so I took the perspective that it was a black family, about a black life and so forth, and so I had to defect and defend that.  I had actually finished my master's thesis by the time I--by that May, but they said 'naw you ain't coming out this fast.  So that summer those professors left, went on to you know do other things, you know they would do various programs and had fellowships to go and teach and all that.  So I was strung out that whole summer trying to get them to read my master's thesis, they never finished it.  So then December was rolling around, we back in the fall and trying to get them to read my master's thesis.  So I went to Ms. Berlinder and I said, "Berliner," and I said, "you know they have not read my thesis and I might have a problem."  Dr. [George T.] Tade was the dean of the grad school [School of Fine Arts] so she says let set up a meeting with Dr. Tade, and Dr. Tade called Sorensen and says, either you read his degree, let him do his orals or he's gon' his degree in December, and so I had my orals in it was like five hours to defend my master's thesis, but I got my degree.
Speaker 1: Okay so this is like a master's in fine arts?
Speaker 2: Master's in theater.
Speaker 1: Theater, okay.
Speaker 2: M.A. in theater, 1974.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And so that's when I met, not directly, but met the great Lorraine Hansberry and she, that, she was another individual who inspired me and changed my entire life in terms of how saw writing, it's phenomenal.
Speaker 1: Well tell us, I mean you met Lorraine Hansberry?
Speaker 2: No I said I never met her--
Speaker 1: No, you never met her?
Speaker 2: --but just through her writing.
Speaker 1: But through her writing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your thesis was that 'Raisin in the Sun' was a black play about black people well that's what it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah about black plays, about black life whatever, but you know the critics had said it could've been done as well had it been a Sean O'Casey, I can't remember the name of the play you know, course I mean all you gotta do is just say here's a family over in, not in Chicago [Illinois], Cleveland Park you know, but it could've been you know in South Dallas [Texas] you know, it could've been in Mississippi whatever and the family could've had the same--a lot of the issues were "humanistic" kind of issues, but because and my thing was because they were blacks, and the whites didn't want them to be there, that's the thing that made it a story about black life.
Speaker 1: Yeah I don't think there were restrictive housing covenants against white people in the United States.  I mean it's just not something that you couldn't duplicate, I mean it would be hard to--I can't think of another culture where white people would have to face that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So that was--okay so how was it received, I mean did people think it was--what did they think you were right, or did they?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I defended it and supported the information with research and I don't think that they agreed with it I just think that they said okay well this is what it is, you know 'cause these were Ph.D.s, scholars who had been around and that's what the critics had been saying that it could've done so.  What they did was bought into what the critics said.  I still disagreed with them.
Story_ID: 227383
Speaker 1: Okay all right, so what did you do after you graduated [from Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for a year, let me see '74 [1974] I worked for a year or two, well a year, I worked for a year at the Mayor's Council on Youth Opportunity, M-A-Y-O-R-'S Council on Youth Opportunity and that's with the City of Fort Worth [Texas] and I worked with a woman by the name of Bertha Collins and I stayed there you know like I said about a year and then I got a job as the artistic director for the Sojourner Truth Community Theater [Fort Worth, Texas] and I stayed there like a couple of years and then I left there and went to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] and worked at Shaw for a year in the theater program, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, excuse me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I left Shaw University--
Speaker 1: About what year is this now?
Speaker 2: This is in '77 [1977], so from '74 [1974] to '76 [1976] I was in Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know and then in the fall of '76 [1976] and '77 [1977] I was in Carolina and that's when I went back and forth to New York and that's when I found out, no in '76 [1976] is when I found out what happened to the Black Academy [of Arts and Letters, New York, New York] from [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee who had come to TCU [Texas Christian University] to do a show and when I realized that they were there doing a show, I went to them and said oh, how you doing, they said what are you doing here, 'cause I had met them several times with Margaret Walker, they were all good friends.  I said well I'm in grad school here and I talked about how I wanted to be a member of the Black Academy and all that, and so Ruby Dee said you know that's not in existence anymore.  I said oh my God what? She said well we can't talk about it now she says, but you know at some point you know get my information from Margaret and then she said we'll talk about it, of course I never did and--
Speaker 1: What happened to it?
Speaker 2: I think one is that people didn't have the time, you dealt with a lot of great, great, great people.  I think that they were busy writing books, doing films, directing shows and all that, and when Dr. [C. Eric] Lincoln left New York and went to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina], John [O.] Killens was the vice president and then there was just some like a lot of internal turmoil that was going on and I just think the bottom line just people just did not have time to run it, 'cause you're talking about running a major kind of an institution and they had a lot, a lot, a lot of incredible programs.
Story_ID: 227384
Speaker 1: So a guy by the name of Joe Nash--I did a festival in Fort Worth [Texas] in '76 [1976] and he had known about my interest in the Black Academy [of Arts and Letters, New York, New York] so he bought me three boxes of, of stuff from the Black Academy that was housed in the Rockefeller Church [sic. Riverside Church] there on 475 Riverside Avenue in New York [New York], and when I looked at the box it had, there was a letter from Langston Hughes, it had all the minutes from the formation of the Black Academy, and I remember that there's this dialogue going where it's Margaret Walker, [Amiri] Baraka [Le Roi Jones], Cannonball Adderley, Alvin Ailey, Arthur Mitchell, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, John [O.] Killens, C. Eric Lincoln, all these people were there and so I have all this information, so I took the box of books and said oh my God this is unbelievable and Joe had said that they had wanted to--'cause everybody just abandoned the office so when they abandoned the office, the people who owned the building said that they needed to clean the office out, so these janitors went in, cleaned the office out and threw all of that stuff in the New York dump and Joe Nash said a couple of people bought him some books and he said, "Where did you get this from?"  And they said, "Well we cleaned this office out Mr. Nash and so we're just giving you this, this stuff because we know you're into this black stuff you know," and he said, "well where's the rest of it?"  He said, "We've already trashed it, it's in the dump."  He could not believe it, he went down to the dump and that's when he salvaged like the minutes and things and that's when he bought those things to me when I was in Fort Worth but I was outta grad school [at Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas] and the rest of the stuff he called Jean [Blackwell] Hutson who is over the Schomburg collection [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in New York and told her about what was going on and Jean Hutson got some students that were interns I believe, to go down to the Rockefeller Church and that dump and salvaged as much of the history of the Black Academy as they could, and then that's when I said well if you're out here and wanna be this great producer, actor, director, but if you don't have a place to rest the history of the organization, what's the whole point, purpose of even doing the stuff?  And I just kinda launched out on a personal venture and then when I was--found out Dr. Lincoln was actually at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] I would go back and forth to see him and then John Killens came down and then you know all that was going on so.  Then I found out that [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte had given twenty thousand dollars to purchase the Langston Hughes House [New York, New York] and that money was still actually left in the bank so that just kind of like fizzled out.
Story_ID: 227385
Speaker 1: So then I just kinda like launched out on this venture [Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] so then I just said okay, well when I got back to Dallas [Texas], '77 [1977] and I enrolled into this doctoral program at UTD [University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas] and this thing had kept haunting me so then I just did the 501(c)(3), started pulling people together with the idea and I was just so torn apart because of what had happened to it [Academy of Black Arts and Letters, New York, New York] and then I dropped out of the doctoral program after about a year and half, and I just started traveling and then I put a company together, a theater company 'cause they didn't have no money and we started rehearsing.  I had $250.00 that I had in the bank and I put that in to do a show and it was a show called 'Tell Pharaoh' [Loften Mitchell] and then that's when Loften Mitchell's play 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' was on Broadway--that was real hot and I wrote him a letter from that little book that I had gotten all those addresses from in '72 [1972] and asked him if he would be willing to come to Dallas--one, if he'd be willing to give us the rights to do 'Tell Pharaoh' and if so if he'd be willing to come to Dallas to see it 'cause then we could sell tickets, and I pulled the theater, a company of theater actors together and directed 'Tell Pharaoh' and we did it in Dallas at the Bonanza Steakhouse [Dallas, Texas], a guy who was a friend of mine and what he did you know I went to him and just said you know how much would you, what would be the minimum amount you would charge us to--for dinner?  And so what we did is we sold tickets for like $20.00 I believe.  The dinner was something like $8.00, $9.00 something like that you know and we sold the tickets and we did three shows at Bonanza Steakhouse.  So I directed the piece almost like a piece of Readers Theater or whatever, and interesting, the interesting thing about that is there is an actress named Regina Taylor, she's a very, very well know actress or whatever, she tells people now I gave her her first job and she is that, she was in that company, that the first thing.  She was a student at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] at that time.  So I dropped out of the doctoral program after a year and a half, taught you know for like a couple of years at El Centro [College, Dallas, Texas] just part time, but then I just started doing this full time and then I would, I directed a show with John O'Neal with Free Southern Theater, then I'd come back to Dallas so I would leave for like six weeks and come back you know and I was still operating outta my apartment you know on, on Knight Street and what was interesting we were doing a show on 42nd Street, it was called--I had directed John O'Neal in this play, 'Don't Start Me to Talking I'll Tell Everything I Know: Sayings from the Life and Writing of Junebug Jabbo Jones,' [John O'Neal] and so John had told me that the show had been picked up to go to New York for three weeks so he wanted me to come back and you know kinda help him brush it up or whatever 'cause I had directed him in a piece.  So I went to New York and stayed in New York like three weeks and about the second week a friend of mine called and told me that he thought that he had found a building, this is in Dallas and it's--I said oh really, I never just--said okay you know a building?  He said when you coming back, I said probably about you know a week or so.  He said when you come back I wanna show it to you.  So I came back to Dallas and we saw this building over in East Dallas on Peak Street, it's about a 40,000 square foot facility.  It was an older white gentleman that was sitting in the office, almost looked like Colonel Sanders (laughter) you know, the chicken place [KFC, Kentucky Fried Chicken] and he and I had a very good relationship initial meeting and we tried to raise the money then to start trying to get this, trying to get this academy, trying to get a building for this academy, 'cause at this point we're still operating in my apartment, and so the building was $300,000, it was $200,000.  Like I said was 40,000 square feet so I came back from New York, talked to the board and we were trying to pull things together to raise the money.  The building had been closed for like three years, three or four years, had been boarded up and all that, and so I talked to Mr. [Hilliard] Griffin, Mr. Griffin says, "Well I'll work with you on it," so we launched out to do this big fundraiser, that was in 1981 so Esther Rolle, Debbie Allen, Roy Campanella, Roger [E.] Mosley, [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks, Kevin Hooks, Olivia Cole, William Marshall, those are the names, all these--and at that point all these people were super hot then, they all came to Dallas to do this big benefit and we did it right on the stage here at this, at this theater and we did this show called 'A Dramatic Collage of the Black Experience' [ph.] and it was so mind boggling, 'cause again we're trying to raise $250,000 which I didn't think we would raise $250,000.  I thought we would raise at least $100,000, well we didn't raise any money (laughter), but we got so much attention.
Speaker 2: Well what happened (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It just didn't make no money.
Speaker 2: People didn't show up?
Speaker 1: The people didn't show so we started giving tickets away, but we got so much press it was unbelievable and so.
Speaker 2: So did these personalities and actors like actually do something on stage they--were they in it?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah they were part of the performance.
Speaker 2: Part of--okay.
Speaker 1: And they just told me, I structured a way for them to tell me what they wanted to do and then I just collaged it and made a performance out of it.
Story_ID: 227386
Speaker 1: Then after the show was over, we [Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] didn't make any money, I went back to Mr. [Hilliard] Griffin and told him we didn't make any money so I said well I tried.  He said, "Do your really believe that this building belongs to you?"  I said, "Yes I do," he said, "well if you think it belongs to you, and God says it belongs to you, then it belongs to you."  He says, "How much can you pay to come in this space?"  I said, "What do you mean Mr. Griffin?  We don't have any money."  He said, "No, what we need to do is to make an arrangement for you to rent the place on a month-to-month basis so that it shows your donors that you know you have a space, 'cause it makes a difference in trying to raise money to go into a space as opposed to being in a space and raising the money while you're already there."  He said, "So I'm gon' let you--" that was in July, he said, "So I'm gonna let you in the space and then your donors will know that you're already there."  So he says, I said, "Oh, okay."  I had $1600 in my personal account, so he said, "Just pay me a dollar, you know the, for the first month," and so I said okay, so I gave him $1600, $800 a month.  He says, "This is a personal check."  He said, "You don't have any money?"  I said, "Naw."  He says, "Well if you say God say that it belongs to you then it does belong to you."  I said, "Yeah, it's a gamble."  I gave him the $1600, $1600, we move in the building in September and we, the first play we did in that building which is interesting was what 'Purlie Victorious' by [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and we made so much money.  We charged three dollars and five dollars for the tickets.  We made about $5,000 or $6,000 off that play.  I directed the piece and the building had been closed for, the building had been closed like I said for about three or four years, we went in that building, we had--there was a lady named Naomi Bruton had been in Dallas [Texas] for a long time, she was a very well-known actress and I mean we cleaned that building, we took shovels and you know got the old mildewed carpet in there, we got paint donated, we--I mean oh God we just, it was just unbelievable.  We had to cut the grass, it just it was unbelievable and what we were able to do to get that first show done.  Rats were in the building and we put out rat poison, we even had people donating rat poison to us (laughter).  We didn't have no money to even buy rat poison to get the place you know habitable, and then after that you know it was right.  Mr. Griffin, that was in September, we paid for the two months.  About three months after we were in the building there was an organization called, called the Metters Foundation [ph.], went to the post office, they gave us a check for one year to underwrite the cost of our being in that building.  It was $800, so $800 times the--
Speaker 2: Twelve months.
Speaker 1: Twelve months, so that was a big boost, we were in the building, Mr. Griffin was right, then Mr. Griffin died.  I had gone to see him, this was January of '81 [1981], so January of '81 [1981], no January of '82 [1982] we moved in the building in September of '81 [1981].  Somebody tells me Mr. Griffin had passed, he had a massive heart attack.  I could not believe it, because at that point we were negotiating to buy the building, so he was the saving grace--
Story_ID: 227387
Speaker 1: Tell us more about him; now, who was Mr. [Hilliard] Griffin?
Speaker 2: Mr. Griffin was an elderly white gentleman and he had an organization called the Griffin Christian Academy [Dallas, Texas] and at that point we were the Junior Black Academy [of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] and so he was the one that I just kinda met off the street, 'cause one day I went by there after a friend of mine was telling me about the building and went by there.  There were two buildings, one was a 40,000 square feet then there was another little building which was probably like a couple of thousand square feet, right behind that building and that's where Mr. Griffin was officed.  So when he was officed there he was the one that you know I just kinda struck a deal with him and he just, he was almost like a guardian angel for me, but he was an older white gentleman and he died in January and then thirty days after he died, this was in 1982 after he died in February we got a $50,000 grant from the Hoblitzelle, H-O-B-L-I-T-Z-E-L-L-E Foundation [Hoblitzelle Foundation, Dallas, Texas] to pay down on the purchase price of that building, then about--so Mr. Griffin's wife came in the picture.  They were actually getting ready to get a divorce, she came into the picture and she upped the purchase price from $250,000 to $300,000, and Mr. Griffin's son came in the picture 'cause Mr. Griffin's son knew how fond Mr. Griffin was of me and the project we were doing.  So when he came in the picture it was a big, it ended up being a big fight, 'cause we didn't have $300,000, but we had literally taken that building and had done so much work it was unbelievable, so we ended up into a big political fight, because at that point it was another group that they were trying to sell, the wife was trying to sell to somebody else from under us and she could get the $300,000 for it.  So we filed a lawsuit against the company, she and the company which we ended up losing and we ended up basically, the mayor, Starke Taylor was the mayor at the time said that he would help find us another space and Annette [Greenfield] Strauss, she passed away, two black [Dallas City] Council people on the council that Diane Ragsdale and Al Lipscomb and they ended up helping us to find another space.
Story_ID: 227388
Speaker 1: --They had--the [Dallas] City Council, the mayor [Starke Taylor] and all these people had agreed to help us find another space and they had (laughter) they showed us spaces you know that just like okay, no and one time they showed us a funeral home (laughter), I said wait a minute here, we ain't trying to let no spirits visit us when we be performing or whatever, but that was nothing was right. At that point Dallas [Texas] was really hot, so to make a long story short, they ended up, we ended up, they ended up showing us this particular building.  A woman by the name of Vivian Johnson who was on the [Dallas] Park[s and Recreation] Board at the time said call me and said, "I think we found a space."  I said, "Oh really where is it?"  She said, "I'm not gon' tell you where it is."  She says, "Where are you now?"  I said, "I'm at home."  She says, "Why don't you meet me at city hall."  So I said, "Okay."  We met at city hall and we walked across the street from city hall, never thought anything about it you know, this was the building.  So we came and we stood here for a minute and then the assistant, one of the assistant city managers and the mayor, she was not the mayor at the time, she was the mayor pro tem [pro tempore] Annette [Greenfield] Strauss.  When they walked in the building they said, "Well what does [HistoryMaker] Curtis [King]--Curtis what do you think?" I said, "What do you think about what?"  "About this space here?"  I said, "For what?"  Said, "For a possible home for the academy [Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas]."  I said, "Oh yeah well this is fine you know (laughter)."  I didn't want to sound too enthusiastic or too excited because I didn't want them to take it or whatever you know, and so I said, "Yeah, yeah this works okay."  So they said, "Are you sure?"  I said, "This will be perfect."  Now what's interesting about that is that was ten years later and ten years earlier we did the first big public performance here with Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority right here in this same space, and the building, this building had only been used like fifty something times out of a year.  So it wasn't even used that much, so after we.
Speaker 2: What was it designed to be, it was like a?
Speaker 1: It's a convention center.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know where they had nothing but conventions here, but the conventions center was going in the opposite direction.
Speaker 2: So they built a newer and bigger one for, for?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah they kept adding--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on to this, to the complex and so this was a dead corner and so I said okay.  So what they did is that they actually ended up giving us--we had actually--they, we had had another building on Austin Street, but that building sat directly in the pathway of the convention center expansion program.  So when it sat in the pathway of the expansion program, they had to tear that building down.  We had spent a year renovating that building and so that would--that made it, that made us more politically entrenched because at that point you know it was like, we've got to find these people something, because they are just totally persistent on having a space.
Speaker 2: Now was there, I mean was some of this anger management too 'cause they, I would think that the community would be a little upset you know?
Speaker 1: Well the community was very upset because at that point we had been without a home since September of '82 [1982] and at that point we were going to and when we moved into this space here it was in '89 [1989], September of '89 [1989], so '82 [1982], '83 [1983], '84 [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], '89 [1989] it was seven years later.
Speaker 2: Without, without a space?
Speaker 1: We were doing stuff in you know recreation centers, and boys club, girls club, church basements and things like that, but I think that everybody just said this organization is just gonna go away, but again go back to the South, go back to standing on the side of 51 Highway [sic. Highway 51] and watching those, hearing the voice of 'Ain't Gon' Let Nobody Turn Me Around' and hearing those, and seeing those spirit whatever.  Every day for me of fighting that particular battle was what I heard: 'Ain't Gon' Let Nobody Turn Me Around,' I just kept hearing that over, and over and over and over and over and it lasted seven years over and over and over, organizing, writing letters, speaking, talking, not just me, there were a lot of people involved and the more we kept fighting, the more angry the African American community became and so as a result, we ended up coming here, it was a vote.  There were fifteen people on the council and eight people voted for us to be here, seven people voted against us being here, but we came here and all the money that we had spent on the Austin Street project, they ended up giving us all that money back, so they did a 1.2 million dollar renovation for us to be in the building.  So then now we done jumped from a 40,000 square foot facility seven years earlier to a 300,000 square foot facility seven years later and it's like whoa, what we gon' do with this big old ocean up in here?  And then we just, everything just kinda like mushroomed at that point on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah this is--
Story_ID: 227389
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Describe this place [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] for those who are watching, now I've been in here but this is, you have to describe this so people have a sense of what this is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's mind-boggling actually because there are people who come here all the time.  We've had Cicely Tyson, like I said the Debbie Allens, the Phylicia Rashads, everybody you can possibly think of in music, theater, dance; we have an 1800 seat theater, that's unbelievable and we just got another 2 million dollars from the city to re-renovate that, so a new lighting system, new sound system, new drapes, a new fly system, the whole--we have a rehearsal hall, we have lecture halls, we have another small venue that seats 250 people, we have a phenomenal gallery.
Speaker 1: That's upstairs, it's like a cabaret theater?
Speaker 2: It's like a cabaret theater and then we have a beautiful gallery here and we just.
Speaker 1: Gallery, gift shop you have like--
Speaker 2: Gallery, gift shop.
Speaker 1: --and just the hallways are huge and it's a--
Speaker 2: It's 300,000 square feet and it's the only African American institution in the country that housed in a convention center and it's the only arts organization that's housed in a convention center and it's the only African American organization of this kind in the country that's multidiscipline.  You have a lot of great African American museums and things like that, but I'm talking about this is a multidiscipline organization.
Speaker 1: The space you have here for anybody listening to this is comparable to or bigger than the Chicago Cultural Center in Chicago [Illinois] which is used by everybody, not for just the, you know, I mean it's that big.  There's nothing I've seen.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That a black organization has and compares to this.
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: I haven't seen everything, but this is, it's pretty.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's a lot of space.
Speaker 2: And what people--some people who come here will say, like Cicely Tyson says, she said, "Baby this is almost like a mini [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]," you know and everybody knows the Kennedy Center is huge 'cause they got like five performance spaces, but she said it's like a mini Kennedy Center.  So and when people come here, they're like awed because it's in Dallas [Texas] of--in their mind of all places in Dallas.  It's, it's so it's pretty significant.
Story_ID: 227390
Speaker 1: So you had to stop calling it the Junior Black Academy [of Arts and Letters; The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] at some point because you were calling it that at first.  Now why, we didn't talk about that, but why did you call it the Junior Black Academy of Arts (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well because we were gonna be the, the Black Academy [of Arts and Letters, New York, New York] was gonna be the umbrella organization for the Junior Black Academy 'cause it was always talked about that the Black Academy was going to be revived so at a point it was never revived, people started dying that had been really instrumental in helping to put the Black Academy in existence, so Dr. [C. Eric] Lincoln before he died, Margaret Walker before she died and Doris [E.] Saunders who is still living, she was a member of the Black Academy on the board, they all say why are you keep calling, why do you keep calling this Junior Black Academy?  You're doing exactly what the Black Academy had set out to do, so just take Junior off and make it The Black Academy.  That's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how we became The Black Academy.
Speaker 1: So you defined yourself in the beginning as a subset of The Black Academy?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, that really, I think that throws people off and they--maybe there's too much humility I guess in the beginning, I don't know but this is, but now it is The Black Academy--
Speaker 2: It's The Black Academy, yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Arts and Letters in Dallas, Texas right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 227391
Speaker 1: So how do you manage to fill this ocean of space [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] as you just described it as?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not easy, one thing last year, for the last three years we've had over 750,000 people come through the space and this is counting people you know, and that's to do--come to films, to theater productions, concerts, exhibitions, luncheons, dinners, you know like we had a writers breakfast we started this year, those, things like that we have about four thousand people who are paid members of the organization and these are people who pay between $20 and $5,000, so we always got stuff going here, and what we do is we have a regular season of programs that we sit down over a six, seven month period time and literally look at programs that we're gonna book in the space, and then once it's booked you know it just kinda happens like there are like thirteen people on the staff and we have about forty contract people and about two hundred very, very, very active volunteers.  So they're the ones that keep it going, and I have to be honest it's a highly professional organization, you know, very well, I think, well managed.  We have three CPAs [certified public accountants] that work with us to make sure that we keep all of our accounting paperwork in place, we have three lawyers that work with us to make sure that we keep all of our legal stuff in place, and when somebody we say we can't pay, we talk to 'em ask 'em to either (laughter) write it off, or give us more time to be able to take care of it, so it's, it's pretty significant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so for instance now all the, so the theater basically you do programming yourself and then you bring in?
Speaker 2: We do combination of both.
Speaker 1: Acts and productions from the outside, right?
Speaker 2: We do both, we produce stuff in-house and then we present stuff, we bring things from the outside that we present and then we produce things like I say in-house that we you know present to the public, you know like we produce three or four or five theater pieces a year, then we may bring three, four or five in from the outside.  So that's you know pretty much it.
Speaker 1: It seems to be a lively circuit these days I guess going back maybe about, maybe nine or ten years of black plays that have been, that our from city to city.  Like there's one called 'Mama I Wanna Sing' [sic. 'Mama, I Want to Sing!' Vy Higginsen] and there's another one, I mean they're like a lot of 'em are gospel-based and or have some contemporary themes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they star like at least one or two well-known personalities either from singing groups or from television or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they--do those productions come through here as well?
Speaker 2: Oh, most definitely we do at least four of those shows a year because those shows bring in huge audiences and what we find is that once those shows come into our venue, it's a new audience and they just, it just spills over into everything else, like they'll go to the cabaret theater, or they'll go into the gallery, they go buy stuff in the gift shop, they come to writers stuff, I mean just amazing at how it spills over.
Story_ID: 227392
Speaker 1: The thing that's different also I think than other people, a lot of these shows will go to other houses or theaters around the country but it's not an organization in place to actually facilitate.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Those people going through those doors like revolving doors, so when they come through here [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas], through this institution, it's a program, it's become a part of the program, even when these flight plays are no longer here we still have ongoing stuff and people are still coming, you know because it's an institution, so I think we've been very blessed and very fortunate.  In our budget range for the last fifteen years, our budget is from a $1 million and generally it always goes between $1.4 million to $2.1 million and we still don't have any money, and what we're doing now is that there are a number of things that we decided we want to do this year, and my thing is to figure out a way of how to preserve an institution that will not die when you go to the grave, and so one thing we did this year, board members had been talking about a key man life insurance policy where they never put it in place, so I said okay, don't wait for nobody to put your dream in place, put it in place yourself.  So I called an insurance company up and they sent me all the paperwork for a life insurance policy and now we have a $1 million, a $1.5 million life insurance policy on myself, and the lawyers are working on now trying to put a trust and everything together so that upon my death the money will be used in a certain way, like for an example, a portion of money will be used to hire an executive director to pay a minimum of $75,000 over a four year period.  That director must bring a minimum of $75,000 in a year, otherwise if they don't bring it the first year, they out, and then $500,000 is being used for an endowment that you could only draw the interest off of it and then there's $250,000 for the director, the other $250,000 is for programs operation and I think it's $75,000 where we stipulated that be used over a period of time for money to go into the operation, and no, so what we're trying to do now is trying to get people to put the institution in their will so that when they die that a certain amount of money will be stipulated to go to the organization but it will go directly into that endowment of their life insurance policy that we have on myself.  So that's, that's what it is now and people, a lot of people are doing that you know.  When I first started talking about the life insurance policy, people said well are you all right?  Of course I'm all right, you know.  You should've asked me that before I did this (laughter), so yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay so you're fully committed to all this stuff so.
Speaker 1: It's been my whole life thirty years you know, there's nothing else to do, I enjoy it too and it's not difficult, and I think that we shouldn't, a lot of people pass away, maybe in all communities, but I know in the African American community they pass away because they're literally so drained from having to pull and pull and pull a people.  They pull themselves right into an early grave you know and so I don't, I try not to do that, you know if I, if people work here what I try to do is empower people to do what it is that they do.   Let them do what they do and if they not doing what they supposed to be doing, then this is not the place where you need to be.  That's what I think about that.
Story_ID: 227393
Speaker 1: As I look around the gift shop [at The Black Academy of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] is named after Eva Jessye, who was a great black choral arranger.  That a lot of people don't know about, I'm just surprised 'cause I know her from Michigan rather than Texas.  I see the name, a name for her you know.  I was just kinda surprised, a big picture of Beah Richards here, you know now and these are great black artists.  They're not on everybody's, the tip of everybody's tongue you know, but these are people that have made a tremendous contribution, Margaret Walker herself you know.  So, do you try, do you hold like community lectures and seminars to try to you know to reacquaint people with the history of the black arts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely we--like the conversation that we had today with the, a roundtable, the breakfast roundtable, so that artists can be able to get creative inspiration, information to do what they do and to empower them to continue to do what it is that they're doing, so yeah we do that a lot, and then I started what they call a mentorship roundtable where I mentor young people on how to go about to preserve whatever it is that they're doing, you know if they're a singer, dancer, actor or whatever, and then just talk about you know information.  So we started putting that together too and that's working out really well.
Story_ID: 227394
Speaker 1: Now do you have, I know there's a lot of discussion in the late '70s [1970s] early, well in the '70s [1970s] primarily and up until today about what is black art and what isn't black art and that sorta thing, do you have a particular black aesthetic that you talk about?
Speaker 2: Well my definition of black art is black life, whatever black life is, is what black art is.   You know I mean that's what it is black art is black life in every sense of the word.  If there's no black life, there's no black art, if there's no black art, then there's no black life.  I think they both work hand-in-hand, 'cause the artist's, the black artist's responsibility I think is to preserve and document the culture and the history of the African American experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I think it is.
Story_ID: 227395
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in general?
Speaker 2: Well I hope we have, I hope we go out and vote (laughter) you know that's one thing and not just in this election, but I mean they can be local elections; they can be statewide elections or whatever, but just vote you know.  I heard Star Jones saying (laughter) on TV the other day, she said, "If you don't vote, don't bitch" you know.  And you know, hope that people will get involved to make the world a better world.  Some people say the world is changed so.  My father [Jonah King] used to always say, the world hasn't changed, it's the people in the world is where the change occurs, so my hope is to be able to what I do as an artist and as an administrator is to be able to make the world better and different based upon my work you know.  People can come in and enjoy any performance or see exhibition, an exhibition or whatever it is, is that they will leave inspired to wanna do something more positive, either in their personal life or in their professional lives.  That's, that's the challenge, I mean that's what I challenge people to do more than anything else.
Story_ID: 227396
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back at everything that you've done so far, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of anything I would do differently because if I could look ahead to see what I should be doing, the reality is I think I would mess it up.  I believe in God and I think everything has its own--time its own way the way something is supposed to go, and so I can say, well I should not have done it that way you know, well what other way would you have done it had you not known that you--what you know now?  I can't think of anything. I would do, I mean there's always room for improvement, there's always room for growth and all that but again what I know now ten years from the day if I look back up on where I am ten years from then, from now--look back ten years to this day, the same question can be asked again.  I think we learn how to do things in a more wise way.  I always the example, when I first started out doing stuff for the first five or six years, seven years, maybe ten years, if I'm working on a project or whatever, I may have five or six different boxes of stuff, my God accumulating all this paper.  Now, working on a project may have a box or half of a box, so it's a matter of how you cut, you know corners to be able to make certain things work.  Some people say about being youthful, more younger; the reality is that I don't need to have the, I don't need to have the--I need to have strength and energy, but I don't need the same strength and energy now that I needed twenty years ago.  I had the energy, the enthusiasm and all this, I was like a go-getter twenty years ago, but what's the difference then and the difference now?  One is that I have grown wiser and I have more wisdom now.  So I don't need that, and now what young people don't have what I have, they got the energy, they got the enthusiasm, they can do all these things but they don't have the wisdom.  So while they're trying to figure out a way how to cut the corner, I've already cut the corner and standing up waiting for them when they get around it, that's the difference, and that's, those are the kinda things that I learned from the Margaret Walkers and my parents [Elizabeth McGhee King and Jonah King] and things like that you know, the whole, the thing I said earlier: you may not understand it now, but you will understand it better, by and by.
Story_ID: 227397
Speaker 1: When you look at your career up to this point and you know you're still young, you know for this, what would you, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my work, my work is, the legacy is really the work and how I just, I guess how I affect and how I change.  I don't know; that's an interesting question and I'm not sure.  I think the only thing that would be my legacy would probably just being the work that I do.  You know it's what I take from heart and what I implant in the hearts of other people.  Now, the building is the place [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] that, where people come and they galvanize and they create and they have dialogue and they have discussions and all that, but that's not really where the legacy is, the legacy is really in the hearts of people that we effect change because as they live, they'll pass on the information, that's how legacies are preserved.  It's what they pass on to other people from generation to generation to generation to generation.  This building may not even be here fifteen years from now.  What happens if God would send a hurricane or tornado or something and blow it down?  So you can't put too much emphasis on a building, you've got to put emphasis upon the people that are in the building and what they create or what comes out of that that gives it the power you know and the strength that's, that's what I believe.  So my legacy is really based upon what I leave in the hearts of individuals and how they, how I affect what it is that they do and how they change.
Story_ID: 227398
Speaker 1: I think that God has given me a special gift.  Pearl Primus, you know, who was a great dancer, used to tell me that you know I'm a Nat Turner and Beah Richards said one day in her hotel room, she says, "Brother, I have been trying to think of whose work that your work reminds me of, DeMille, Cecil B. DeMille," she says, "one of these days brother the world will know you as a great director because you have a very broad way of how you see things.  You see things very direct [HistoryMaker] Curtis [King], and you know how to go about to put those things together."  So she said, "You just, you just brother you just keep doing that brother, you keep doing what you're doing."  So people like Beah Richards, Esther Rolle, Margaret Walker, [John O.] Killens, Dr. [C. Eric] Lincoln all those great, great people. They're the inspiration and the reason for my continuing to keep doing what it is that I'm doing, and people say you do it with so much ease, is it difficult?  Of course it's difficult, but I've learned how to do my prayers and my meditations to make things a lot you know less cumbersome and you know I don't take a lot of stuff off people you know and when people ask me something I listen to people, I try to learn the art of listening that's what Dr. [Eva] Jessye say.  I try to say thank you to everybody when they--'cause people have options, they don't have to come to The Black Academy [of Arts and Letters; Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Dallas, Texas] to volunteer or to give service.  They have options, but when they do I'm always appreciative for them doing it for me for the institution and so I, I think that one thing I, I sense and feel is you know is not, I don't feel so put upon you know and then when people say, "Oh, the academy ought to be doing this."  If that's not something the academy is supposed to be doing even though it may be important to be done, then I will tell people, "That's a good idea, but why don't you go do it?"  This is what we're doing here, and we have a great time at the theater you know, once a month all the staff people get together and we bring a covered dish and we sit down and eat, and have a good time and dance you know.  There was a patron that came through (laughter) about four months ago and she said, "Oh, I came to get some tickets."  We said the box office was just opening back up, and she said, "So what are you all doing here?"  So we said, "This is our monthly dinner."  She said, "That is so amazing for the boss of an organization to be sitting down having dinner with the staff," she says, "I can hardly stand to even see, let alone speak to the people that I work with, so how do you manage to do that?"  I said, "Well I wouldn't work with; I wouldn't have a relationship with people that I didn't enjoy being with or whatever."  We really do have a good time here with the organization, again we have meetings.  Every year we do what is called a volunteer staff and board retreat where all of 'em come together and they're generally about 95 to 150 people that will come to those retreats every year, it's mandatory, these are people who chair, co-chair as committees and things like that and what they do is get the whole program for the year.  We talk about what we did right, what we did wrong, what we could've done differently.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah you were talking about the volunteers; you were trying to wrap that up.
Speaker 2: Yeah the volunteers so we meet once a year and those 150 people and it's just unbelievable and it's very spiritual, I mean it's incredibly spiritual and then at the very end we have dinner and we all get in this one huge circle, like the last one we had was in August and there were about 115 people that came to that and everybody got in this circle and we reminisced about some of the people who were in the circle last year that are no longer in the circle now, and that was, that's very profound but people love doing it.
Speaker 1: It sounds very African, very, very.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 227399
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, what did your parents [Elizabeth McGhee King and Jonah King] think about you getting involved in the arts and so forth I mean?
Speaker 2: Love it, my parents say whatever it is that we all--they don't, "We don't care what you all do, but whatever you do, you make sure that you do it right and you do it well.  You do it with pride and you do it with dignity."
Story_ID: 227400
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but different: how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person, who came through this journey, made a difference, committed, loyal, dedicated, passionate, concerned, humanist, artist, thinker, scholar, a man who learned from the masters and tried to pass it on to somebody else.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
