Story_ID: 625880
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Kojo Kamau. K-O-J-O, K-A-M-A-U.
Speaker 1: All right, and is there a story behind your name Kojo Kamau?
Speaker 2: Kojo is a West--Kamau is West African Yoruba and Kojo means unconquerable and Kamau means quiet one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And this--my name was chosen from a book. Now Kojo also means one born on Wednesday.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Kamau is Kikuyu right from--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry Kojo means one born on Monday.
Speaker 1: Monday, okay.
Speaker 2: Monday.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was born on Wednesday (laughter).
Speaker 1: And Kamau is quiet warrior right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay. And sir do you mind telling us your, your--now you weren't born with that name were you?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't born with that name. The name that my parents [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins and Robert Jones, Sr.] gave me was Robert Jones [Robert Jones, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story behind the transition from Robert Jones to Kojo Kamau?
Speaker 2: Yes, early, in the early 19--well in 1970 when I became aware of our African history I wanted--and I was just getting involved in photography, documenting what was going on in my community, I wanted people to know that the photographs that they were viewing were created by someone of African American descent.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you concerned that they might be confused and think it was somebody of, of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --African continental descent rather than--
Speaker 2: The, the confusion would be that we just assumed that it was done--was not done by someone of African descent because of a lack of history, a lack of documentation, which we should have been doing, and which, I'm not gonna say that we weren't documented, we were, but it was just that our history was not valued and so it wasn't kept, or if it were it was not accessible to the public.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're concerned that if your work was out in the general public people would just assume a white person did it because--
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) white people did most of (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and I, I wanted, I wanted it to be known that, as I said someone of African descent did it.
Speaker 1: Now was there a group or an organization that was, had anything to do with your name change?
Speaker 2: No, not really. Well, I was involved in several community groups at the time in the 1970s, and it was all about discovering who we were at the time, because I am from Columbus, Ohio, and I was born here and educated here and we did not have black history in our, in the school system, so the place most likely that we got black history was in the church at the time. And so my journey to learn more about our history was, that was what was going on in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio. I was born at University Hospital [Starling Loving University Hospital], October 11th, 1939, and I was born on my mother's birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was a birthday present (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a part time photography teacher at Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio], and I'm retired from Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], medical photographer.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're, you're also a fine arts photographer here in the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm a, I'm a photographer, fine arts photographer.
Speaker 1: And you have your own gallery too don't you? Do you have your own gallery? I thought, I think you do right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a studio now. I have owned a gallery, but I have a studio [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio], yeah.
Speaker 1: All right and what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April 5th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at The King Arts Complex on Mount Vernon Avenue in Columbus, Ohio.
Story_ID: 625881
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? (Laughter) I guess it would be, first thing comes to mind is bread pudding (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color would probably be blue.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: It would be spring.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Always remember what you do today is tomorrow's history.
Story_ID: 625882
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Jones, Sr.] side, but we're gonna ke- keep them separate so we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then I'll, I'll have you tell us about how they met. So let me start with your mother. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Elizabeth, E--Elizabeth Patter- you want her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes, both of them.
Speaker 2: Eli- Elizabeth Patterson [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, P-A-T-T-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 11th, 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: And she was born in Ashland, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them in history?
Speaker 2: Only to my grandmother and her name was Nancy Patterson.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know about her? Was she born in Ashland, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: She was born in North Carolina, but I don't know where.
Speaker 1: And she would had to been born in the 19th century I guess, in 1870s or '80s [1880s], or something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yes, something--somewhere like that.
Speaker 1: In, in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you don't know exactly where in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that, that she passed down to you about what life was like for her or anything that happened in her life that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I was very young and--when she died, and my mom, we didn't talk about history.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea about what caused her to move to Ashland?
Speaker 2: No, I just, I remember hearing them talk about Ashland, Kentucky, and we visited there when I was young. I'd hear them talk about Berkeley, West Virginia, and, but we, like I said we didn't talk much about history, our family history at all.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did, what did your grandmother do for a living do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know. She didn't have a job. She, she stayed with, with our family.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You can continue.
Speaker 1: All right she, my grandmother stayed with my mother, and she, she was not employed.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did you know, do you know what she did you know when she was employable?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right did she, had, had she gone to school or was she--?
Speaker 1: All I know is she was my grandmother (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: Other than that, maybe she might have died like when I was maybe six or seven years old and so.
Speaker 2: Okay so you, you don't know of any specific skill she might have had that you, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: --where she could cook or sew or teach school--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --or any of that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 625883
Speaker 1: So what did your mother [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] say about growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mom was a, my mom was a housewife--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was what she did. She, she took care of my brother [Charles Jones] and I.
Speaker 1: Okay, did mom talk about what it was like growing up in Ashland, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about what church she went to or school or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So when you went down, did you all go to the church that she went to or anything like that or?
Speaker 2: She, they didn't talk much about, anything about history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe that's why I've become so interested in--even though they were all gone by then. At the time, in, in the '70s [1970s] I was more interested in my African history than I was about talking about what went on in Ashland, Kentucky or whatever.
Speaker 1: Now that's, I think, I believe you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I know a lot of people who, who felt that way at the time and feel that way now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But when you think about it, do you wish you had of paid more attention?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I guess I never really thought that I needed to know that information. I was too busy with so many other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as a youth it was, it wasn't something that we talked about at all in, in the household.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know if your mother had a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, she didn't. I know my father [Robert Jones, Sr.] did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she didn't.
Speaker 1: And did your mother have any special talents or anything that she, you know, say she was good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a good cook (laughter), yes. That was the special talent. She was a good cook, and I think she was a very good mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as far as how she, she raised us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I know our mother cared about us, so.
Story_ID: 625884
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Robert Jones [Robert Jones, Sr.], R-O-B-E-R-T, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1914.
Speaker 1: And where, where was he born?
Speaker 2: Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: My mother [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] and father divorced when I was nine years old, and all I know about my father's side of the family is my grandfather.
Speaker 1: So are saying then your father was not around really to--
Speaker 2: Right, my father was not around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you see him at all when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We, we would see maybe once or twice a year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he live in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: He lived in Columbus, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you saw his, his father a lot?
Speaker 2: His father's name?
Speaker 1: No, you were saying that the grandfather you saw more than you did your father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was he, I mean why, why was that true, I mean?
Speaker 2: Why our grand- why did we see our grandfather more often? We went to the same church, and my grandfather was interested in us and so, when there were things that your father would normally come to, my grandfather came (crying).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather would come to things that my father should have been coming to.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Handy Jones.
Speaker 1: All right, so okay, so did he live close by?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he usually--yeah he lived close by.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We usually, we always lived on the same side of town, which was the East Side [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: So, so he kind of took--did--would you say that he kind of took of the place of your father in some ways, you know especially at events but--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't spend a lot of time with him. We just, he was around when like I said when, when there was something going on maybe at school or whatever he would come.
Story_ID: 625885
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I just know when my parents met my father [Robert Jones, Sr.] was a chauffeur.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your mother [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] doing for a living now?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: What did your mother do for a living at that time? What was she doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know what she was doing when, when they, when they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But he was a chauffeur and okay--so, so how long were they together do you know?
Speaker 2: About twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably about twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay. So okay, so what, what kind of things did your [paternal] grandfather [Handy Jones] do? Was, was he working when--?
Speaker 2: He worked on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was he a Pullman porter or?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know exactly what he did, but he did something on the trains. He wasn't a por- or anything like that, but he, he--all I know is he worked on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my, my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do think he was a brakeman or--
Speaker 2: He could have been a brakeman, something like that. It had something to do with the trains. My father also worked on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your father eventually worked for the railroad too?
Speaker 2: Well, I know what my father did on the railroad. He, he worked in the icehouse, and he, they put ice on the railroad cars.
Story_ID: 625886
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his name is Charles R- Richard Jones [Charles Jones].
Speaker 1: Now is he older than you or?
Speaker 2: No, he's younger than I am. He's two years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just two of you in--you and your brother in the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I have a half brother and a stepbrother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so when you were growing up the family would consist of--
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, my family consisted of my mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] and my brother, Charles and I. Then my mom got married again, so I had a stepfather [James Perkins].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so when did your mother get married again in, in relationship to your age, I mean how old were you when your mother got married again?
Speaker 2: I was about fourteen, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you were pretty much a, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --know teenager by that time.
Speaker 2: Right, I was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, their looks even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Who do I take after? My mom and my stepfather (laughter). My mom because she, she raised my brother and I, and my stepfather because he was a good dad.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was, he was a custodian--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my mom was a housewife, but somehow my mom managed to, to save up enough money for a down payment to get a house, a rooming--so she bought a house and we, we had a rooming house and that was some income for her. Of course whenever anyone would move out of the mo- the rooming house, we would have to go clean up (laughter) and, but she was a housewife and again like I said she had a rooming house.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what time, I mean how old were you when your mother bought the rooming house?
Speaker 2: We were still teenagers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so it was about the time she got married, around that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple of years after she got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're about sixteen I guess when--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was sixteen, sev- yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so okay, so, so, so you would have been a junior then, right?
Speaker 2: I was what?
Speaker 1: You were, you were named as a junior I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, junior.
Speaker 1: Robert Jones, Jr. [HistoryMaker Kojo Kamau]. Yeah, all right. So, I take it because of the estrangement from your father [Robert Jones, Sr.] it wasn't hard to change your name and that--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In fact it was it any motivation at all for changing your name?
Speaker 2: Was there any motivation?
Speaker 1: Yeah because you didn't want to be a junior. Was that, was that, I mean did you feel you didn't want to be a junior is that, or was that the reason (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I just, as I said earlier I just--Robert Jones, Jr., doesn't--at the time I didn't know who Robert Jones, Jr., was. I mean I tried to research it. I think Robert was French, and I wasn't French (laughter), so I changed my name.
Story_ID: 625887
Speaker 1: Can you describe then the neighborhood you grew up in? Now you grew up on the East Side of Columbus [Ohio] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was, did your neighborhood have a specific name or?
Speaker 2: No, just Near East Side [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, and I grew up in, actually I grew up in three different neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But two of them are on the East Side and one was on the South Side of Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the first neighborhood you were in?
Speaker 2: I lived on Toronto Street. I was 1140 Toronto Street, and until I was maybe about nine years old and then we moved--now To- Toronto Street is, well it's located over by Mount Vernon plaza [Mount Vernon, Columbus, Ohio], the Mount Vernon plaza area now.
Speaker 1: Okay. Then when you were nine--
Speaker 2: And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you moved? Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we moved to 550 Grove Street, and that area is now part of Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio], part of their campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we moved to 479 South Monroe [Avenue], and that is close to where Children's Hospital [Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio] is located now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, all of the neighborhoods where I grew up are no longer. They've all been torn down and something else is there now.
Story_ID: 625888
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the ne- the Near East Side [Columbus, Ohio], was like--we had everything we needed in our community as far as you know all kinds of stores, shoe stores, furniture stores, grocery stores, hat stores, dry cleaners. We, we, we really never had to leave the community to, to survive, so. We had movie theaters, nightclubs where all the musicians would come, and we would go downtown to the big department stores mainly like during the holidays. And it was just a lot of, lot of stuff going on all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now how, how old were you when your memory starts?
Speaker 2: How old was I when what?
Speaker 1: Your memory started?
Speaker 2: My memory?
Speaker 1: Yes, I mean when you, you go all the way back the first stuff that you remember how old were you, you think?
Speaker 2: Oh about six, five or six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, yes I went to Beatty Park kindergarten [Beatty Park Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, now I didn't want to get you off the other question though, so let's go back to sights and sounds and smells, you know, of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, you had res- restaurants. My family didn't go to restaurants too often. The only time we would go eat in a restaurant is when we're on the road going somewhere, I guess because mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] did all the cooking and when my grandma [Kamau's maternal grandmother, Nancy Patterson] was alive she did cooking also, so we did everything at home I mean as far as eating. And the sights and sounds was just--it was like people were just moving all the time. I, I mean everybody was on the street going somewhere.
Speaker 1: And what was the main drag in--
Speaker 2: The, the main drag was Mount Vernon Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Long Street. Long Street I think had more of the nightclubs and activities, but Mount Vernon Avenue had the, as I said, dry cleaners, grocery stores, markets, and places.
Story_ID: 625889
Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: What did I like to do?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I guess I have to go back to I liked to shoot pictures--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a kid, and as a kid we grew up in the Y, YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], on Spring Street [Spring Street YMCA, Columbus, Ohio] and also the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. So, I was a Boy Scout and between the Boy Scouts and the YMCA, I guess I was able to keep out of trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] always knew where we were because we were either at the Y, it was like--our job was to go to the Y and swim and play basketball and pool and all the activities they had going on at the Y.
Story_ID: 625890
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you would spend a lot of time at the YMCA [Spring Street YMCA, Columbus, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --growing up and how old were you when you first started going to the Y?
Speaker 2: About nine years old. Because when we moved to Grove Street is when I started going to the Y. When we moved to Grove Street I was about nine years old, ten, and we started going to the Y and got involved in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].
Speaker 1: Okay, so is that where you were introduced to photography the Boys Scouts or?
Speaker 2: The Boy Scouts yeah. My scout master [Thomas Yates (ph.)] always had a camera, and he was always shooting pictures and we--mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] always had a camera around the house and I was always shooting pictures, but most of the time, of course, the pictures never came out. Back then you only got film developed a couple of times a year, 'cause film stayed in the camera six months and--
Speaker 1: What kind of camera did your mother have? Was it a--
Speaker 2: I don't know where she got the cameras from, but we'd always have little Kodak, the, the, you know the inexpensive cameras.
Speaker 1: Was it the Brownie, the box (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Brownies, yeah the box cameras.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then maybe because she knew I was interested in photography she would bring home some ot- you know another kind of camera that had a little bit more controls on it and--
Speaker 1: So, so did your scout master show you how to shoot?
Speaker 2: Not, not really. I just, I guess I just, I saw him shooting and I wanted to do what he was doing, so I'd, I'd shoot pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your family, did you get like Life magazine in those days or Look?
Speaker 2: Well no, but what happened was, well even before--I, I took my first photography class in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. But before I got to high school, I was in junior high school [Franklin Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] and in study hall they had magazines, and National Geographic was one magazine I always remember. I looked forward to looking through the magazines. National Geographic and Popular Science, and Popular Mechanics were the magazines that, you know I enjoyed looking through and especially the National Geographic. So, when I go to high school--well I thought maybe someday I may be able to travel around and shoot pictures, and I guess that's how I got involved in, in the travel thing and wanting to go to Africa and see for myself and, and bring back photographs and show the community and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you draw pictures when you were growing up? Were you an artist?
Speaker 2: Did I draw?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When I was high school I took all kinds of art classes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but did you just like to draw that's what--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean at home would you draw as recreational (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at home I draw, I drew all kinds of things. You know just sit on the porch and draw a picture, pa- a drawing of the house across the street and I even made a comic book one time. I remember (laughter) putting together a comic book of Superman, so yes I did.
Story_ID: 625891
Speaker 1: Now you started school at Beatty Park [Beatty Park Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio], right kindergarten (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was, yeah that was kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then--you want, do you want the names of the schools (laughter) that I went to?
Speaker 1: Not in a row, but the first--so did you go to elementary school at Beatty Park too, or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the, the elementary school that I went to was right around the corner, which was Mount Vernon Avenue elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is this where you started first grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First grade.
Speaker 1: All right and were there any teachers, special teachers or in, at--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any special teachers.
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah I liked school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't--I was quiet. I've always been quiet, but I did like school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was this, is this where [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey was in school with you?
Speaker 2: Was?
Speaker 1: Was Bernie Casey in school with you at this point?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay well, okay so Mount Vernon elementary, weren't any special teachers or anything. Is there anything special about Mount Vernon Avenue School [Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, there was nothing special. Well, the only thing I remember about Mount Vernon Avenue School is at the time we saved sales tax.
Speaker 1: Oh, the sales stamps, yeah I got you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, something like that. And, and we would take--
Speaker 1: Tax stamps they call them, tax stamps.
Speaker 2: Tax stamps and we would take those to school. I, I guess you turned those in and you got money or credit or something. I don't re- getting any money, but somebody probably got something. I just remember collecting, taking those stamps to school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the school could turn in the tax stamps and get some kind of credit from, or some, some benefit from state government or something.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember those tax stamps (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I hadn't thought about those in years.
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't either 'til (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And they were different colors. Yeah, they were different colors too, right--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --they were green and orange and different, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for, for different amounts that paid.
Speaker 1: They'd ask you to ask your parents to bring them to give them to take to school--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --then the school would turn them in and they would get some kind of benefit.
Speaker 2: That's what I remember about that school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the benefit they got would make it a better school some way, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right. Now, we, we moved and then I went to Garfield Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, now how old were you when you moved?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah you said you were nine yeah, nine years old, fourth grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you went to Garfield Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did it, did it bother you to move or were you excited about it or do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember how I felt about moving. I, I guess--well we moved because my parents separated, so I had to have some kind of feeling about the separation in all, you know, that affected us so.
Speaker 1: When your dad [Robert Jones, Sr.] was at home was he active as a father when he was at home?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't really home that much. He, no he wasn't home that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, all right so just you, you and your mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] and your brother [Charles Jones] most of the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my, my mom's sister, my aunts, and uncles things like that. That's, we, I guess we had a close knit family as far as my mom's side of the family where her sisters and my aunts and all kind of looked out for each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have cousins that came around too in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, well yeah I had a couple cousins, but mostly it was, it was my aunts and uncles.
Story_ID: 625892
Speaker 1: Garfield Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio] now this is, now these are both black schools right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Pretty much all black pupils (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right all black teachers.
Speaker 1: Teachers too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know sometimes you have like an all-black school, but you got all white teachers you know in the school.
Speaker 2: No, these were all black teachers.
Speaker 1: But they were all black teachers, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember any white teachers 'til I got to high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], well junior high, junior high.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting. That's different from Dayton [Ohio] and some of the other cities where we've talked in Ohio, you know, during that period of time. Okay, so well how did you like Garfield?
Speaker 2: That, that was fun. Garfield was, was fun.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in Garfield?
Speaker 2: It wasn't English I know that (laughter), and then the reason I'm saying that is because I, I remember Garfield as being the school where I always had trouble spelling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used to hate spelling, the spelling tests that we took because I always got too many incorrect questions. And, and I think it was because, well I have a hearing problem now, and I think I've always had a hearing problem and so when the teacher would say sound it out, you know it's like if I don't hear it correctly I can't sound it out. So, I've always had a problem with, with spelling.
Speaker 1: Okay now is, is Garfield where you met [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he's an actor and an artist too. Well, he wasn't an actor then I suppose (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, we were just, we'd just hang out in the schoolyard and he was one of my favorite friends at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay was he an artist in those days?
Speaker 2: No, no, no not, not at Garfield, at least I didn't know if he was or not. I just know we had fun playing in the, in the playground.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he became like a professional athlete, big guy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Did, now were you known as an artist in school?
Speaker 2: No, no I was, I was just an average student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had no, no special skills at that time--
Speaker 1: So, you hadn't--
Speaker 2: --that was I was aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were still shooting photos every now and then with your mother's [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] camera?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I was shooting photographs, and it was just something I just did, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was something I thought everybody did, you know, because they had cameras. I, I didn't think it was anything special about shooting pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have, you never thought about it as a career or anything?
Speaker 2: No, not when I first started.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't until I was in high school that I thought about it as a career.
Story_ID: 625893
Speaker 1: So when you were a kid like what were the, who were your heroes? Did you have any heroes?
Speaker 2: As far as photographers or?
Speaker 1: No, just period.
Speaker 2: Just period, period--as a kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there anybody you looked up to either on TV (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it would had to been my scout master [Thomas Yates (ph.)].
Speaker 1: --or movies or, or--? Scout, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It would have to be my scout master. I looked up to him and, and my stepdad [James Perkins].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well he doesn't come along until about, you're about for--
Speaker 2: I was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Teenager yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But as a small kid was there anyone?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, let's see, yeah I was a teenager when mom [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] got married.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So growing up did you have any heroes you know in particular?
Speaker 2: Again, I always go back to my scout master (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now did you--what, what about in the movies or on the radio or anything like that.
Speaker 2: My (laughter), I guess one of my heroes would have to be Roy Rogers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And (laughter), and that's because of I remember what is the Empress, the Lincoln Theatre on Long Street [Columbus, Ohio]--across from the Lincoln Theatre was the Empress Theater [Columbus, Ohio], and the Empress Theater on Saturdays used to have Roy Rogers movies and I was a member of the Roy Rogers club (laughter). On Saturdays you go, they played Roy Rogers movies and then you watched, you pay for so many movies, then you get go in free. So, I still have my little Roy Rogers card (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So I guess I that had to be one of my heroes.
Speaker 1: Now those are the days when you were growing up when cowboys were the big, you know, popular culture heroes to most kids.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Hopalong Cassidy and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Gene Autry and Red Ryder, all those guys.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so your--
Speaker 2: The Lone Ranger.
Speaker 1: Lone Ranger.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: But you know the interesting thing about the Lone Ranger you know when they, television came about and 'The Lone Ranger' show was on TV they had, if you really looked at some of those episodes, they, they had a lot of social meaning, meaning to them between the Lone Ranger and, and the Native American Indians. And I just remember some of those shows and, it was more than just entertainment.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they actually had a code I read one time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that they abided by. The Lone Ranger would never shoot anybody. You know he'd shoot the gun out of their hand, but he'd never shoot them, you know. And there were rules that they had for him. But, you know that, that's true they did try to, strove to have a higher level show, a message.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Any other, so you went to the movies on Saturdays for the serials and you remember when you got your first TV?
Speaker 2: Yes, we, of course the first TV was a black and white television and my, my mom borrowed it from someone because it was there for a while and then it left or, or maybe she pawned it or something (laughter); I don't know now, but to think about it. I know we did have a TV though, but and we were, we lived on Grove Street when we got the first TV.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that of much interest to you when you got it?
Speaker 2: Well, not really because we really didn't look at it that much because back then the TV wasn't on all the time, and, and it, it wasn't like we watched TV, just turn the TV on and it's blasting all day long because people, you know back then we, we thought about the electricity bills and so forth (laughter), so you didn't leave anything on all the time, at least that's how, that's how it was in our household.
Speaker 1: Yeah it seemed like the pattern for kids was as you say go- going to the movie on Saturdays, spend all day in the movies and then come back home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Right.
Speaker 1: So, that was the TV time actually and so.
Speaker 2: That was, yes.
Story_ID: 625894
Speaker 1: Were you at Garfield [Garfield Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] when your--let's see, you were at Garfield until, until what grade?
Speaker 2: Oh, I graduated from Garfield.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah so you were like thirteen when you left there in the eighth grade I guess, right? Or did you have middle school?
Speaker 2: No, I went to mid- let's see I went to middle school, at that time we called it junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Franklin Junior High School [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay. Is that in the same neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: Is that in the same neighborhood as Garfield?
Speaker 2: No, this was a different side of town.
Speaker 1: Okay, this--
Speaker 2: Oh, the interest- Franklin--yeah the interesting thing about that was I lived in the same neighborhood, but we were bused to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now was Franklin an all-black school too?
Speaker 2: That was Franklin Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Junior high school yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I went to that school one year and then we moved again. And at Franklin is where I was introduced to National Geographic. Well, I, I, not introduced. That's where I seen the National Geographic because I used to go to the library when I lived on Grove Street.
Speaker 1: Now did you, when you looked at National Geographic did you notice the photographic information in National Geographic?
Speaker 2: Did I notice the photographs?
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah that's why I would look at the magazine 'cause all these photographs of exotic places. They didn't look like anything that I'd seen before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean the photographic information.
Speaker 2: The information?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I mean I looked at where they were taken and everything, but how they were taken and all that. I don't even think they, they gave the information on how they were taken.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause they, they did, they, they would tell you if it's shoot with Ko- Kodachrome, Ektachrome and what kind of camera.
Speaker 2: Oh well yeah, okay that--
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah but as far as the F-stop and shutter speed and all that I don't think they told you that, but they did tell you--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what they were shot with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what kind of camera and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then they as I remember a lot of camera adds in, in National Geographic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You can see what the latest brand was or model, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, did you check those out then the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I did. Yeah, all that was of interest to me at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you're about twelve here, so you, now did you, you, you moved again and then what was your next junior high school?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Junior High School [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from Roosevelt in 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay now at any of these junior high schools at Roosevelt or at Franklin were there any special teachers that took an interest in you or did anybody encourage you, you know to do something with your life?
Speaker 2: There was always one teacher that I remember, but I don't remember her name. And the reason I remember her is because she was the only teacher that at the beginning of the class a student had to say a prayer and each, each day a different student would say a prayer and the Pledge of Allegiance. That was something different than most of--the other teachers didn't do that. But, she was a civic, civics teacher, is that what you call it civic, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know they, they outlawed prayer in school at some point, but I guess that's before they did that I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.
Speaker 2: I guess it was something that, some, you know it wasn't against the law to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't required either.
Speaker 1: So, did you like having prayer in school?
Speaker 2: Did I what?
Speaker 1: Did you like that part of school, I mean having prayer in school?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any problem with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Except when it come to my turn (laughter). No, that's not true.
Story_ID: 625895
Speaker 1: After Roosevelt [Roosevelt Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] you go to high school. You went to--
Speaker 2: East High School [Columbus, Ohio], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) East, East High School okay.
Speaker 2: That's the only school I went to where I only went to one school (laughter) during that grade level.
Speaker 1: All right and, well what was East--now East High School was a all-black school too right?
Speaker 2: It was mostly black at the time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but before I graduated--no it wasn't mostly black at the time that I went there. It was, it was a mixed school. It was about half and half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It may have even been more non blacks than there were black kids at the school, but then they built, while we were in school they built Eastmoor, Eastmoor High School [Eastmoor Academy, Columbus, Ohio] and then a lot of the non blacks transferred to, to Eastmoor and, so then it became more of a black school.
Speaker 1: Okay, this would be, this would be like 1954 when you started?
Speaker 2: Fifty--yeah I started in fifty- I graduated in '57 [1957], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so it was in high school you got interested in photography--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean as a profession and, and as a skill (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So tell us about that. You took a photography class?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in high school when I became a senior--well in high school I liked art, so I took all kind of art classes, and--well I took all the art classes. But, I also took, which at the time didn't too many boys take typing, I took typing and I went the business route. I took business law, business English and all that kind of stuff because I thought maybe someday I was gonna have my own business, which I didn't know exactly what kind of business, but I felt like I wanted to have my own business, which probably would be photography, 'cause I took photography. Of all the different medias in, in, in art, I liked photography because it was, it was clean and neat and everything. When you do charcoal, you know you get dirty and clay you get dirty, and I like to be neat so (laughter) I took, I got into photography and I really liked it.
Speaker 1: What kind of cameras were you shooting with in class?
Speaker 2: I just had, it was an Argus. I don't remember what number. Well, it was an Argus, I know it was 120 [120 film] and it had limited controls, 'cause I only had three F-stops, 8, 11, and 16 (laughter), and one shutter speed, well two time and bulb and 60 at double second.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have, was there any particular subject matter you liked better than another?
Speaker 2: No, because at school even though I took photography I didn't, I didn't shoot a lot. I, I didn't work on any projects, you know, that required photographers that--to go shoot students and things like this, cause I was quiet and I just did my own thing. So, I was not, I belonged to the Hi Y and we played basketball, and I belonged to the glee club, we sang (laughter), but I wasn't part of like the yearbook staff or anything like that.
Speaker 1: So you didn't, you didn't shoot any pictures for the yearbook?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you're still flying under the radar as a photographer I guess. You're kind of flying under the radar as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --photographer, you're just learning how to shoot.
Speaker 2: I was just learning how to shoot right.
Speaker 1: So, did they teach you darkroom technique in that school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right we got into the darkroom a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it whetted my appe- appetite, so after, after high school then that's when I decided to go to Columbus, Columbus Art School [Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio].
Story_ID: 625896
Speaker 1: Now just back to high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] for a minute--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --did, were there any special teachers in high school, anybody that you related to then?
Speaker 2: There was a lady, Mrs. Cupito [ph.]. Yeah, I think that's her name, Mrs. Cupito. She was ra- radio/English teacher, and I really liked radio/English.
Speaker 1: Now what is radio/English?
Speaker 2: Well, it just taught you how, it taught you how to produce a radio program at the time, and she was someone who encouraged me to, to get involved in radio. And so I remembered a project that I did, which was the bombing of Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], and I did the sound effects and all that stuff you know like it was happening and I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to like reenact it as if it was a news story or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a news story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And because of that, at the time WCBE Radio [Columbus, Ohio], which was the school radio or the ci- you know throughout the city had an announcer of the day and she chose me to be the announcer of the day at one of the--one day at the radio station I was announcer for the day.
Story_ID: 625897
Speaker 1: So when you were the announcer of the day [at WCBE Radio, Columbus, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --did your, your family members get excited and tune in that day or could they--?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know you must have told your mother [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] and your [maternal] grandmother [Nancy Patterson].
Speaker 2: Well, yeah I told them and yes they, they, they did listen in, and then, and then also being a member of the, of the glee club during summer break I got--this is another story, I got a letter in the mail saying that I had been selected to be a member of the All-City Chorus during the teachers' back to school meeting I guess which was down at the Vets Memorial [Veterans Memorial Auditorium, Columbus, Ohio]. So, yeah those are two highlights of my high school career that I remember. And so I was a part of that choir singing at the teachers' meeting.
Speaker 1: So are you a baritone? Are you a baritone then or what?
Speaker 2: No, it's pro- well yeah, yes I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you speak softly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was trying to sound like a tenor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well you speak softly, but I think when your voice is exerted it's deeper--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --deeper so yeah. That's--
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't a great singer, I was just--liked being part of the group I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a skill being able to blend in with a group, 'cause not everybody can do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: Well, maybe some of them wish I hadn't been there (laughter), but the teacher let me stay, so that's all that mattered.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you were selected for some reason, so it's--so anything else about how--now did you, were you social in high school? Did you go to the prom and all that sort of thing and?
Speaker 2: Did I do what?
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom in high school? Were you a social person in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I, I had lots of friends. I didn't have any problems with friends and things like that. I just wasn't someone who joined everything or tried to be involved in everything. I, I was always kind of quiet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I know when we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey he talked about going to the prom. Was he at East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] with you?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Bernie Casey.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We were, we were in the same class.
Speaker 1: I know he talked about Roland Kirk [Rahsaan Roland Kirk] playing for the prom.
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so were you, I guess you weren't there.
Speaker 2: I wasn't there, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I didn't even, I didn't even go to my prom. I went to another school prom.
Speaker 1: Okay, which one did you go to?
Speaker 2: South High School [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah now, now was the, yeah 'cause if you have like a school with 50 percent black and 50 percent white sometimes those kinds of situations are not you know, the prom may end up being one where the one group or another doesn't feel comfortable and so I don't know if that was the case at East, but.
Speaker 2: At East it may have been that way when we first, when I first started, but then like I said they built Eastmoor [Eastmoor High School; Eastmoor Academy, Columbus, Ohio] and then people transferred.
Speaker 1: The white people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they went to Eastmoor and then, okay.
Speaker 2: Eastmoor yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they couldn't call it Eastless right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well M-O-O-R, not, no E on the end (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Okay so now did you have any, when you graduated now were you, did you make the honor roll or anything or?
Speaker 2: Oh, no (laughter). I was doing good to graduate. No, no that's not true. No, wh- when I graduated I, I remember that the summer before I went to, the summer, I was graduating in June of '57 [1957] and so in June of fifty--it had to be summer, June of '56 [1956], yeah I went to summer school and, and took English and math in summer school and I passed. So, when it was time for me to graduate I didn't, I'd already taken the subjects and I didn't need to take English and math when I was in--back then we had 12A and 12B, 12B and 12A--I didn't need to take English or math. So when I was a senior I didn't, I had already finished those, but at that time you still had to go to school. You know they didn't let you out early like they do today and that, that was why I took so many art classes and things because I'd already done all that, the required subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, and I did that because just in case I failed something I'd have another chance (laughter) to take it again and graduate on time. So, but I passed everything the way I should have, so when I became 12A as I said I didn't--I took more art classes than I did the others.
Story_ID: 625898
Speaker 1: Now did you work in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Did I work?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have any--okay, so those are days--did you ever work as a kid?
Speaker 2: Did I ever work as a kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah, carry papers or anything like that or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just--not, not for any long periods of time, but I did, I--just to carry papers, or I used to sell papers. I remember selling the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. I used to sell that, and I used to sell the local newspaper, the local black newspaper I would sell.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that?
Speaker 2: It was probably the Ohio State News. And then shortly after graduating from high school I got involved in shooting pictures for the black newspaper--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was the Columbus--Columbus, Ohio State News.
Speaker 1: Was it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Call and Post.
Speaker 1: The Call and Post.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Call and Post.
Story_ID: 625899
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation [from East High School, Columbus, Ohio], did you see yourself, what did you see yourself doing? Going to college or starting a business and getting a job or what?
Speaker 2: No, I saw myself as getting a job, and when I was in school, I guess my position in the class was so that the, the counselors didn't--I don't ever remember talking to a counselor. So, I guess I wasn't college material, at least I didn't think I was anyhow. So I, of course, I went looking for a job and then that's when I found out, I mean I discovered that the kind of job I wanted, I didn't really know exactly what I wanted. I didn't even know how you, how you got a job, of course, but I didn't know it worked the way it did and so I remember going downtown and checking out different places. I always remember this one conversation I had with this lady that I asked if they had any job openings and she said, "We don't need any custodians." And I thought, who said I wanted to be a custodian (laughter)? And it didn't take long to figure out that you need a skill, so I thought what is it I like to do. I like to take pictures, so that's when I decided to go to photography school [Columbus Art School; Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio].
Story_ID: 625900
Speaker 1: Let me go back and ask you a little about your stepfather 'cause I think I, I missed all that--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause said he was a big influence and so about the time you started high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], your mother [Elizabeth Patterson Perkins] remarried and she married--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a man who was a pretty good father you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Well, he was a, I guess you'd call a no nonsense person. He was, he was older than my mom, and he was just, you know he took, he took my mom and us in and, and, and tre- treated us you know like we were, like we were a family. And being older, he was wise and he had advice for us and those are the things I remember the, the advice that he gave us to, to, to keep you out of trouble and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but it's interesting I interviewed somebody else this week that was telling me that they hated their stepfather just because he was his stepfather (laughter). You didn't have that kind of relationship.
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't, I never called him father. I always called him by his name, Mr. Perkins [James Perkins], and I could never get to call him father, but I, I respected him like he was my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said now he was a custodian by profession (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, he was a custodian.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did he work downtown or some place or did he--?
Speaker 2: He actually worked on West 5th Avenue, and I always remember wh- when I say I respected him I remember a couple of things about him and one was he was in World War II [WWII] and he put in for disability, he was in the [U.S.] Army, and the Army didn't want to give him disability status and he wrote enough letters that he got the status, so he was a fighter. And I also remember when he got older they, they wanted to fire him be, before his retirement age and he fought that and he won. So, I remember him being, you know, someone who fought for what he believed in.
Story_ID: 625901
Speaker 1: Now also when you were in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] the Civil Rights Movement was cranking up and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Civil Rights Mov- we, we saw it on TV you know 'cause it wasn't much happening here in Columbus [Ohio] at this time. It wasn't until later and--but in 1960 I did, before I went into the [U.S.] Air Force, there was some marches downtown, which I went--I photographed. So, those are my first--1959, 1959, was my first shooting of demonstrations and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the statehouse [Ohio Statehouse, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, okay so now let's catch up to photography school [Columbus Art School; Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio]. So you, you were looking for jobs and you were discovering you're not getting the kind of offers you were, you thought were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said I had no idea--somehow I thought they had job openings and then you would get the job and train you on the job or whatever, and, but of course it doesn't work like that unless you did get a lower paying job and--'cause my first job right, right after high school my Boy Scout master again, right after high school I got my first job washing laboratory equipment. I, I, worked in the laboratory equipment washroom, and I worked there before I went to school and then that's when I decided I was gonna go to photography school. The people in the lab they wanted me to go to lab school to learn laboratory technician, laboratory techniques and so forth, but that's wasn't what I was interested in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I quit that job and, and, and got me another job and then I went to art, art school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and just for the record you graduated from high school in--what year what was, what was it?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay and we, we have '59 [1959] here, so I'm changing it right now, '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: I, I had '59 [1959]?
Speaker 1: Well somebody has it on this outline, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm drawing a line through it.
Speaker 2: No, '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], okay. And so all right and so you, you spent like--how, how many years were you out before you went to photography school?
Speaker 2: How many what?
Speaker 1: I mean well you went to photography school in '59 [1959] correct?
Speaker 2: In '59 [1959]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I went to photography school in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: So then in the interim you were working in the lab?
Speaker 2: I was working in the lab and then that's when I decided I, I wasn't gonna do that all my life, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. What kind of laboratory was it?
Speaker 2: It was, I'm sorry it was a labora- I worked in the lab at Children's Hospital [Columbus Children's Hospital; Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was, I didn't ask you, what was your scout master's name? He did, he did so many things we should at least have--
Speaker 2: His name was Tom Yates. I guess it's Thomas Yates [ph.], Y-A-T-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right Thomas Yates. Okay and is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he, he died a young age. He died right after I came back from the [U.S.] military, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because when I came, when I, well I'll tell you that when I get to it (laughter).
Story_ID: 625902
Speaker 1: All right so at age twenty I guess, in 1959 you enrolled in, at the Columbus Art School [Columbus, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which is now the--what's it now? It's changed names.
Speaker 2: Columbus College of Art and Design.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so what was that like. Tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: That experience?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh that was fun. It was like I was learning something. I was going to school at night, and I had a job working at a store downtown, I was a stock clerk and salesperson at a men's clothing store called Moguls, M-O-G-U-L-S, menswear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so a lot of the photographs I shot during that time were taken downtown because I worked downtown and I, I didn't have an automobile so I walked everywhere or caught the bus, most of the time I walked. So, I have a lot of photographs now that I have taken downtown in 1959 and 1960s because that's where I was, that's where I was most of the time and that's what was going on.
Speaker 1: And what were you shooting with?
Speaker 2: Then I was shooting, the kind of camera?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yashica, Japanese camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was like--back then in the '50s [1950s] the Japanese were producing cheaper versions of the higher priced cameras, which were the German cameras like the Rolleiflex, so the Yashica was like a copy of the Rolleiflex, which if you were a student you couldn't afford the--so you got that later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Yashica now what was it a 35 or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I'm sorry, it was a 2 1/4 [2 1/4 film].
Speaker 1: Two and a quarter, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a 2 1/4 camera, and then after--
Speaker 1: It's a camera you looked down in the box.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah twin lens.
Speaker 1: Twin lens.
Speaker 2: Twin lens yeah. That was the first camera and then, then a bought a 35mm Agfa, A-F-G-A [sic.], and that was a German camera.
Speaker 1: Okay, now these are both range finders, right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's a range finder.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that I shot basically 35mm, well slides, slides. I shot slides with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry the, the Yashica is through the lens and the, the--
Speaker 2: Yashica is a twin lens and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and the, and the Agfa is a thir- is a range finder.
Speaker 2: As a reflex.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a range finger, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And at that time also, now that I think about it, I did a slide show, 'cause 35mm is sort of like what PowerPoint is today, you know everybody can do PowerPoint today. Well, if you were into photography back then you did 35mm slideshows and so I did a history--in the phone books there was a history of Columbus [Ohio] and I used that as a script to shoot photographs about Columbus, and I did that in 1960. And so now those, those photographs that I shot in 1960s are my most popular photographs that people are interested in and I've got a book called 'Columbus Remembered' [Kojo Kamau].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I meant, well Columbus has changed quite a bit since 1960 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and in my book, I showed the picture that I shot in 1960 and then I showed from the same perspective in 2006 and that book has been very successful.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say some of those pictures are on display at The King Arts Complex [Columbus, Ohio] now.
Speaker 1: All right so I can look around and see them (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, this implies now that by virtue of the fact that you can do this, it means that you actually preserved your work, you valued your work.
Speaker 2: I valued my work because I felt that what, what I was doing was documenting what was going on, and growing up in Columbus with what I thought was a lack of our history it's like well we, we have to start somewhere and so I started where I could, which was 1960. And I, I tell all the young photographers to respect their work and maintain it and have a filing system so you can find it.
Speaker 1: That's good advice yeah. So, so this is work that you did as a student that is now valuable as a professional.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Story_ID: 625903
Speaker 1: Were you aware then of, of I guess the best known photographer that was emerging in those days was [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So were you aware (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was I aware of Gordon Parks then? No. I was aware of the local photographers, and, and I felt like, George Pierce was the, the, the one that was, had his own photography studio. And I felt like if he could make a living at having a photography studio, then maybe I could too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what type of work did George Pierce do in his--
Speaker 2: He did family portraits and, and you know. He was just a commercial photographer. Well, I couldn't say just a commercial. He was a commercial photographer, and I was a commercial photographer for a short time, but that wasn't my interest. My interest was documenting what was going on in the community, so, when someone would come to town I was there, and that was what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, just before it gets away from us, who were some of the others, other black photographers here? You said George.
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and Roosevelt Carter became a videographer for WBNS Television [WBNS-TV, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: That's the, that's a CBS outlet right?
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Channel 10 right?
Speaker 2: Channel 10 right. And then there was another photographer and his name was Mert Woods [ph.].
Speaker 1: Mert Woods.
Speaker 2: And, and he was, he was in education. He was a hi- I know he was a high school teacher, but he also had a photography shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as a youngster he, he was the person I would take my film to, to get developed before I learned how to do it myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would actually develop it for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and ironically he, his shop was located in this building [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio]. At the time, there was a storefront out front and when this building was renovated they took that storefront away and it's now the men's restroom (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a long memory about this neighborhood (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) this is, this is it.
Speaker 1: Now did--now, how do you, see 'cause what you're telling me now is what a lot of people our age I guess can do when you go out in the community you see things, you see what's there, but you also see what used to be there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you know what--you got another sight around the neighborhood. And in those days were you aware of, you know, keenly aware of changes that's going on?
Speaker 2: Oh no, oh I was not, no I, I thought that--and I tell young people this: be prepared for change because at the time I thought that it would be the way it is forever because if a store has been around for a hundred years, you know, why would it leave twenty years from now and so, but things change. So, you have to be prepared to make change also or get left behind. So, and I've always tried to change with technology so.
Story_ID: 625904
Speaker 1: Now di- did you get a chance to finish your coursework at, in, at Columbus Art?
Speaker 2: Oh no I, I joined the [U.S.] Air Force--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, to finish my education (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so.
Speaker 2: That's another whole story.
Speaker 1: Yeah and explain the philosophy behind join- joining to finish your education, I mean the--?
Speaker 2: I thought, I went to Columbus Art School [Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio] for a year, and I thought I had enough to--experience that I could be a photographer in the Air Force, I was interested in the Air Force, and so at the time the recruiter was, they were saying that you join the Air Force and get the job of your choice. So, I was guar- I was told I was guaranteed to be a photographer in the Air Force, so I joined the Air Force. And then once I got in the Air Force, they told me they didn't need any photographers and that I could be a truck driver, a cook, or a supply person. I did not join this Air Force to be that. I was told I could be a photographer, so they said, "Well, we don't need any photographers right now." I said well why--at the same time they were sending some of the airmen to school, photography school, and I said, "Well, how, how can they be going to photography school, I'm already--I already know photography, why can't I be a photographer?" "Well, we won't need the photographer until they get out of school." So, anyhow I convinced them that I knew photography. So, I took a test and I passed it and I told them that I had been a newspaper person back home, 'cause I had my little--I wor- I did work on the newspaper [Call and Post], I wasn't paid, but I worked on the newspaper and I had press, press credentials and I told them that and they, and to make a long story short I, they put me in the office of information, so--which meant I was working on the base newspaper [at Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, South Carolina].
Story_ID: 625905
Speaker 1: Yeah you were just saying off camera where you were stationed. Where, which one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was stationed at Myrtle Beach Air Force Base [South Carolina], three years and ten months and most of that time I was editor of the base newspaper. So, I was responsible for a weekly newspaper and I also shot photographs for the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Now that sounds like a great way to spend your time in the summers.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was. I had, that was a good experience. I, I learned a whole lot from that.
Speaker 1: So you, you actually had a chance to be places where a lot of airmen wouldn't get a chance to go.
Speaker 2: Right and, and I also. There was a story I'd like to tell you about the newspaper. There were thirteen, thirteen bases in Tactical Air Command, and our newspaper when I took it over was number nine out of thirteen. And to ensure that they had quality control, headquarters, which was up in Langley Air Force Base in Virginia critiqued each newspaper to make sure you know they were up to a certain standard, and our newspaper was number nine. And in about six months our newspaper was number one and so I made it, I improved it and made it number one. And Langley was so impressed with that, that they flew me up to Langley, flew me up there for me to explain how I did what I did (laughter). And, well what I did was studied the top three newspapers and made my newspapers around those three and then I became number one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay and so, that sounds a good way, way to do it, look at what the competition is doing then--
Speaker 2: Oh, I can tell those stories now (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did you have a philosophy about how you, I mean what did you learn from those three papers about presentation and, and, and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And how to lay it out and stuff. No, I was on the job a year before they sent me to school. See I got the, the improvements before I went to school, 'cause I went to Army--at that time it was called the Army Information School [Defense Information School, Maryland] because all the different branches of the service went to the one school, and we were taught how to lay out newspaper. We were taught to write for television, how to right speeches, and government.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so how long was Army Information School, what was, how long was it?
Speaker 2: That was, that was eight weeks.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you, but you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I survived it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but as you were saying you got to be number one without going to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So then--
Speaker 1: Do you think maybe because they didn't have a chance to tell you what to do that you were able to do better or, I don't know?
Speaker 2: That seems to--I, I've been to several different schools, and I haven't really finished any of them, but I seemed to have survived without finishing so I, I think I go to school and I, I learn enough that, to, to, to, to get my foot in the door and then I continued to learn, so.
Story_ID: 625906
Speaker 1: So did, so were you stationed there the whole time in Myrtle Beach [Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah the whole time I was stationed at Myrtle Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's like a couple of years right and?
Speaker 2: It was three years and ten months.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: The base was fine. It was after you left the base that's a whole different experience back in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is South Carolina--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, okay well tell us, well did you have any incidents when you left the base that you--?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, well yeah I--at the time I didn't know. The, the newspaper, I worked with a civilian printing company okay, and my last day on the job, the last day that I went to, to the printing company, the publisher called me into his office and, and told me how I handled myself very well when his crew walked out on, on me. And I didn't, I did, at the time I didn't understand what had happened, but what he had told me is that, when I first came on the job, which would have been three years and ten months earlier, his crew did not want to work with me, but I wasn't aware of that. I knew what happened was when I walked in, everybody walked out, but I thought maybe I walked in during lunchtime or something (laughter), and I was naive and then, then they came back. So, what had happened was, they, they didn't want to work with me, and well I guess he told them was that, "We have a contract with the [U.S.] Air Force, and if we want this contract we had to work with whoever they send," and they had never worked with anybody that looked like me before. And so, but I wasn't aware of that and I, I off- at the time I was thinking well what if I had known that from the beginning. What I was told that, I was only supposed to deal with one person. I didn't have any problem with that. I didn't come to deal with the whole crew. So, when they said that, that was nothing unusual to me because that's how being in the [U.S.] military, that's how you think anyhow you got one person that you, you know, report to, not everybody. So, that was, that was shocking to me. The last day that I was there I found that out.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that they thought they were insulting you and you didn't know they (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I was, they must have thought I was nuts or something, 'cause I was treating everybody you know like we're all friends (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. It just never occurred to you that they would act like that in South Carolina, they would--?
Speaker 2: No. I mean I knew that happened. I mean, it's like the first time--I always remember this one. The first time I went downtown and, and you know about this moving over to let white people pass and stuff and I had my uniform on and, and this older white gentleman was walking towards me and, and I'm thinking am I supposed to get out the, I'm not getting off the sidewalk. So, I just kept on walking, you know, and he spoke to me (laughter). So, it was kind of okay (laughter), how you doing, and so being in the military you were treated a little differently than you know civilian townspeople were treated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A little differently.
Speaker 1: Yeah. They would expect anybody that was raised there to follow all those rules and those--
Speaker 2: Yeah. But there were some, at the same time there were some airmen who, they, they would, they got in trouble getting off the bus. You know 'cause they refused to adapt to whatever was going on, and they would get, they would really get kicked out the service before you even got to the base, which wasn't fair, but you know that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 625907
Speaker 1: So you were in the service during the beginning of the sit-in movement and all of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and we couldn't participate in that because you know we were in the [U.S.] military. But, things weren't all that great. Well, things were good on base [Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, South Carolina], but there were some, there, there were some, some improvements that could have been made on base too, which were made, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were most of your officers from the South?
Speaker 2: Most, most, most of my superior officers were from the South, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but life on the base wasn't that segregated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, life on the base wasn't all that bad except for we, we did not have a gym on the base at the time, and so, so everybody, the whites and the blacks could not practice together because we didn't have a gym. And so our team never played together until we'd go to the tournaments until you know where you could go someplace where everybody could play together. And so you know we were always losing, and that was one of the things that we fought for on the base was to get a gym, which, which we did. And so before, before I left everyone could play together.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: Which is a little thing, but at the same time it's a big thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so if you had to practice in town, the, the whites had to go to a segregated gym and the blacks had to go to a black gym?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, the blacks went to the black high school to practice and the whites went to the white high school to practice, and then when you go to the tournament y'all play together (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played a lot of basketball in the service?
Speaker 2: I didn't play a lot of basketball.
Speaker 1: Oh, but some.
Speaker 2: I just, I played a little basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have time. I, I had a newspaper to put out.
Story_ID: 625908
Speaker 1: When was your service done in the--
Speaker 2: When what?
Speaker 1: When was your service over?
Speaker 2: October 31st, 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you come back to Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I came back to Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so what did you do when you got back did you enroll in school?
Speaker 2: When I came back?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, when I came back I contacted my Boy Scout leader [Thomas Yates (ph.)] (laughter), and I told him about my experience in the, in the, in the Army [sic. U.S. Air Force] and he, and he told me he says, "Yes, I know a little bit about that." And I said, "How do you know about that?" And then he said because the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] contacted him, 'cause I needed a clearance.
Speaker 1: Security clearance.
Speaker 2: Security clearance yeah 'cause I worked in the Office of Information, so I needed security clearance because in that office we had one person that wrote the, the history of what was going on and that was a quarterly thing that she did. She wrote the history of the base [Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, South Carolina] and submitted it to higher ups, you know. So, everybody had to have security clearance. And anyhow he told me about a job--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], which I, and I applied and I got the job as a medical photographer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you kept this job a long time right? You retired from that job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a medical photographer for thirteen years, and for most of that time I was the chief medical photographer and then I quit that job and I opened up my own photography studio [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio] in 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay, so while you were shooting--so what would you, what did your job consist of at Ohio State? Now you would like shoot--
Speaker 2: In surgery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, most of the time, at that time I was shooting in surgery, and shooting surgical procedures. It was, you know, a teaching university, so we did videos of the surgical procedures and we had artists who did drawings. Mostly back then there was pen and ink drawings of the surgical techniques, and for presentations and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did that, was that easy to do when you first started to shoot surgical procedures? I know some people get a little squeamish around blood and--
Speaker 2: Oh, no I didn't have any problem with that. Well, I didn't have any problem with that because I was used to being around blood and stuff because, I don't think I mentioned, my Boy Scout master was, he worked in the morgue at Children's Hospital [Columbus Children's Hospital; Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio], so my locker was in the morgue at Children's Hospital when I worked there. So, oftentimes I would see a body on the table or he was working on a body on the table doing autopsies and so forth. So, that was--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that didn't bother you v- that much and so okay, so what were you shooting the slides or, or black or whites or what?
Speaker 2: Mostly, well if, if we were in surgery we were shooting mostly slides, and we shot, you know, like the public relations. What, whatever the College of Medicine [The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio] needed, our department provided as far as visual aids. We had artists who did charts and graphs and all that stuff. We had artists who did illustrations and we, and we had the 16mm movies that we did of surgical procedures.
Story_ID: 625909
Speaker 1: Now you said that at a certain point in the early '60s [1960s] you would, you would shoot like demonstrations and, and some of the civil rights activities too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right I, well I would be, I was doing all that, you know at the same time I was working at the, at the hospital and I don't think--I may have mentioned right after high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] that I was shooting pictures for the, the black newspaper.
Speaker 1: The Call and Post.
Speaker 2: The Call and Post, okay, and, and I was, at the same time--and I was reporting on youth activities in high school, what was going on in the high school. I was the photographer, but at the same time there were two, two reporters, you know in high school and one of them is, you might be familiar with the name, Barbara Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds]. She's in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area now.
Speaker 1: Right, she's the one that wrote the biography of Jesse Jackson ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, well she, she was a student, a writer too at the Call and Post and Charles Taylor [Charles E. Taylor], Dr. Charles Taylor he was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], and he was a student writer. So, there were those two student writers and myself I was the photographer and we reported on what was going on in youth activities. That was right after high school.
Story_ID: 625910
Speaker 1: When you were working for the hospital [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio], you know, as a medical photographer were you, were you shooting on your own, the stuff that you wanted to shoot on the side too or were you waiting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now I mentioned that I, I, I was there seven, thirteen years and, and I left there in 1978 and opened up Kojo Photo Art Studio [Columbus, Ohio]. But during that time, that timespan is when I met Mary Ann [Mary Ann Williams], my wife to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us about that now how did you meet?
Speaker 2: We had a mutual friend who was from Nigeria, and he was telling everybody that no one was there to see him graduate. So, he had more people there (laughter) because, and he was from Nigeria, then somebody who graduated from Columbus [Ohio] (laughter). And so Mary Ann was there and I was shooting pictures and I was--we were standing waiting for them to march back out and I wanted to make sure I was in the right place, so I asked Mary Ann, "Is this, they're gonna be marching out this way?" And she said, "Yes," and then we just start talking and she asked me was I going to his party, (unclear) party. And I said, "Oh yeah, I'm gonna be there." Well, of course, I didn't even know anything about the party. So, anyhow I went to the party and we hooked up and we start talking and I had my camera with me, but I didn't shoot any pictures and of course when we first start talking I told her I, I had just stopped by the party, I had another engagement and she said she had another engagement too, but neither one of us left you know we just stayed there all night talking and one thing led to another.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's how these things work yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that's how we, that's how we, that's how we met.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and so, so how long was it before you all got married?
Speaker 2: A year. We got married the next year.
Speaker 1: This is like 19--what?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And she had the television show ['Afromation'] and the radio show ['The Black Studies Broadcast Journal'].
Speaker 1: Was she already doing the shows when you met her?
Speaker 2: Was she what?
Speaker 1: Was she already doing those shows when you met her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I had seen her on television--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she needed help (laughter).
Story_ID: 625911
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that in 1970 you photographed the Columbus Symphony Orchestra right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's something that kind of resonates--
Speaker 2: In 1970, was when I really started photographing, documenting what's going on in my community and seriously shooting pictures other than just for, to make money okay. So, in 1970 I heard, not heard, I read that this bl- a black conductor was coming to conduct a symphony and so during the summer at Franklin Park [Columbus, Ohio] they had concerts and the, the Columbus Symphony was gonna be playing at Franklin Park, and that was where most of us hung out at Franklin Park, African Americans that is, and that they were gonna have a black conductor. So, I went to the park and I got some photographs of the black conductor conducting the orchestra. And it just so happens that they also had a black cellist playing, so I had two of them (laughter). I took pictures, and I sent the pictures to the Columbus Symphony and I told them how much they cost and that I was available to shoot photographs, that was like in June during the summer, and that September they called me and asked me if I could shoot a photograph of the orchestra on stage without--during a performance without creating a disturbance, and I said, "Oh yes, I can do that" (laughter). So, to make a long story short I shot it and they were satisfied and I became the official photographer for the next ten years until they changed administration and you know got all new people, which was okay with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I shoot people like Leontyne Price and everybody who came to the symphony I, I photographed them.
Speaker 1: Who was that black conductor that you shot initially? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't re- I, I wanna say his name is DePreist [James DePreist], but I can get that to you later because I do have it, I did an exhibition of that with the info and all, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so whenever the Columbus Symphony would perform you would shoot some photos or?
Speaker 2: All over town, yes. That was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I've been, I'm a music lover too, mostly jazz, but I appreciate all kinds of music.
Story_ID: 625912
Speaker 1: Speaking of jazz did you, did you have occasion to shoot Roland Kirk [Rahsaan Roland Kirk]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's a Columbus [Ohio] native (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I shot Ro- Roland Kirk in 1959, and he was playing in this, in this location at the Pythian Theater [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was--what were people saying about Roland Kirk in those days, I mean?
Speaker 2: I, I, you know I was a jazz person, well I wasn't always a jazz person. I didn't even know who Roland Kirk was. Most of the people here didn't know who he (laughter) was because he was known out, outside of Columbus, even outside the country. I mean, you know, he was big, big deal in Europe 'cause now I have CDs [compact disc] of him playing all around the world, you know and, and we, we didn't even realize what he was or who he was. Maybe I was too young to appreciate it you know at the time.
Speaker 1: You were just out of high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] in '69 [1969] so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but when Roland--so you were two years out, I guess you were nineteen, I guess when you--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --you were nineteen or twenty when you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Twenty, I think I was twenty yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and so, and Roland Kirk he's older than you I think by--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah and, or he would have been older than you, I mean then. He's passed away now, but, so what did you think about, I mean I'm just, I'm just saying you know anybody that sees somebody playing two or three saxophones gotta be you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wherever he goes people see that, so did you, what did you think of that?
Speaker 2: Well I thought, you know I'd never seen anyone play three saxes before. Now when, when I shot him there was, there was another thing going on and it was like, what's his name, Dr. Bop [Hoyt Locke], Dr. Bop was on the radio, and Dr. Bop was the emcee. So, it wasn't just Roland Kirk, it was Dr. Bop and Roland Kirk, or Roland Kirk and Dr. Bop. Dr. Bop would, he would always have on, looked a doctor's uniform with, you know the little instrument around his neck and, but he was the emcee for the, for the performance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know sometime he even played with three instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's one--do you have any--so, so you shot his, you shot him back when you were--in '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he come back to Columbus very often?
Speaker 2: He didn't come back to perform. No, he would come back every now and then, but, 'cause you know that's where his family was, but he, he wasn't a performer like, like some people who come back you know often and perform.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was just wondered if there are any stories about him that, that you heard or, or if you knew any of his family members. He's such an unusual figure in music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah. He, he was different.
Story_ID: 625913
Speaker 1: Okay so let's get back to, now you just got married in '75 [1975] and, and your wife has--
Speaker 2: The television shows ['Afromation'].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so and I would go on the set and shoot photographs for publicity purposes, and so that's how I got a lot of the, you know, famous people who would come to town, people like Alex Haley. We went out to dinner with him before the TV show. Muhammad Ali, all of them. Muhammad Ali was an interesting interview because at, at the inter- at the end of the interview he complimented Mary Ann [Mary Ann Williams] about the interview, and he said this is one, it was one of the best interviews that he'd ever done because she didn't ask him one thing about boxing (laughter), and she just asked him you know all about growing up and his family and everything, and he thought that was refreshing that you didn't ask me one thing about boxing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you like Ali?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was fun.
Speaker 1: So, who else came on the show? You said Ali, you said Alex Haley.
Speaker 2: Shirley Chisholm.
Speaker 1: Is that when she was running for president? Is that when she was running for president, Shirley Chisholm?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yeah that, yep. She came, oh gee, Ralph Abernathy, I remember him, all the guys from Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter), [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 1: Joseph Lowry [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery].
Speaker 2: Ma- Maya Ange- [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, yeah.
Story_ID: 625914
Speaker 1: Tell us about Elijah Pierce.
Speaker 2: Okay, can, but can I take, are we gonna go back to 1970?
Speaker 1: We can.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think we lo- left off at I opened Kojo Photo Art Studio [Kojo Photo Art Studio, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: That's '78 [1978] right.
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight, '78 [1978], yeah '78 [1978]. Okay and then when I opened Kojo Photo Arts Studio I had quit the university [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], so that gave me time to do some things I wanted to do. And one of the things I wanted to do was go to Africa, and Mary Ann [Kamau's wife, Mary Ann Williams] and I had talked about what we would like to do in the future. My thing was to open up my studio, and her thing was to get her Ph.D. So, she got her Ph.D. and I opened up the studio in June of 1978. We heard about an opportunity to go to Africa shortly after we opened, and so we both wrote proposals to go to Africa, and we both were funded to go to Africa. So, I went to Africa for three weeks. It was a three week study tour. I shot photographs, and I come back and I presented my photographs of the trip to Africa. And because of our experience going to Africa, we felt that any artist who wanted to go to Africa should be able to go to Africa. So, we had a friend, Aminah, and we told Aminah about this trip to Africa and how she needed to go to Africa and that what we wanted to do was raise funds to help her get to Africa because we know it would have an impact on her art, on her artwork. So, we raised enough money to send Aminah to Africa. From that experience, we started a nonprofit organization called Art for Community Expression, which was, the mission was to assist artists, African American artists to get the work into mainstream basically and to go to Africa. And so we sent, we were able to send three artists to Africa, Aminah, Larry Winston Collins, and Charles Dillard all went to Africa and then the following year they exhibited at Art for Community Expression Gallery [Columbus, Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is Aminah Robinson we're talking about right?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Aminah Robinson we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, Aminah.
Speaker 1: And so where did the money come from for the--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Where did the money come from for the trips?
Speaker 2: The money come from the commu- one, the Thomas Foundation [ph.] had funds to help send an artist to Africa, and so we used their funds and we raised money and the artist raised money. So, it was like one third of each of those entities would raise funds to help the artist go to Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good--now is the organ- so you were able to send three artists to Africa, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. We sent three artists to Africa and then our focus kind of changed a little bit, because we had an opportunity to open up a gallery in the Short North [Short North Arts District, Columbus, Ohio], which was a new area for--that was developing up there. So, we were one of the first galleries to open in the building in which we were located, which was 772 North High Street in the Short North and now that's the place to be the first weekend, the first Saturday of every month they have what they call Gallery Hop, and the streets are just full of people every first Saturday.
Story_ID: 625915
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back a little bit and just ask you where did you go in Africa?
Speaker 2: Oh, when, when we went to Africa, we went to Senegal, West Africa; Ivory Coast, West Africa; Ghana, West Africa; Ethiopia; Tanzania and Egypt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's were Aminah [Aminah Robinson] went. That's where, yeah that's where we went.
Speaker 1: Okay now did this period of time coincide with when you changed your name?
Speaker 2: No, no this was like eight years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, I had planned to go to Africa a couple of times before that, when the trips were cancelled because they had, a cruise or something was going on. And my first trip star- the first opportunities to go were in--in the early 1970s were to go to Nigeria, but I've been to Africa several times now and haven't been to Nigeria yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, now 'cause you, I know you said in the beginning, you met, you met your wife [Mary Ann Williams] at a, at the graduation of a Nigerian from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Ni- Ohio State had an exchange program at that time with Nigeria, so there were a lot of Nigerian students going, going to Ohio State.
Speaker 1: Just in that regard, I know in those days you would be more likely to meet somebody from the continent of Africa in college--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --then you would on the street just normally, but, but I know nowadays there are a lot of Somalis here--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Columbus, Ohio in particular.
Speaker 2: Right and Columbus has a large Somali population, and, and many of them are going to Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about you know how to make better relationships between African Americans and Africans from the continent or?
Speaker 2: The, just have to do what some of us do which is to try to understand the differences or just try to understand the lifestyles and the religion, the culture of the people and be open minded about who you're talking to.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and I've heard it's a lot of tension between Somalis and African Americans in Columbus and--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think there is any, any tension here as a matter of fact. One, one of my best photographer friends for instance from, from there and his name is Abdi [Abdi Roble] and he's a great photographer and he's been documenting what goes on in his community and he's been back home several times and documented what's going on.
Speaker 1: Okay and it seems to be often a paranoia from African Americans around Africans from the continent, so it's not necessarily--so.
Speaker 2: Well because of the university here, I think you know we're kind of used to seeing people from the continent here so.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think that--
Speaker 2: And we're all brothers and sisters. It's just the way it is.
Speaker 1: You think art helps to bridge the gap or, or, or, or create better links with people?
Speaker 2: To what now?
Speaker 1: Do you think that art is a great vehicle--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --a great vehicle for that--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in making good relationships?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. All around the world art, art is, connects people. We can go all the way back to Egypt, the art on the cave, on the walls and things you know.
Story_ID: 625916
Speaker 1: Oh, I was gonna ask you about Elijah Pierce and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elijah Pierce, I met Mr. Pierce in 1974, and I was mentoring a student, photography student at the time for The OSU [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and he asked me if I would go with him to shoot some photographs of Elijah Pierce, so I said yeah okay. And I hadn't met Mr. Pierce yet, and I really hadn't photographed him either. So, I told him, yeah I'd go with him and I'd shoot a few pictures too. So, I went with him and we met Mr. Pierce and I photographed him and of course we became good friends. And then I photographed him for the next ten years. I met him in '74 [1974], and he died in '84 [1984] at the age of ninety-two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I never saw him as a person that was eighty-two years old. He's, he was getting around fine and all you know, and I always said when, when I grow up I wanna be like Mr. Pierce.
Speaker 1: Now what was Mr.--what did he do for those who don't know?
Speaker 2: Mr. Pierce was a woodcarver, and he was a folk artist. He was considered a folk artist because he was untrained. He, he didn't have a formal education in, in, in his carvings in, in art. He, he was a barber by trade, and between haircuts he would just whittle things, and he'd been doing that ever since he was a youngster. And so when--his, he was participating in an exhibition in, in an art show at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] when someone saw his work and befriended him and persuaded him to send some of his work to this folk art competition in Yugoslavia and so he sent the art work and he won first place, so that gave him international fame right away you know and, but you would never know that he was a famous artist, that people collected his artwork and so forth, but, that was Mr. Pierce. He was a minister also. He was a Gay Street Taber- Gay Street Baptist Church [Gay Tabernacle Baptist Church; Tabernacle Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio]; he was a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was he from originally do you know?
Speaker 2: He was from, originally he was from Baldwyn--Baldwyn, Mississippi, and he came to Columbus [Ohio] I believe in the early 1920s.
Story_ID: 625917
Speaker 1: You all had the studio [Kojo Photo Art Studio] for how long in, on the Short North side [Short North Arts District, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: We were up there to, for sixteen years, and just part of the, you know the art community, what was going on at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you know why did you close down you know or why did you leave?
Speaker 2: It, it, it was, it was getting more and more difficult to, to, to function, and all of our energy was just going towards paying, trying to pay you know the bills.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And, and opportunity--when we first started the organization, we did not have as many opportunities to exhibit our work as we do today. So, it's not that we're not still needed, but the need is not as great.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't--what I'm talking about galleries opening up and, and exhibiting work created by African Americans in Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay and quite a few, we named some of them today, but who are some of the other artists in Columbus, 'cause this place is starting to really become a boom town of artists.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we've lost a lot of artists also. We've lost quite a few artists and, since we've been--since I've been involved in this for the past thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so some of the people we talked about Aminah Robinson and who else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the, the artists to, today would be Aminah Robinson. I think we mentioned Ruth Macklin, Pepper Johnson. I'm naming all these female artists because they're, they seem to be the ones that's most active right now. But, we also have Bruce Robinson. He just retired from Columbus College of Art and Design [Columbus, Ohio] after being there over twenty years. Larry Winston Collins he's down at Ohio--University of Miami, Miami University of Ohio [Oxford, Ohio], and he's one of the artists that we went to Africa and it's quite, quite a few.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you, you had a chance to meet [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was here at The King Arts Complex [Columbus, Ohio] a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's my hero too, he and James Van Der Zee.
Speaker 1: And you were telling us at one point that you were at a gathering where James Van Der Zee and Elijah Pierce were both there right the same time.
Speaker 2: James Van Der Zee and Polk, Aprent- Prentice H. Polk. P.H. Polk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we, we presented their work here at the Ohio historical center [Ohio History Center, Columbus, Ohio] a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us a little bit about P.H. Polk and James Van Der Zee?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you P.H. Polk was a photographer at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for a number of years, and Van Der Zee was, had a studio in Harlem [New York, New York] and he was so call discovered late in life and he became a master photographer. He was still shooting even, well I don't know he died, I don't remember how old he was when he died, but he had lived a long life. He documented what was going on at Harlem at the time. He's someone that you could study his photographs and learn a lot from him. He was a master of retouching before computers, and, but he, he was a master at retouching.
Story_ID: 625918
Speaker 1: Is there any particular photographer that you admire the most?
Speaker 2: Mo- modern day photographers I admire the work of Chester Higgins [HistoryMaker Chester Higgins, Jr.]. He, he's a great photographer. He's been here also to King Arts Complex [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Is there any particular reason why you like his work, you know?
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I guess it's because it kind of reminds of my work (laughter). No, he shoots a lot of people pictures and I've had people tell me that when they come to one of my exhibitions that they feel like they have traveled along with me to wherever it is that I have on the wall and that's what I want them to feel like. I want them to feel like they have, they've been on a trip, you know, and, and can experience, feel what I felt when I was actually there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have an artistic philosophy that accompanies your work?
Speaker 2: The only philosophy I have about my work is that I wanted to convey positiveness. I don't con- I'm not interested in shooting a whole bunch of negative stuff, so. Some people may consider shooting demonstrations negative, but I don't see anything negative about demonstrating, you know what I mean. So, I think that's positive too, so I, I shoot, I shoot everything. I photograph everything 'cause it's, t- to me if it's there, it's to be remembered positively.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What would be an example of something that would be a negative shoot?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: What would be an example of a negative or even a positive?
Speaker 2: A negative?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A, a negative would be shooting some- somebody lying down drunk on the street. To me there's no need for that. So, I mean it's happening, but it's not something that I need to record. You have enough people recording that, so they can record that and put it in their filing system. But I don't have any room for that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 625919
Speaker 1: Now what kind of equipment did you evolve to, I mean, I know you at a certain point I guess you started using SLRs [single lens reflex camera] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've used just about every kind of camera there is and right now, of course, I'm shooting digital. I'm not shooting top of the line digital, but I'm, I am shooting digital. I'm having a lot of fun with that. Of course you use a lot of the same techniques that you use in the darkroom, when--I think it is helpful to know the darkroom techniques if you get it, when you get into working in photography on the computer 'cause there is a lot of the same, plus hundreds of different--that you can't--you can do things now that you couldn't do in the darkroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, have you had to study like computer techniques to enhance your photos?
Speaker 2: Yes you do, plus you get the book, 'Photoshop for Dummies' ['Adobe Photoshop CC for Dummies,' Peter Bauer] (laughter), and I learned a lot from that book. Of course when I first started I didn't know the first thing about computers, so it's, you know when you want to really learn something somehow you kind of grasp it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think it makes as much difference--did you think of the type of camera you have or the type of equipment you're using makes as much difference as the photographer?
Speaker 2: No, I think as long as you understand your camera and you know how to operate it and what it does and you have control of your camera and the camera doesn't control you, you get what you're after.
Story_ID: 625920
Speaker 1: Now your wife passed away in--
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991] okay. And, you know, she left behind a legacy in Columbus [Ohio]. Could you, can you talk about that further (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she was a poet, and, and she Anna Bishop were great friends and Anna Bishop was a poet also. Anna was a retired school teacher, an elementary school teacher, and she taught at Garfield Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio] for long time. And she and Anna, Anna used to do a lot of poetry all around the city, and just like I said she had, Mary Ann [Mary Ann Williams] had the television show and the radio show ['The Black Studies Broadcast Journal'] and she was just involved in the community and she, she, she died a young age at forty-six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, she had the television show, 'Afromation,' where she interviewed people, and her interviews were at one time in the public library [Columbus Metropolitan Library, Columbus, Ohio], so you could go check out her programs at the library. They still may have a few tapes at the library.
Speaker 1: Here in the local Columbus area.
Speaker 2: At the local Columbus library.
Speaker 1: Now, now was her show ever picked up by public tele--
Speaker 2: Of the national.
Speaker 1: PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] yeah, PBS?
Speaker 2: PBS? I, I, she was on PBS and I know that she won, she was nominated for an Emmy [Emmy Award] for, for a couple of her shows. I don't remember what they were, but I know she was nominated for an Emmy and we went to the award ceremony, but she didn't get the Emmy, but she was nominated.
Story_ID: 625921
Speaker 1: When you look back at the days of, of when you started and the position of the black artists when you started and look at it today, how do you account for the transformation sort of, you know, from, from those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I just felt like when we started that--but based on Harlem Renaissance you know, I felt like we can have our own renaissance and what we needed to do was what was necessary to get our work out there and that if, if we did, if we waited for someone to accept us based on their standards or whatever, we'd be waiting forever because many of us produce--our, our creation is a little different than what, what you might get in art school. In other words, we learn what we learn in art school and then we take that and develop our own, at least that's what I think we should do. That's what I try to do. And so we had to go one step further than what you just learn in school and create something for yourself and that's, I felt that's, that's what we should do and that's what I strive for. In doing so, I think we should help each other along the way, so it's all about helping each other in getting our work out there. And we do this not only in a gallery situation, but we, we did it by sponsoring art festivals like outside during the summer. We, we used to sponsor something called Afro Fair. Afro Fair was at the Mount Vernon plaza [Mount Vernon, Columbus, Ohio], in the plaza area. We would be out there on the weekend set, set up and we have music playing and it, it's was, it was an artist festival and we, we did that for a number of years. When I say we, Art for Community Expression.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's ACE right, yeah.
Speaker 2: ACE, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so I know that when I lived in Chicago [Illinois], I knew about Barbara Bayless at the Ohio Arts Council.
Speaker 2: At the Ohio Arts Council right.
Speaker 1: What role did they play in what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, the Ohio Arts Council played a big role in the--at the time we really didn't think that much about it, but they weren't much older, the, the organization wasn't much older than our organization, so they were just getting starting. We all were just getting started about the same time, but they played a big, big role in providing funds to the different organizations around the state and so did the Greater Columbus Arts Council. They all supported us from the beginning, all the way up to the end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And gra- we were considered like a grassroots organization because most of the organizations that the GCAC and Ohio Arts Council provided funds for were educational and city, city, city type organizations con- you know connected with city government somehow. And then the grassroots organizations were those like, like us, just like grassroots people. We weren't connected to anything except we're coming together to make something happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you think that you would have received the kind of support that you received if there had not been like black people on the Ohio Arts Council or? I mean do you see them playing a significant role on what happened here?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I have to say yes, yeah, yeah they did play a role on what's going on. I, I remember Barbara Bayless was instrumental in some things that went on at, at the Ohio Arts Council.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not suggesting that they replace what the grassroots artists are doing 'cause you know you have to have artists to have, to have somebody to support (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but I'm just saying I know they played a role.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they did.
Story_ID: 625922
Speaker 1: So now you've, you've had, you've been featured in some exhibits in the area and around the country. Can you tell us about some of those?
Speaker 2: Yes, when, when I have opportunities to, to send my work outside of Columbus [Ohio] I try to do so and the art, art is very competitive, so when I get rejected from someplace I don't take it personally I just, I just look at like they don't understand what they're looking at (laughter). So, and there's a whole world out there and so you try to get involved in the whole world out there and you don't just say I'm gonna do this, this, this. I'm gonna do this, you know all, all around. So, that, that's how I look at when I try to get involved in things, positive things.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I've exhibited--the major exhibit that I, that I've had was my fifty, fifty years ['Kojo: Fifty Years in Photography'] at the Columbus Museum of Art [Columbus, Ohio], and that was quite an honor. When I, I told them, we were talking at the museum and I said, "Well, you know next couple of years I will have been shooting photographs for fifty years." So they said, "Well, wh- wh- are you gonna have an exhibit?" And I said, "Well, I'd like to have an exhibit." "Where you gonna have it?" "Oh, I don't know. I'll find some place." "You're gonna have it here" (laughter), and so that's how that came about, you know. And so we had a birthday party at the museum for me for, it was my seventieth birthday, two years ago.
Speaker 1: This was in 2009 or 2010.
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I'll be seventy-three in October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know that (laughter).
Story_ID: 625923
Speaker 1: So the, the city [Columbus, Ohio] has recognized you officially as being the photographer for fifty years and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and that must make you feel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the city has been very responsive to my, to, to what I do I guess and, and when--the 'Columbus Remembered' [Kojo Kamau] is what I guess really got a lot of people's attention. And, and I brought--I had not shown those photographs before until after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and after 9/11 took place I, I felt like maybe people were looking for something that reminded them of the, the so called good old days, and I remembered that I had all these photographs that I had taken in the 1960s, and so I brought those out and people really liked them. And I, I did, people would say you know you should do a book, so I did a book and I got the Ohio--Ohioana Library Association Career Award. I think it was because of that book that I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean of course I never ex- expected to get anything like, an award like that for doing the book, but it happened.
Story_ID: 625924
Speaker 1: Now you teach at Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right, yes I'm--my strong thing is black and white printing, so I, I've been teaching there for about fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are you--you have decent students? Do you have decent students, I mean students today like--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, basically what I'm in--I'm in charge of the darkroom, and I'm there to assist the students to, who are working on projects from the various classes that they're taking. I'm there to assist them to get, to get their work done, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you teach darkroom technique--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and with the chemicals and all that, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yes. I don't know how long that's gonna be (laughter), but until then yes I'm still there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so in photography classes today--I know I was surprised in Dayton [Ohio] to find that they're using a 1912 camera in one of the photography classes to actually shoot and--
Speaker 2: Well, what they call alternative methods are very popular at school now. Pinhole cameras and things like that, using the view cameras. What we used, what we used to do, well it was the only way to do it, you know. Now you have all these different choices, and so the young people they, they, they enjoying everything, you know. So, it's not just digital and computers, but a lot of the young people are taking film classes.
Speaker 1: Right and you're still--we were discussing earlier that you're still learning technique on the computer and techno- technology. You're in a class that's coming up right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah we're still, I'm still learning, and I'm in, I'm having fun and enjoying more, more about the computer.
Story_ID: 625925
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy. My legacy would--well I'm proud of the fact that we started ACE [Art for Community Expression] and that it worked out for us, because when we started ACE there were only a couple of known African American photo- artists in town that were known by mainstream, and our goal was to get out there and get more, more of us involved in what's going on and since then we're, we have so many African American artists involved in everything that's going on in the art community here in Columbus [Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and we're proud of that.
Story_ID: 625926
Speaker 1: Now what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh boy the community at large, not just the artists?
Speaker 1: Both, yeah both.
Speaker 2: Both. Okay, well my, my concern would be that again about the change. There, there's gonna be change and we, we just have to learn to live with change and to try to work, try to make that change work for us instead of working against the change, 'cause the change is gonna happen. I mean it's, we can see that. It's happening more now than ever before. In, in, in the past, there was always change, but it's much slower. Nowadays stuff just changes overnight, and that's the way things are. So, again, we should try to figure out how to get involved in the change and then I, I don't think it will take such a toll on us. Does that make sense?
Story_ID: 625927
Speaker 1: Now when, when you look back over all the things you've done again is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Do things differently? I don't, I can't think of anything that I would--oh yes there is something I would do differently. I would finish some of the schools that I started (laughter). It's not funny, but I would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what you, you'd advise young people I guess to--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I would advise, oh yes today I would advise you to get--I have always tried to get as much education as I think I have needed okay, and I have not been con- I am convinced now that I should have gotten more education, but for the time I was in it worked, what I did worked, but it would not work today. So, I would advise young people to get as many pieces of paper as they can, but at the same time work towards whatever it is that you really want to do with those pieces of paper, because without them nowadays it's hard to get your foot in the door. The competition, competition now is not just who lives in your neighborhood. Competition now is the whole world, so it's global.
Story_ID: 625928
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family now. Do you have any children? (Unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have one son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his name is Kenya [Kenya Jones].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's forty-two years old.
Speaker 1: And does he live here in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he lives in Columbus.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He helps me when I do art festivals and things like that, but he's, he's not a photographer. Well, he's a photographer with his telephone (laughter).
Story_ID: 625929
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to mention before--oh let me ask you about this. I didn't ask you about this complex that we're in, The King Arts Complex [Columbus, Ohio]. Did you play any role in the development of this complex or, or what role does this complex play in your life?
Speaker 2: The complex is, we're glad the complex is here yes, and the complex came about I believe it was 1987. Of course, this was a closed theater for a number of years and at the time the Lincoln Theatre on Long Street [Columbus, Ohio] was also closed, so we had two buildings and not, did not have a cultural art center in town, and so the powers to be decided that they were gonna renovate this building, which they did, and the, the Pythian Theater [Columbus, Ohio] was renovated first and then this was renovated in phase two. So, this gallery hasn't already, this hasn't always been here. The building has been here. It was Garfield Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio], and so they connected the two buildings and th- this is, it's, we have lots of fun here, lots of fun here.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the features of The Kings Arts Complex (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you, you come, we have theater performances here, dance performances here, gallery, we have the art gallery which changes about every two or three months. We have different artists who come in. We have speakers come here and of course we have a ballroom upstairs. We have jazz, and there's a park, Mayme Moore Park [Columbus, Ohio] is right next door. In the summer, we have jazz concerts in the park and which draws what looks like thousands of people and of course all that's free. So, it's, it's a busy, a busy complex.
Story_ID: 625930
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different. How, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's real simple. I guess I just like to be remembered as a person who was interested in helping all people and, and, and, in playing a part in trying to make our community better.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much for spending the time with us.
