Story_ID: 251580
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Georg] Koen, we're going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And today's date is Monday, January 31, 2005, and this interview is taking place in New York City [New York, New York].  Now, if you would please, for the record, please tell us your name and spell it, your full name.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Georg, G-E-O-R-G; Koen, K-O-E-N.
Speaker 1: No middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And would you please tell us the date and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born April 4, 1934, in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, at the moment I'm retired.
Speaker 1: Retired?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, I had my own company called Corporate Computer Systems [New York, New York], and we did banking analysis for major corporations in the city.  So I'm not doing that anymore. But I am dealing with one my clients that I've had for many years just to keep myself active, to keep the brain alert.
Speaker 1: And so, retired but banking consultant?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You can say that.
Story_ID: 251581
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions. It's just to help us to get to know you a little bit better--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --and help us get familiar with the process, so I ask you to please give me short answers--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --to these questions.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a difficult question, because I was a follower of Julia Child, and, in fact, I have an autograph of hers in the kitchen from one of her recipes.  And it turned out when she was asked to autograph this recipe by a friend of mine, she says, "I know that name."  And (unclear), and I said to him, "Yes, of course she knows it because she spent a lot of time in Norway where I sung so many times.  She probably even saw me on television.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And then remembered you in the name.  Well, let's see.  Breads actually are a favorite of mine.  And I am very fond of brioche, and--that's it, and [Pain] Louis XV bread that, Julia Child came up with the recipe and, I have worked on that one on a number of times.  In the meat category, I think I like Beef Wellington and en croute; and I love salmon.  But I like it--to do it myself in the Norwegian way, because they call it gravlax in which it's cured with sugar and salt, and it's really quite one dill; it's quite wonderful.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my favorite colors is yellow, as you can see, that's what I use in the apartment.  Blue is also a very favorite color or mine.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, living in New York [New York], it's fall.  It's the greatest time to be in the city.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I've had some happy moments on the Adriatic Sea in Yugoslavia.  And one of the great moments of my life was when I was engaged in Dubrovnik [Croatia], and that was really very special.  And I'd love to go back and vacation there again.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have one really.
Story_ID: 251582
Speaker 1: Now, let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother grew up as a girl and spent her childhood.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my mother's name was Ida Hollins, and I think she was born in Memphis, Tennessee, but her mother [Minnie Jones] died at childbirth and she was raised by her mother's sister.  And I'm not exactly sure, but I think she grew up in Byhalia, Mississippi, which is just southeast--or southwest--yes, southeast of Memphis.  Then she finally same and to live with her other two sisters and father [Henry Hollins] after--once she had grown up to a degree, I think probably six or seven years old.
Speaker 1: And Hollins, H-O-L-L-I-N-S?
Speaker 2: N-S, yes.  Hollins.
Speaker 1: And did your mother share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl and the things she enjoyed doing and how she spent her time?
Speaker 2: No.  She was very--she was a very quiet person.  And she really didn't talk about her childhood very much to me.  And I think it probably was a sad childhood in a way, because I had a feeling that she felt she was responsible for her mother's death, you know, which she had nothing to do with it.  I mean, that's how it is.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a homebody.  She loved to cook and do--and can things.  I think she learned all of that from her upbringing in Mississippi.  But she loved--she just loved to cook.  You always had good food on the table.  Always.
Story_ID: 251583
Speaker 1: And let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting with your father's name and where he grew up as a boy and spent his childhood.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my father's name is Maurice Koen, and he was born in Memphis, Tennessee; grew up there.  And I don't know too much about his young years, but I remember him from the time I was about three years old.  And he was a very loving person.  I remember once his picking me up and holding me for several hours, just talking to me, and it was in one of his melancholy moods.  But it was a loving family.  They all pulled together and looked after each other because, you see, there were ten children and only four grandchildren.  So we were all very special.  And we were not born really close together.  The oldest grandchild was almost the same age as my father's youngest brother.  And then the next grandchild was probably four years older than myself; then I came along.  And then there were twins, one of them died; so the one--they were at least five years younger than myself.
Story_ID: 251584
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents [Ida Hollins and Maurice Koen] met?
Speaker 2: I think they probably met at the high school where they were attending in South Memphis [Tennessee], because the Koens had a home--house in South Memphis, and they were all out there.  And my mother's father [Henry Hollins] and his--you know, her sisters, they all lived in South Memphis.  So I suspect that that's where they met, in the school; if not, certainly in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very loving towards me and very possessive, but that was only natural because I was his only child.  And when I would go to visit him, on one occasion, I remember, his wife said that she was going to pick me up.  And he said fine.  And what he did, he drove to the first stop before the 63rd Street Station in Chicago [Illinois] and took me off the train, and we drove home.  And she came--and when his wife came back, she said, "There I was sitting in the apartment."  And she realized that, even though she was a little hurt, she realized that he wanted to have a little private time with me, you know; he hadn't seen me for a while and then she shouldn't be so possessive.
Speaker 1: So did your parents divorce when you were young?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I was a baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--and did your--and your father moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He moved to Chicago, I'm not exactly sure when, but probably--it would have been in the '40s [1940s]; probably shortly after the war, World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: But you still spent a lot of time with him?
Speaker 2: Oh, every summer I began--after--especially after I grew up from nine years old, I began to spend my summers in Chicago, but I would stay with different members of the family:  his sister or one of his other brothers and--because they were all very caring and always wanted me around.
Story_ID: 251585
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if you came from free peoples, slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know very much about my ancestry on my mother's [Ida Hollins] side, and I can only guess on my father's [Maurice Koen] side.  We are of Dutch, German-Dutch heritage, and because Koen is quite a common name in Holland [the Netherlands].  And in Germany, it's Kern [ph.].  And it's quite a northern name.  When I'm in Germany, they all ask me if I'm not a German.  And they're just certain that I am.  But also the last name is a common first name in Holland.  So (laughter), you can end up both ways, Koen, Koen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you spend much time with your grandparents growing up?
Speaker 2: I did with my paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Louise Koen.  And then she died.  I'm not exactly sure now when she died, because I lost her in Memphis [Tennessee]. See, I lived with my mother's sister, oldest sister.  And we had--because of the war, her husband had to move to Columbus, Ohio.  So his mother lived in Cleveland [Ohio].  So we moved to Cleveland.  And my grandmother died during that period.  So when I came back to Memphis she was gone.  But I remember very fondly she was--she had said that when I was born, if I were a born she didn't want to see me because she had so many boys.  She had all boys, but two.  And when she saw me, she broke down (laughter).  And I like to think I was her favorite (laughter).
Speaker 1: And why was it that you ended up living with your aunt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think basically, because the schooling was much better.  My mother moved to a small town in Alabama.  And in Memphis, they had much better schools, you know, because of segregation.  So I think primarily that was the reason.
Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandparents.  Did you spend much time with them at all, your grandfather [Henry Hollins]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandfather, he died in 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I never knew him.
Story_ID: 251586
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think being around my father's [Maurice Koen] family, because they had this business on Beale Street, and I was often left there during the day, and my aunt, she would go and work, and she'd come back and pick me up.  And, you know, I was getting all of this attention.  Babies love lots of attention.  So I think I became very close to all of the--especially the brothers of my father.
Speaker 1: What kind of business was it?
Speaker 2: It was an electrical shoe shop; and was considered the largest shoe shop in Memphis [Tennessee] at the time.  Then they ultimately developed a cleaners business, because shoe repair sort of went out of vogue.  Too many people buy shoes, and they don't repair them anymore.  So they went into the cleaning business.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, like, the electrical shoe shop, do you remember how things worked there and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the layout, and I remember it was this long room, and on one side they had all of these booths for the customers; and on the other side, all of the electrical equipment, which ran from the (unclear), major window, all the way back.  And it looked very humongous to me, because I was a just small child.  But things do appear that way when you're young.
Speaker 1: And did most of the family--was there a family-run business?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My grandfather felt that his boys should have a trade.  That was the thinking at that time.  And they all learned how to repair shoes.  And after World War II [WWII], several of them went on to teach shoe repairing through the government program.
Story_ID: 251587
Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house growing up?  Were they very festive times, and did everyone come and gather together at one particular house; that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, the things that I remember, the most festive occasions would be with my mother's sister after she died.  And I went--back to Memphis [Tennessee] (unclear).  At one point, I left Cleveland [Ohio] and went--traveled down there to live with my mother [Ida Hollins], because I always visited her during the summers, too.  And then when I went back to Memphis after her death, her sister was always interested in making grand occasions and to find a reason to have a festival if possible and going to the park; for example, to have a picnic and things of that nature.  And we did things that were creative, not the way it is today and you go and you buy everything.  But we tried to make things at home and to make fun, because really there wasn't a lot of money, and you had to make it stretch.  So I think it was a very happy time.  We had nothing, but we were very happy.
Story_ID: 251588
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on growing up where you spent most of your time?
Speaker 2: Well, initially in Memphis [Tennessee] it was on Beale Street.  But then we moved to the Foote Homes [Memphis, Tennessee], which was a huge complex of buildings in Memphis.  And it was like subsidized housing.  And then, of course, after that we left Memphis and came back.  My aunt, the one that I lived with in Memphis, she lived out near where we had--the Koens had their own house.  So that was a private house.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe the community for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a very cohesive community.  Everybody looked after his neighbor.  And when your parents left, you, they would say to the next door neighbor, "Keep an eye out on the kids, will you?  And if they get out of hand, give them a spanking."  Then you got another spanking when they came home.  So it was a great community.  No crime, and that's something that occurred later, it seems, in our society.
Speaker 1: Were there lots of businesses around?
Speaker 2: No.  It was basically--there were some businesses, but it was basically a residential area.
Story_ID: 251589
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of your childhood and remind you of growing up [in Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I open a can of peaches, I often think of my mother [Ida Hollins] because she would can a lot of peaches.  And the smell of that, of a peach, reminds me very much of those happy times when I used to share and help, you know, with the gathering of the peaches.  And then she would, you know, peel them and what have you, and then can them.  Then I think that the smell of leather brings back to mind the shoe shop, when I spent so much as a little one there.  There's nothing like the smell of new leather.
Speaker 1: And what sights and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a rather quiet community, really.  I can't really think of any sounds or sights that stand out in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 251590
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up that come to mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I do remember my mother's sister.  When I went to live--after my mother [Ida Hollins] died, I went to live with her middle sister.  There were only three girls, and the middle sister had four children at that time, and so I made it a fifth child.  And everybody thought that I looked just like her, so they used to say to her, "Oh, your son has grown so much."  And she always had a wonderful time with that.  She was tickled when people that I was her son.  She was a very loving and caring aunt and treated me just--as one of her own children.  So I'm very close to her children, because she said that we were, first come down, only first cousin.  And she said we must always be in touch and care for one another.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother died?
Speaker 2: I was twelve.
Speaker 1: And you were living with your other aunt?
Speaker 2: I was--no.  I was living with my mother at the time.
Speaker 1: At that particular time?
Speaker 2: At that particular time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your other aunt, where did she live?  One lived in Cleveland [Ohio].  Where did the other live?
Speaker 2: They lived--the other lived in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh, she--and so you went back to Memphis?
Speaker 2: I went back to Memphis, yes.  They thought it was best that I go back to Memphis because I had a footing there from my childhood that I would probably adjust easier by being in surroundings that I was familiar with.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--were there any differences that you can recall in terms of going from Cleveland to Alabama?  What were some of the differences that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things, they tease very much in Alabama, because of the way I spoke, because I spoke with a Northern Baroque, and the they--the teachers used to tell me don't lose it, because, you know, the southerners spoke with a drawl.  And I really stood out very much, because they were always teasing me about it.  Also, I felt that in Cleveland, in the schools, no one really cared about whether you got an education or not.  The classes were rowdy and the teachers really didn't try to contain the situation.  So I was really very unhappy in Cleveland actually.  And I was happy to go and live with my mother, because by that time, they had developed a very fine school in the town where she lived.  So that turned out to be a Godsend for me.  They had a wonderful music program, which I was interested in using.  And it probably was the inspiration of my wanting to become a singer.
Story_ID: 251591
Speaker 1: When did you first begin getting interested in music?
Speaker 2: Well, I was probably in the sixth grade and I began--I used to listen to The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] on the radio, and I remember the first opera I heard was 'Madame Butterfly' ['Madama Butterfly,' Giacomo Puccini] with Dorothy Kirsten.  And I thought that was the most glorious music I ever heard.  And that really ignited my interest in opera.  Then, of course, I used to hear the recordings of Marian Anderson sing lieder, and I loved those songs.  So I became very much interested in German lieder.
Speaker 1: And did you sing, like, in church and school, and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I did.  When I went back to Memphis [Tennessee] to live with my aunt, I sang in the choir.  And at school, I didn't sing in the choir.  But I did do solo work, and when I went back to Memphis, I was only there for a couple of years before I go a scholarship to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], to the high school there, 'cause Rust College had four singing groups.  They sang out to the Midwest because they were sponsored by the Methodist church, and I went to South Dakota two of those years; and then one year I went to--and Minnesota--and then one year I went to Iowa.
Story_ID: 251592
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Georg] Koen, I want to ask you, what was the name of the elementary school that you went to?  And I know you probably went to two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --one in Memphis [Tennessee], one in Cleveland [Ohio].  Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Gee, I'm trying to think.  The one in Memphis I don't really remember, and yet it just doesn't come to mind at the moment.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: But in Cleveland it was Gladstone Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in elementary school?  What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was a good student until I went to Cleveland.  And then I didn't think I'd excel because of the way that they managed their classes.  It was a very different atmosphere to what I was accustomed to because in the South, I think that they were much more concerned about the individual and giving you special care and help.  And they didn't do that at the Gladstone School.
Story_ID: 251593
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from elementary school who may have had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a Mrs. Thomas [ph.] in Alabama, had a tremendous influence on me.  In fact, she followed my career right up until the late '50s [1950s].  She was teaching music at the school and was very interested in my well-being and advancement.
Speaker 1: And did you have any favorite subjects in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, I think geography was my favorite subject.  And it paid off when I went to Europe.
Speaker 1: And did you ever think that, you know, some of these places that you were reading about in other countries, these foreign lands, did you ever think you would get an opportunity to visit there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had hoped that I would, but I wasn't sure.  But it was just a dream.
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, once I decided that I wanted to study music, yes.
Speaker 1: That was during elementary?
Speaker 2: That was during elementary school.
Speaker 1: And what did you--and what were your dreams?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to become a concert singer, because I'd heard Marian Anderson, just so many songs; 'Ave Maria,' 'Mon Coeur s'ouvre [a ta voix].'  And she did [Johannes] Brahms and [Robert] Schumann.  And now I've familiarized myself with some of them, and I just--to me that would be the ultimate to be able to join and meet her in concert.
Speaker 1: And what did your friends think of you wanting to have this, you know, concert singing career?
Speaker 2: I don't think there was any real objection because everyone, especially in the South, tried to instill--the teachers tried to instill in you an ambition, to obtain a certain ambition in your life.  And so no one ostracized me about it, because the school had a very good music program and they stress the arts, which was unusual.
Speaker 1: And did you begin performing during elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In the school, I would be in plays, and I would also sing, and 'cause they would encourage you do so.
Story_ID: 251594
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I attended with my mother's [Ida Hollins] sister, the one that I first lived with.  She went to the [Cleveland] Church of Christ [Cleveland Church of Christ, Citadel of Hope Ministries, Cleveland, Ohio], which was a church that did not allow a musical instrument to be played.  And I remember everything was done a cappella.  And then when I went back to Memphis [Tennessee] to live with the other sister, we were very active in the Baptist church, Central Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennessee]; and there I sang in the choir, and it was a very, very wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your friends from elementary school?  Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Well, I do remember--I can only remember first names--there's one fella by the name of Walter [ph.].  He was related to the music teacher at the school.  And we were very good friends.  He was interested in music also.  And most of my friends were musicians.  I remember there was a trumpet player that befriended me, and we had wonderful times together.  There weren't a lot of them that I remember.  I do have a visual image of them in my mind.  But the names just slip me now.
Story_ID: 251595
Speaker 1: Around the elementary school years, around the sixth grade you started to be kind of interested in music.  And what were some of your other interests?  What were some of the other things that you enjoyed doing during your spare time as a boy?
Speaker 2: Well, I was so engrossed in music, I didn't do much else.  I learned to play the trumpet, and I practiced a great deal on the trumpet and it paid off, because when I went into the [U.S.] military my specialty was trumpet playing, and they sent me off to band training school.  So I was lucky there.  And I hadn't played trumpet for many years.  And when I went into the military, but you know, you never forget if you are well trained in that area.
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this particular time in your life?  Who were you being most influenced by?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think my aunts on my mother's [Ida Hollins] side, because they always talked about education; that things are going to get better, you want to be prepared, and you can't be prepared if you don't apply yourself.  And so I think that they were the ones, because they constantly preached, "Go to school, go to school, go to school.  You know, we don't want you to end up as we are."  Because there were not many opportunities, but they were very optimistic.  And I think this optimism was passed on to us, when they say, "Never look back, look forward."
Story_ID: 251596
Speaker 1: What impact did your mother's [Ida Hollins] death have on you at such an early age?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, her suffering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had she been sick for a long time?
Speaker 2: She had ovarian cancer, and it was a horrible death and horrible suffering.  And I--it reached the point that she didn't trust anyone but me.  She didn't trust her husband.  She didn't even trust her sister who was taking care of her.  And it was a horrible death.
Speaker 1: And were you still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I still remember it.
Speaker 1: Just a lot of responsibility and also just seeing her suffer.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  The suffering was horrible, because at that time there was very little medical science could do to try to, you know, ease the pain.  That was about it.  But, you know, to hear her say to take--she wanted you to take her life.  I mean, what a horrible thing (crying).
Speaker 1: Poor boy.  Do you want to take a minute?  Anything (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sickness and death.
Speaker 1: In your life--your short--I mean, at that particular time at twelve years old?
Speaker 2: 'Cause my paternal grandfather [Richard Koen] died, but I was very young.  It didn't mean anything to me.  But this did.  The suffering.  And my aunt told the children that they must be patient with me, because they said, you know, "He's going through a lot."  I would get up at night, I thought I heard her calling me for a long time after her death (crying).
Speaker 1: Sure.  Had she been sick for a long time?
Speaker 2: She was sick for almost three years.
Speaker 1: And so when she passed, you moved back to Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, living back with her sister.
Speaker 1: And how many children did her sister have?
Speaker 2: She had four--at that time she had four.  And then ultimately had the fifth child, which happens to be the one that's here, the boy.
Speaker 1: And so, what was that like for you, the first time really living in a house with a big family and lots of kids?  What was that like for you as an only child?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I adjusted very well, because they were so understanding.  And then that's because their mother had imparted to them that they would have to understand that I was an only child, and I often had my own ways, and that they trust--to try to appreciate that and endure these things, then I would come around.  But I only lived with them for two years before I got my scholarship.
Speaker 1: And did you eventually come around or did you still struggle with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I had problems with her death for a long time (crying).
Speaker 1: Sure.  Sure.
Speaker 2: The suffering was just immense.  And especially now that I've become ill myself, it all comes back to me, her suffering.
Story_ID: 251597
Speaker 1: So you received--how did--Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], how did they even know about your talent?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, they didn't read it in Coronet magazine, in an article on my going to Rust. Let's pause for one quick second. (Pause).
Speaker 1: So, tell us a little bit about how the scholarship opportunity came about.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd been singing with a group from the radio station WDIA [Memphis, Tennessee], called the Teen-Town Singers.
Speaker 1: A group that--where they a group of men your age?
Speaker 2: Yes, and young girls.
Speaker 1: Teen--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we sang every Saturday.  And I was heard by someone from--that was affiliated with Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  And they said--and they recommended that they should audition me.  So I was invited to go to Holly Springs, Mississippi, for an audition.  And I sang a sacred song, which I don't recall now what it was--the type, but I remember that after I did that, they asked me if I knew a spiritual, and I said, 'Swing Low Sweet Chariot.'  And they all laughed.  And the music director said, "Don't laugh.  He's had--been exposed to only classical music.  That's why he only knows 'Swing Low Sweet Chariot.'"  And she said, "And he's just what we're looking for."  So they offered me the scholarship, even though I was only fifteen.  And they were not accustomed to taking youngsters at that age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I went on to travel with them for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.  Let's pause for a quick second.  (Pause.)
Speaker 2: So this--so you were offered a scholarship to attend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  The high school at Rust College.
Speaker 2: In South Dakota.
Speaker 1: No, no.  That was in Holly Springs, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm sorry.  And what was the name of the high school?
Speaker 1: It was just called the Rust College High School [ph.].  Rust College is the second oldest black institution in America founded in 1866.  Today, they have embraced integration, and it's a thriving institution in the State of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And so this was a music scholarship?
Speaker 1: It was a music scholarship.  Yes.
Speaker 2: And what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 1: Well, that was--it was a great experience, but I was thrown with college people being, you know, a youngster.  So they sort of embraced me as the younger sibling, so to speak.  And they were very watchful and caring.  So it was a very good experience.  And also to just be around older people, I think did a great deal to help me to mature.
Speaker 2: And what was it like being away from family?
Speaker 1: Well, it was difficult in the beginning, but I soon adjusted myself to dormitory living.  And then after the first year, the music director had me come and live in her home, and because she felt that because of my age, I probably shouldn't be living in the dormitory with the other guys, because they were much older.
Speaker 2: And did you want to move or were you enjoying life in the dormitory?
Speaker 1: No.  I was enjoying it, you know, but they just felt that it would be better if I, you know, lived with her.  So, and that was a very good experience because she had had great (unclear) experience.  She had to travel to New York during her young years as an accompanist.  And she would relate stories to me so that--which inspired me to want to become a singer.  So it was a great experience.
Speaker 2: And were you involved in any other activities in high school?
Speaker 1: No, not really, because we traveled for three and a half months every year.  Then when you came back, you were very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You traveled throughout the South or--
Speaker 1: No.  The Midwest: North [Dakota] and South Dakota, Minnesota and Iowa.
Speaker 2: What were your experiences like in the Midwest?  Was it the first time you had ever been to the Midwest?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the first time.  Oh, it was wonderful, because we would always have all of this snow.  And even though I had seen snow before, but nothing like what they have in Minnesota and North Dakota.  The snow is humongous.  It was a great experience, and the people were wonderful.  But we stayed in private homes.  Each engagement, we would arrive and the minister would take us to the various homes, from the parishioners who would invite us as guests.  And it was really a great experience.
Speaker 2: So did you graduate from the high school at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That would be 1951.
Speaker 2: And the name of the high school was Rust College High School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was Rust College High School.
Story_ID: 251598
Speaker 1: When you graduated, what were you thinking you wanted to do professionally?  What did you want to do with your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I--my objective was to become a concert singer.  And my training geared in that direction.  So that was where the emphasis was placed.  And when I--see, I eventually left Rust.  I spent one quarter there in the college division, then I got a scholarship to the University of North Dakota [Grand Forks, North Dakota].  And that was to broaden my perspective of music, because they had a better--a larger music department than Rust.  And also it was a different experience.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like in North Dakota?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing, the academic standards were very high and it was very difficult.  But I was in the school of liberal arts, and it was wonderful because it gave me such a broad outlook on life, and the professors were wonderful.  They knew of my deficiencies, and they tried to help me, you know, to make up for them.  So it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: And so what year did you go to the University of North Dakota?
Speaker 2: I went there in '52 [1952].  And I left in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: And were you studying music?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was it like for you as an African American in North Dakota?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, there was no difference.  I mean, you knew the difference, but people treated me just as they treated everyone else.  And they considered--I think most of the kids considered it an honor and privilege to have someone of a different background in their midst.  So it was a wonderful experience.  There were a lot of Norwegians living there, some Germans, some Swedes.
Speaker 1: And what was your family--what were their thoughts about you leaving Mississippi to go to North Dakota?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they were attuned to it, because they knew that by going to Rust, I probably would get a scholarship to go to some university, because that was the pattern; if you excelled in your studies, you would get a scholarship to go somewhere.  So many of the students did.  Singers in particular got scholarships elsewhere.
Speaker 1: And you stayed at the University of North Dakota for two years.
Speaker 2: For two years.  Then it was decided that really what I needed they could not offer me.  And I had a chance--I was recommended to audition for a voice teacher here in New York City [New York, New York].  And he encouraged me to come his summer program.  He had been at [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York] for twenty-two years, and every summer he had a summer program.  And he invited me to come and study in that summer program and see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Juilliard?
Speaker 2: No.  He had left Juilliard that year to set up his own private situation.  So I studied with him for several years.  I stayed on in New York after that.
Story_ID: 251599
Speaker 1: So you came to New York [New York] in 1954?
Speaker 2: In '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: And just to study music?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And dramatic arts.
Speaker 1: Was that your first introduction to dramatic arts on that level?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And did it kind of change your thought pattern a little bit in terms of what you wanted to do professionally?  Did you still want to be a concert singer or were you thinking more of a career in film or acting, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I was still thinking of a concert career at that time because the Broadway theatre wasn't really integrated at that time.  There was very little integration at that time, so--but there was optimism.  I went to the American Theatre Wing [New York, New York] for one semester, and they were very optimistic.  James Earl Jones had studied there at the time.  So we knew that ultimately there would be opportunities in the Broadway theatre.  And I wanted just to be exposed to that type of environment just in the event that ultimately one day I would, you know, have the opportunity to function in the Broadway theatre.  And it ultimately did work out for me in Europe where they didn't do type casting.  And I had many opportunities to employ some of the Broadway techniques, you know, in my work.
Speaker 1: And so you continue to study music in New York from 1954 until when?
Speaker 2: Well, I studied until 1956.  And that's when I entered the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 251600
Speaker 1: --Were you drafted?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And when I did--after completion of my basic training, I was sent to the band training school at Fort Dix [Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, New Jersey], because I knew how to play a trumpet.  And when I got there, they realized that I was a singer, because I was auditioning for the [U.S] Army Chorus in Washington [D.C].  And at that time, the [U.S.] Army was doing a big television show here in New York [New York] called 'Get Set, Go,' and featuring Broadway artists on each segment.  So I was engaged in that for a year, and would come to New York to the Astoria Studios [Signal Corps Photographic Center, New York, New York], and we would tape the various segments.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a great experience, because it was a very professional environment, very high quality.
Speaker 1: And did it just solidify for you, this is exactly what I want to do?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Well, (unclear) and also it gave me optimism that things were changing in the country, and that would be opportunities, so that if I applied myself and be prepared, I would be able to participate.
Story_ID: 251601
Speaker 1: And how long were you in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Did you travel--did you, were you stationed abroad--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during that two-year period?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I was sent to Germany by accident, really, 'cause I was denied the opportunity to sing in the [U.S.] Army Chorus.
Speaker 1: Because you were black?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And because--well, that was part of the story.  The, they--I passed the audition with flying colors evidently.  And they were very interested to have me join them.  I met a lot of the chorus members.  They did have a black member.  He became a very famous Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] tenor, [HistoryMaker] George Shirley.  But what happened was, that as they traveled around the country, there was no problem in the northern and western states; but when they went south, there were no accommodations for the black member.  So he had to fly back to Washington [D.C.].  And they were a little hesitant to have a second black person on the team having to endure that sort of thing.  And I was very disappointed when they said that that changed their minds, 'cause I felt that if this is the federal sponsored endeavor, they should uphold the law and make the states either come and fall into line or don't go there period.  So I had gone to school with my congressman's daughter from North Dakota.  And she--I wrote her father, and she was in Washington at the time, and he spoke to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and they decided that I should go to Germany with a concert band that was being organized.  And I had to go to Fort Hood [Killeen], Texas, for orientation.  And when I arrived, the commanding officer said, "What are you doing here?"  And I looked at him strangely, and he realized that I didn't know what he was talking about.  And he said to me, "I was at your audition in Washington.  You passed with flying colors.  You were supposed to join the chorus."  I said, "They changed their mind."  He said, "Well, let me tell you, I welcome you here.  It's their loss and my gain."  And he says, "Anything you want when we get to Germany, you let me know."  And as a result, besides the concerts that I gave, I was able to study with an opera singer [Hedwig Fichtmuller] in Munich [Germany] every week, I was given a pass for the whole day to go to Munich and have these voice lessons.  So it was a great opportunity--turned out better for me than had I gone to the chorus.
Speaker 1: (Pause) And so that was in 1957?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, that would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you went to Germany?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was in '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And so--
Speaker 2: So, I was in Germany from '57 [1957] to '58 [1958]--
Speaker 1: And did the concert--the [U.S] Army Concert Band, did it tour throughout Europe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  They toured, not throughout Europe.  See, German-American relations were rather poor.  So we were concentrating on certain areas in Germany where we were stationed, and we would give concerts.  And then I would give--I had decided that I wanted to do concerts myself of lieder.  And it was suggested that I should go into the hospitals to do that, because they have little concert halls.  And I did, and the first one I did, the paper, newspapers came and were quite--they thought I was rather bold to come with German lieder on a program to sing to the patients.  But the newspaper said they had a pleasant surprise when I started to sing [Johannes] Brahms, [Franz] Schubert and [Robert] Schumann.  And I began to do that throughout Wurttemberg [Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany], where we were located.  And when I left Germany, I did a farewell recital and got it rave reviews.
Story_ID: 251602
Speaker 1: And so, when you left Germany in 1958, what were you thinking you were going to do next?
Speaker 2: Well, my objective was to come back to continue my studies with the opera singer [Hedwig Fichtmuller] I was working with.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And she had welcomed me to come back, you know, if I wanted to.
Speaker 1: To come back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No.  To come back to Germany to continue my studies, 'cause she felt that I had a future as a singer, and I needed--but I still needed some work.  And she said, you know, "If you're just here, you hear what you're trained to here; and that's what we're doing, we're training you to hear, to hear properly."
Speaker 1: And so, you did return to Europe in 1959 for a four-month tour in Yugoslavia?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Then I went back to Germany after I was a singer, released from the [U.S.] military service.
Speaker 1: And so that was in 1958?
Speaker 2: That was in '58 [1958].  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then in '59 [1959] I was in New York for some months.  Then I went back to Germany to study, and I studied with her until 1960, when she decided that I had to get my career going.  And I had to stay in Europe, because my money was almost down to a few pennies.  So she spoke to an agent, and the agent got me a four-month tour in Yugoslavia.
Speaker 1: And what was that like, touring and singing and performing in Yugoslavia?
Speaker 2: Now, that was interesting, because this was my first encounter with a communist country, and it was just the opposite of what I had, imagined or had heard.  People were wonderful.  There was no politics applied, and I was treated royally, and I--it helped me to really get ahold of my career and to know what direction I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: And so this is a four-month tour in 1959?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In 1959.
Speaker 1: And what did you do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  In 1960.  This happened in 1960.  I returned to Germany in '59 [1959], and I studied with her through '60 [1960].  And then in the summer--in the spring of 1960, I went to Yugoslavia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was 1960.  And so when did you go to Copenhagen [Denmark]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I spent the four months in Yugoslavia and I came back to Germany, had an engagement; that would have been in the fall of 1960.
Story_ID: 251603
Speaker 1: I think it was in November [1960] I went to Copenhagen [Denmark].  She--I was going to go to Holland [the Netherlands] because of my background.  And she said, "Well, that's a wonderful idea, but I would suggest you go to Scandinavia and go"--and I said, "Well, then I'll go to Stockholm [Sweden]."  And then she said, "That's a good idea, also.  But I think you should go first to Copenhagen.  And if you don't get an engagement in Copenhagen, then go to Stockholm."  She says, "But Copenhagen is the door to Scandinavia, and I'm sure that all of the agents there can book you anywhere in Scandinavia that's available."
Speaker 2: And were you successful?
Speaker 1: Yes.  She was absolutely right.  But then the first agent I went to see, he said, "Don't leave.  Stay here and we'll be in touch with you within several days."
Speaker 2: The Princess of Denmark [Princess Margaret of Denmark] actually requested your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  She requested through this agent, because he was the most important agent.  If I would do a command performance at her benefit charity, called Gentofte [Bornevenner] Friends of Children.   And Gentofte is a suburb of Copenhagen [Denmark], and it was the social event of the year each year; so that one look forward to it.  And I had the option to be presented as the main attraction.  And afterwards, she came up to speak to me and shake my hand.  And then I had a letter from her a few days later.  And my agent said out of all the years of in command performances, she has never written a letter, 'cause royalty is very careful about adhering their names to paper.  But evidently had been so captivated with one of the selections I sang, which was 'Never on Sunday,' because that film was very popular at the time.  And I had my own rendition.  And she called the agency and said, "I haven't been able to get it out of my mind.  Where is he performing?"  And they told her to note never on Monday (laughter).
Story_ID: 251604
Speaker 1: Was word of your success starting to trickle back to your family in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Oh, with that?  Well, at that time, I don't think so.  But word was getting out in Scandinavia.  Once the princess [Princess Margaret of Denmark] had acknowledged me, the agent was able to use that, and I was beginning to get offers from Sweden and Finland and Norway.
Speaker 1: What about in the U.S.?  Was word trickling back down to family members and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, they knew, yes, because I was in contact with them.
Speaker 1: And do you think that you would have been attaining the same level of success at that rate had your career taken off in the U.S. at that particular time?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: Because there was a whole different attitude towards my performance.  And--see, one of the things that happened here, and it existed even when I returned, typecasting, and the whole industry deciding what kind of image you should portray.  And I was not thrown in that kind of situation over there.  I'd do all kinds of parts when I went into the theatre.  Sometimes they would typecast me, but in the same production I'd do another part that was strictly nondescript.  So, it really didn't matter.  So it was a whole different experience.
Speaker 1: And how do you think you would have been type casted here in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Well, I often say like a monkey on a stick.  When I came back, I was invited by the Hal Prince [Harold Prince] office to come in with my portfolio.  And Shirley Rich, who was the casting director, said she had never seen a portfolio as extensive as mine.  And she called another agent and told them the same thing.  So I said to her, "Would I be given the opportunity to audition for 'Cabaret' because I know Joel Grey is going to leave."  And she said, "Oh, the backers would never accept your doing the M.C. [master of ceremonies]."  I said, "But they wouldn't know the difference once we do the make-up and shave my head."  I said, "No one would know the difference.  Make-up does many wonderful things."  She said, "No."  She said, "You know, we have one black girl in the production.  And we had to justify her being there, because Josephine Baker went to Berlin in the '20s [1920s]."  But I said, "She's--Josephine Baker wasn't the only black in Germany in the '20s [1920s].  After World War I [WWI], there were many blacks on the Rhineland that stayed.  They were African blacks that had stayed.  They were from the French colonies."  And I said, "Do you think that only one black would exist in the country, and especially in Berlin [Germany], which was the place to be in the '20s [1920s]."  So, she said, "Well they really wouldn't accept it."
Story_ID: 251605
Speaker 1: Yes, in September of 1961 the Norwegian television did a program which was called 'A Short Encounter with Georg Koen' [ph.].
Speaker 2: And can you tell us a little bit about that program?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, that program--as I did a selection, I would talk about it and my career, and then move on to sing, and then move on to the next selection.  And it was only about fifteen minutes long.  But it was a series of programs, portraits actually of artists coming to Norway that the television presented and prepared for their archives.  So that was my first introduction to Norway.  But following that, I did a radio program of Broadway melodies with the radio string orchestra, and it's called the (unclear) orchestra, which is one of the finest in Scandinavia.  And I did selections from 'Oklahoma!,' 'Guys and Dolls,' a whole gamut of things which I just don't recall right now.  But it was a twenty-five-minute program, as I recall.
Story_ID: 251606
Speaker 1: During your career in Europe in the 1960s, there was a lot happening here in the U.S. in terms of really the beginning of, like, the publicized (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about being so far away when all of that was taking place here in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say that I was involved, because I was ensconced in a whole different society and atmosphere.  But I was affected by it I think as Europeans were, the Germans were.  Absolutely, I thought it was abhorrent what was happening, especially when they were putting dogs on people.  And this I think was true throughout Scandinavia as well.  It was sort of unbelievable, because I didn't think that America would go quite that far.  Certainly they were not painting a very good picture, and they were losing--the United States was losing a lot of its prestige at that time, admiration from other nations just because of these acts of violence against the people that should be treated differently and better than they were being treated.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Excuse me.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Sure.  Thank you.  And so, were you ever longing to be back here or were you so engrossed in your career (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think I was very much engrossed in my career.  And it was moving very well and rapidly.  I had no thoughts of returning at that time.  It was just because things were happening so fast, and offers were coming my way.  And so I, you know, why should I consider coming back.
Speaker 1: And were you making a fairly decent living at that particular time?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the problem, because Europe had not recovered from the war [World War II, WWII], so the cost of living was much, much lower than it was in the United States.  So you weren't making large sums of money.  And I actually stopped singing at a time when things were changing in Europe and I could have cashed in on the recovery.  But at the time I was there, the salaries were very, very low.  But I really didn't care.  Monetary value had little significance for me.  I wanted to work in my profession, and I was being given that opportunity.  And I was being able to maintain very high standards.  So that was what was important to me.
Story_ID: 251607
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about in 1962 your experience in Bulgaria.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, Bulgaria came as a surprise.  My Viennese agent contacted me and said that he had this offer from Bulgaria if I wanted to accept it.  And I said, "Sure, I don't mind," 'cause I had already been to Yugoslavia several times and had had a very good experience.  But I was singing in--when the offer came, I was singing in Zagreb, Croatia.  And at the hotel where I was performing, Orson Welles, Cameron Mitchell were there during--and Anthony Perkins were there doing a film ['The Trial'].  And they thought that I probably wouldn't get a visa to enter Bulgaria.  And the consul attache at the consulate said to me, "You know, we have an exchange program with Bulgaria, and they've never accepted anyone from our list, even though we've accepted people from their list, and we don't think you'll be permitted to enter into Sofia [Bulgaria]."  So I said, "Well, I'm going to give it a try."  So I left Zagreb and I went to Belgrade [Serbia].  And I had met some Yugoslav Serbs [Serbians] in Belgrade that had lived in this country, and they were back now in Yugoslavia.  And I remembered them.  They had given me their name and address.  So I went to them and said, "I know you speak Russian, and I need to get a visa from the Bulgarian consulate.  And I would assume that if you can't speak Bulgarian, they'll certainly expect you to speak Russian"; 'cause Bulgaria was a staunch ally of Russia, probably the closest friend they had outside of the Soviet Union.  But we went to--yes, the young man went with me to the consulate, the embassy, in Belgrade, and he spoke to them, told them about me.  And they said, "Okay.  Let's have his passport and return here in two hours."  And when I returned in two hours, I had the visa, and I was able to take the night train on to Sofia.  And when I got to Sofia, I had no Bulgarian money, which was called the lev.  But I was stopping at the leading hotel there, and the cab driver came in with me 'cause I thought I could exchange money at the counter.  And he said, "No.  It's too late now.  The exchange is closed."  And so the night clerk said to the driver, "Come back tomorrow and you can get your money."  Then I was struck by that, because, see, I'm a total stranger and he couldn't get his cab fare because the exchange was closed, and the desk clerk told him, "Just come back tomorrow and you can get your money."  (Laughter)  And the next day I went to the agency, and they were happy to see me.  And I performed in Sofia for one week.
Story_ID: 251608
Speaker 1: They said, "We would like to send you to the Black Sea," because that's where they had all of their tourist resorts.  And I was sent to one just outside of the town of Varna [Bulgaria] and it was called Drujba [Bulgaria], and it was a wonderful experience.  The hotels there were satisfied for various nationalities.  There was an--I stayed in the American hotel, and there was a German hotel, there was an Italian hotel, there was a French hotel.  And depending on, you know, what foreign business they had.  So these hotels were set aside for them.  And that was to also to keep the Bulgarians from fraternizing with the foreigners, which they didn't want.  And it was an interesting experience and I--actually, a few days before my contract was to end, that particular contract, a communist member came and wanted to censor my program.  And I said, "No."  And he didn't come himself and do it, he sent a lackey to do it.  And she had been someone who had approached me in Sofia [Bulgaria] when I arrived, and the orchestra leader stopped the rehearsal, and he and his wife pulled me to the side and said, "Be careful.  She's a communist spy."  So when she came to censor my program I said, "No.  Then I'm not singing.  This is it.  I terminate the contract."  Well, she didn't say anything.  And the next day--well, I'd got on the phone to the embassy in Sofia and told them that if I didn't show up then by the next day, they should make inquiries, because I probably would have been arrested.  But nothing happened.  I went back to Sofia.  And at that time, they were negotiating a contract with my Viennese agent to tour Bulgaria that fall.  And the contract was on route.  He had made all of the arrangement, and we were waiting for it to come.  But, of course, when it arrived, I was no longer in Bulgaria; I was on my way to Spain.
Story_ID: 251609
Speaker 1: And how were you adjusting to the different languages, the different cultures, that kind of thing in terms of all of your travels throughout your career (unclear) in Europe?
Speaker 2: Well, I began to adjust very quickly because Europeans were very accustomed to the many different languages.  And there were certain key languages which you could use all over; German, for example.  They may have lost the war [World War II, WWII], but they did not lose end the language area because many people spoke German, especially all over the Baltic States.  In Bulgaria, I spoke only German. But there you could speak German and French.  Yugoslavia and Serbia it was also German and French.  In Croatia and Slovenia it was all German.  So it worked out very well, and you learn, you know, what language will carry you through.  And, of course, in Scandinavia it was always English; everyone spoke English.  In fact, I was surprised when they found that I was speaking Scandinavian, 'cause it was a mixture of Swedish, Norwegian and Danish.
Story_ID: 251610
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about your, your Spanish debut in Barcelona [Spain].
Speaker 2: Yes.  So then I left Sofia [Bulgaria] and I went directly to Barcelona.  The reason I did that, one of the dancers from the theatre where I had worked in Sweden, is--I had written to him, I promised him that I would write once I got settled in southern Europe and I knew my itinerary.  His wife saw the letter, forwarded it to her husband, and she wrote me a letter and said that he--"I forwarded your letter to him.  He's now in Spain.  Why don't you go to Spain?"  And I wrote her back that I can't because I have this big contract that's being sent to me to sign, and because the situation in Bulgaria had not yet changed.  So when it did change, I knew what I was going to do, I'm going to Spain.  And I went to Barcelona.  I had wired him that I was on my way, and I couldn't say exactly when I was going to get there because once you got to the Spanish border, then they tell you, "Manana came into existence."  (Laughter) It was a different situation then, because this was under [Francisco] Franco.  But I made it late in the night, and they had what they call a guardias on the street.  When you arrived at your building, you clap your hand and the guardia would come out and open the door for you to the building.  So they told the guardia that I was coming and I was an American and to please see me in.  And he did.  And that was the beginning of my Spanish experience.
Speaker 1: And how were you received by Spanish audiences?
Speaker 2: Oh, beautifully, better than I had anticipated.  My friend was studying with a Russian ballerina and she said to me one day--because in a rehearsal, 'cause she was doing zarzuela choreography of the zarzuela 'Luisa Fernanda' [Federico Moreno Torroba] at the Grec theatre [Teatre Grec, Barcelona, Spain] in Barcelona.  My friend was a part of the ballet, and she said to me, "Wouldn't you like to perform in Spain?"  And I said, "Oh, they wouldn't have any interest in my work here."  She says, "Quite the contrary."  She says, "They love you in Barcelona, I'm sure."  She said, "Let me speak with the impresario here.  He's the most important man, and he's opening up a new theatre called the Victor- the Opera Victoria [Teatro Victoria, Barcelona, Spain]."  So she did and a couple of days later she came back and she said, "He wants you to come to the theatre tonight to sing for him after the performance."  So I did.  I went and he had his music director [Augusto Alguero] there who did not like me.  But the reason he did not like me, according to the impresario, was because his wife, who was very famous, called (unclear) Carmen Sevilla, she did like me.  And the impresario said, "Just ignore him.  Just ignore him.  He's jealous."  And he said, "And if he won't write for you, I'll get someone else to write for you, but you're going to be a big success in Barcelona.  And what I want you to do is to sing some selections from 'West Side Story' among some of the things you're going to do for us."  So I got very good reviews at the opening.  And finally, one night I presented a song, which I had presented that day on the radio.  And it won the first award at a song festival, but because of a natural disaster south of Barcelona, no one was interested.  People were very unhappy and they were trying to rearrange a recovery in the area, 'cause this was all along the Mediterranean Sea where the disaster had occurred.  So the impresario thought that I probably could bring some significance to, or attention to the song.  And I did at the ra- on the radio that day.  There was an audience and the reception was overwhelming.  So that night when I arrived at the theatre, he said, "We're going to insert that number you did today on the radio in our show tonight.  And it'll just simply be a black backdrop and we'll spot on you in the center of the stage."  And I said to him, "But I haven't memorized it yet."  "Doesn't matter.  Use the music."  And I did.  And the ovation was absolutely not to be believed.  Mary Santpere, who was the star of show, said that they never had such an ovation in that theatre ever.  And from the night on, everyone seemed to have been waiting for me to do that number.  And so my experience in Barcelona was exceptional.
Story_ID: 251611
Speaker 1: From there [Barcelona, Spain] you went back to Germany?
Speaker 2: No.  I went back to Scandinavia because some Scandinavian impresarios had seen me in Spain and had offers for my work.  So I went back to fulfill those engagements.  And before I--then I went back to Spain after spending some time in Scandinavia.  That's when I--they engaged me to go back at the Theatre Victoria [Teatro Victoria, Barcelona, Spain], and then from there I went to Madrid [Spain] to the Theatre De La Sal Zarzuela [Teatro de la Zarzuela, Madrid, Spain].
Speaker 1: And in 1965 you went back to Germany?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Around in '65 [1965] I was in Germany in Berlin [Germany] to do a recording for RIAS. RIAS did lots and lots of recordings.  And I did a recording of two musical selections with a string orchestra.  And it was intended that I should come back and probably fill out a long play of selections.  But I was so busy I just didn't get back.  And when I did decide that I could go back, the conductor had died.
Story_ID: 251612
Speaker 1: Can you kind of explain for those who may see this and don't know the difference, but what is a lieder and exactly what the difference between a lieder and an opera singer, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, an opera singer, of course, is someone who participates in a drama that's set to music.  A lieder singer is a concert singer who sings, stands on the stage by himself, and sings a whole gamut of songs and expressions for one entire evening, and maybe of twenty or thirty songs.  So it could be a song cycle.  The Germans excelled in this area of song literature.  And that's why most concert singers include [Franz] Schubert, [Robert] Schumann, [Ludwig van] Beethoven and Richard Strauss in their programs.  Then, of course, we have the American musical.  And, of course, we all know that that's a different type of singing altogether.  And there is a very specific way of singing American musicals in this country, the style, as opposed to the way they are sung in Europe because the Europeans prefer more legitimate voice with their performances.  And in New York [New York], they're not particularly concerned about the legitimate voice as they are about the characterization.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite?  What's your preference?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed lieder very much, but I was heard by Ed Valle De Paz [Edgardo Del Valle De Paz], who was a pianist, accompanist and music critic in Vienna [Austria].  And he heard me in Stockholm [Sweden] at the request of Scandinavian's most prominent music critic.  And he told me, put it in writing that he thought that I sang German lieder movingly intelligently.  And he thought that that's where I should concentrate my efforts, was in that area.  What he really wanted me to do was to come to Vienna and spend one or two years to see if they couldn't launch the career from there.  And he thought that I was very close to becoming one of the five leading lieder singers in the world.  And I said to him, "Well, that's something for you to say, because the five are now are all German."  He said, "That's because they haven't heard you."  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 251613
Speaker 1: And let's talk about your television performance in Turkey in 1971.  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was in Turkey--actually, I had been given a trip to Turkey in '71 [1971] by an American gentleman who had seen me in Scandinavia.  And he worked for the state department [U.S. Department of State], not exclusively, but he had many assignments from them.  And he had said to me, "You know, I know you've have always wanted to go to Turkey, and I'm going to Turkey.  And whenever you'd like, let me know and you can come and be my guest."  So in '71 [1971], I set aside some months, six months, to go to Turkey.  And he was stationed in Ankara [Turkey], and it gave me an opportunity to travel all over.  And while in Ankara, they heard about me and asked me to come and perform in television.  Television was in its infancy at that time in Turkey.
Speaker 1: And what kind of performance did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I did some performances that I had done in Finland, and because I had the tape.  And they were Spanish selections, and I did those for them.  They were very international in Turkey.  That surprised me also.
Story_ID: 251614
Speaker 1: Were you thinking--was your career where you wanted it to be at this particular time or was there more that you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I really had decided that after my bad experience here [New York, New York], I was not going to going to do--you see, one of the major agencies here told me that I was just a white boy in black face.  And I thought, well, if that's what I've got to go up against, you know, it's not worth it.  And there're other things that one can do in life.  Either I go back to Europe or I stay here.  And the Norwegians had said, "Well, we're going to try to launch your lieder career from Oslo [Norway]."  And they had the opera singer, the Norwegian opera singer, Ingrid Bjoner, to meet with me in New York [New York].  And she says, "Well, I'm going to set you up with my agent in Oslo," because my agent had died.  And I did go back to Oslo in '76 [1976], and I did the song cycle (unclear), which had not been performed in Oslo for many years.  So I got a lot of publicity about it, and I was acclaimed as a very fine lieder singer.  And--but, at that time, I also realized that there wasn't a huge audience--there was a huge audience, but they weren't interested in lieder; just a few people could draw a crowd, and it was very difficult to make any money.  Now, what has happened, the market is saturated with operatic recordings.  And it's so expensive to produce an operatic recording, they are now producing--the record companies are producing lieder recitals, and the audiences are flocking to them.  So if I were doing them now, I would be in demand.
Story_ID: 251615
Speaker 1: 'Cause I studied here, also when I came back here I decided to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When did you come back to the U.S.?
Speaker 1: Well, I came back in '67 [1967], and then I went back to Europe every year because the Norwegians engaged me to do things in television and radio.  But I decided that, you know, it was too much of a gamble.  And it's very expensive to do lieder recitals, 'cause you have to pay for them.  And in order to make a profit, you really have to get a full house.  And that was one of the things.  I think one of the critics had pointed out in his review that, here's a master singer and he has sung here so many times, yet, you know, he didn't get a full house.  And if we don't support singers like this, they'll just disappear 'cause they won't come here.
Speaker 2: When you came back to the U.S. in '67 [1967], was the U.S. what you had expected or how had it changed?  How was it different?
Speaker 1: Well, I thought it was going to be much different, because Orson Welles and Cameron Mitchell, they were all saying to me--Susan Strasberg, they were all saying that I should be in the United States.  Things are really happening.  There's social change.  But they were right to a degree, but they were not right toward me, because I found a lot of resistance, as I pointed out about the Hal Prince [Harold Prince] office.  And that existed throughout the industry.  And I was accustomed not to being typecast.  So I--and also, Shirley Richards [sic. Shirley Rich] said that one would not expect me to start all over again, not with a portfolio like this; that I deserved being treated as someone who has a career, an established career, and should be treated as such.  But it really wasn't happening.  The only chance that I really had was with the Ashley-Famous Agency.  They heard me in an audition.  And at the time, they were considering a black comic.  I can't think of his name.  He set himself, I think, on fire once or--.
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor?
Speaker 1: Richard Pryor.  Yes.  And they said, "Don't do anything.  Give us twenty-four hours.  But, because we are consider--we are considering him, but we want to see if we can take you on as well."
Speaker 2: 'Cause at that time, they could only take on one black client.
Speaker 1: That's exactly what happened.  That was the explanation.  They apologized but thanked me for waiting the twenty-four hours, but they said the funds just weren't available.
Speaker 2: Even though you all were in two totally different industries, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Yes.  Definitely.
Story_ID: 251616
Speaker 1: So were you thinking that in order for you to continue your success in this career that you wanted, you would have to go back to Europe?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I felt that I had to go back to Europe in order to do it.
Speaker 1: And so, in the '70s [1970s], you would go back to Norway every year?
Speaker 2: I went back every year.
Speaker 1: For how long?
Speaker 2: Oh, sometimes two weeks.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  For how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did that right up until 1976, when I did my lieder recital.  And then I--that's when I decided that this is going to be the end, because I'm going to organize a company in New York [New York] and do something else.
Speaker 1: And so your lieder recital was in Norway?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was in Oslo [Norway].
Speaker 1: And that was in 1976?
Speaker 2: That was in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: And how was it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It received critical acclaim.  I thought it was very successful.
Speaker 1: Full house?
Speaker 2: No.  It wasn't a full house.  That was the reason the music from one of the newspapers had complained, that I didn't get a full house, and yet I had sung in Oslo so many times he couldn't understand why the people didn't come out.  He says, you know, "If you don't support a venture like this, people will not come here because they can't afford to throw away money that way, because lieder recitals are very expensive."
Speaker 1: And were you disappointed that you didn't have a full house, even though the recital itself was successful?
Speaker 2: I was somewhat disappointed, but I knew that the people who were there were there because they wanted to be there, and that was gratifying.
Story_ID: 251617
Speaker 1: So, after your lieder recital [in Oslo, Norway], you decided to come back to the U.S. and form a company?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide to--what kind of company did you decide to form?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to do a service organization in banking analysis.  And I realized it was something that could be done on an ongoing basis and as an outside service, that it wasn't an accounting function that needed to be done by a permanent employee.
Speaker 1: And why banking?  Where did you get your banking experience and background?
Speaker 2: Well, I just had a knack for it.  And I think that that's how it is really, you know; you have a knack for something and you do it.  And I was able to find errors very easily, and also too we were entering the computer age.  PCs [personal computers] hadn't come into existence yet, but they were on their way.  And I had familiarized myself with a lot of computer programs, which were being used by the banking industry, and I knew how to put them together and reconcile them to the general ledger.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to go in a completely different direction, from performing and singing and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there was an opportunity--that I saw it as an opportunity as something that I could do and could do successfully.  So I chose to go in that direction.
Speaker 1: And were you missing performing?
Speaker 2: Not really because I'd made up my mind that I wasn't going to do it anymore.
Speaker 1: Because did you feel like you just couldn't succeed on the level that you wanted to here in the U.S. under the circumstances?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Unclear) that typecasting (unclear).
Speaker 1: And so, tell us a little bit about the name of the banking analysis firm that you formed?
Speaker 2: Well, I called it Corporate Computer Systems [New York, New York].  And I had a client who had an office on East 51st Street, and he had said he was in literary business.  And he said, "You know, you can use my office as your office," 'cause he had a lot of time anyway.  So that's really how I started and set myself up having a midtown office and having telephone service and all of that, someone manning the reception desk.  Then finally, we moved to another location; then finally he went out of business and moved to California.  So I finally just brought my office here to my apartment, because no one knows the difference, since this is being in lower midtown [Manhattan, New York, New York]; the address, it's a business address.  So it worked out very well.  And I really didn't need an office, because I didn't do work in the office.  We did work on the premises of the client.
Speaker 1: And how successful was the company?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was very successful in view of the number of accounts that we had.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your clients?
Speaker 2: Well, CBS; Toy Division [Inc.] was one of my clients.  They were the largest toy manufacturers in the U.S.  Then, let's see, Club Med [Inc.] was a client for a number of years; Elle Publishing, the magazine; EUE/Screen Gems [Ltd]; Gimbels department store [New York, New York] I had for about ten years until they went out of business.
Speaker 1: Lots of magazines, Seventeen magazine.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I dealt with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Soap Opera Digest.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because they were all under the Rupert Murdoch umbrella, and therefore, they, you know, engagement me to do any new company that they acquire.  They said, "Well, you take over the banking analysis."  And that's exactly what I did.  And that's why there are so many of them on here.  But I was heavily into publishing, John Wiley & Sons [Inc.]; I was there for about eight years.
Speaker 1: And were you still getting calls from Europe and other places to perform despite retiring from the business?
Speaker 2: No.  But I knew none other than I did get Maria Santpere [Mary Santpere], whom I had worked with in Barcelona [Spain], tried to get me to come to Spain, give up what I was doing in New York [New York] and come to Spain because she said that, you know, "You could easily reemerge here as a very fine singer."  And she says, "You can work with me, because I'm doing basically galas performances now."  But, I told her that I was too happy doing what I was doing, and I thought it was too much of a risk.
Speaker 1: But did you miss that at all?  Again, this is what you had wanted since your childhood.
Speaker 2: Well, I was reaching a certain age where the attraction, the real attraction, was no longer there.
Story_ID: 251618
Speaker 1: And how do you think the business was starting to change throughout the time that you left in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]?  What were some of the changes that were taking place?
Speaker 2: Well, The Beatles came on, you know, early on. They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What came on?
Speaker 2: --the Beatles.
Speaker 1: Right.  I'm sorry.  The Beatles.  Yes.
Speaker 2: They changed everything.  And I knew then it would be very difficult for me unless I got into a theatre company.  One of the chances that I had but I couldn't accept it was to go to the Swedish Theatre in Helsinki [Finland].  They wanted to feature me in 'How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.' But I couldn't accept it because I was in Madrid [Spain] performing at the Zarzuela Theatre [Teatro de la Zarzuela, Madrid, Spain].  But I had hoped that if I had gone there, I would become a member of the ensemble and could work that way; then you get benefits and ultimately you retire, and you retire very well.
Speaker 1: And so, do you think that there was starting to become at that particular time less of an appreciation and understanding of classical music and performances and operatic music and performances?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there's always been an audience in Europe, because it's a cultural thing with them.  But, you see, it's very difficult to enter into these various countries and into their musical life unless you are a very big international star; and even then it's difficult.  Now, you take the singer [HistoryMaker] Mattiwilda Dobbs [Janzon]; she was married to a Swede [Bengt Janzon] and lived in Stockholm [Sweden].  But I don't know how many times she sang at the opera, but I know she was learning Swedish so that she could do a performance in Swedish at the opera because they did everything in Swedish.  So that's a hindrance also because unless you're going to be attached to a company like that, and one who wants to learn the language.  And I learned the role, you know, of that particular language and do it just a couple of times.  But, if you can take advantage of the (unclear) system and the various benefits, then you know it's worth it.  But I--so I don't think there was less appreciation, it was just that things were changing.  Countries seemed to think that they need to protect their own singers, even though they know many of them come to this country and do very well.  But on the other hand, countries like Spain didn't care.  If you were attractive to an audience there, hey, so much the better.  But in Sweden there, they were very protective.
Story_ID: 251619
Speaker 1: What about in the U.S.?  What was happening in the U.S. in terms of its acceptance or understanding of that genre of music?
Speaker 2: Of classical music?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, it was certainly beginning to take on a new significance, mainly because of singers like [HistoryMaker] Mattiwilda Dobbs [Janzon], Leontyne Price, Grace Bumbry, Jessye Norman; you can just name them.  There's a whole list of them: Martina Arroyo, Shirley Verrett.  But they were all female singers.  Very few male singers to this day have been able to really breakthrough in a big, big way.  I think there's only maybe one that I can--one or two that I can think of that have been able to break through in a big way.  So that's still a problem.  But I think James Levine has done a lot to rectify this problem by bringing young male, blacks, into the training program at The Met [The Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] and giving them an opportunity to start at the bottom, learn the small roles and move on up to bigger roles, and we would eventually see black male singers doing a lot of leading roles.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No.  I think you do what is right for you at the time that you embark on it.
Story_ID: 251620
Speaker 1: What advice or suggestions do you have for young African Americans who may be interested in a career in classical music and/or performance?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, if they're going into classical music as a singer, they need to obtain a command of languages, especially in German, French, Italian and perhaps Spanish.  And I wouldn't really leave out some of the Scandinavian languages, because there's a wealth of song material in Scandinavia.  But you certainly need to master the languages 'cause without a good command of the language, you really cannot succeed.  And it's very difficult to do that in this country because you don't have a chance to practice.  So many times that's why singers go to Europe and spend some time so that they can master--they'll study here but go there to master the language.
Story_ID: 251621
Speaker 1: And had the racial climate not been what it was, what do you think could have happened with your career here in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: If the racial climate had been different?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I think that if they had only--were only willing to accept me as I presented myself and not in the image of what Broadway or Madison Avenue [New York, New York] had decided they wanted to do, then they--see Madison Avenue was always thinking about their sponsors, and the sponsors were hesitant to use certain people.  But, of course, that's--a lot of that has changed now.  And, thank goodness.
Speaker 1: Has it changed as much as you think that it should have or you would have liked for it to have changed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that we see--Madison Avenue, I think, has changed tremendously in this respect.  I mean, there are many minorities now doing advertising, which I think is wonderful.
Story_ID: 251622
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed the whole musical aspect of my life.  And it gave me an opportunity that I wouldn't have had otherwise.  I mean, I wouldn't have traveled as much and come to know so many different people.  And many of them I'm still in touch with.  They come to New York [New York] and they visit me, and they call me and constantly.  So from that perspective, I've enjoyed it very much, and I'm very grateful for the opportunity.  Even my professor in Munich [Germany] said--'cause she was attached to the Munich opera [Bayerische Staatsoper] for thirty-five years, and she said, "How wonderful for you.  You have been able to travel and meet so many different people, and I just think that's wonderful."
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish that--or think back to how your life would have been different had you not been so devoted to music at such an early age?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I can't imagine what my life would have been like, really.
Speaker 1: Do you ever have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I think that's--'cause I think I believe that you do what you have to do at the time in which you do it.  And you take it from there and move on.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that you can always find things that you say I would have done differently, "Had I only known better."  (Laughter)  Hindsight is always, you know, something that we look at and say, "Oh, I would have done it this way."  But, hey, you do things at a given time and for certain reasons, and I think that whatever you do it's the right decision you've made.  And if it turns out that it was not the right decision, you move on.
Speaker 1: And what do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that there is anything that I really aspire to do at this point in time.  I'm in my sunset years, and I just think about what I have had an opportunity to do, and I'm thankful for that.  And I have my friends, and they come to visit me and I think that's wonderful.  We talk about old times.
Story_ID: 251623
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we're all on the right track and there have been many improvements.  So I think that the community at large just has to keep its focus on the prize and things will work themselves out.  But there have been many changes to take place I think in recent years.  And the most important thing, I think that young people must learn to not resist a good education.  You've got to get a good education.  If you don't get a good education, you're doomed.  And society today is such that it's very difficult for families, 'cause everything is so expensive and two parents are working.  See, when I grew up, my aunt, she didn't work; my mother [Ida Hollins] didn't work; they were always home, there to tell you what to do and what not to do.  And that made a great deal.  It made a great deal.  And to think kids are missing that today.  And that's why they go astray.  They need discipline in their lives.  And I don't know how we're going to change that.  But that seems to be the crux of the problem.
Story_ID: 251624
Speaker 1: And what did--what was the reaction back home of your success in your--with your family and just, you know, friends and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, people really don't comprehend the total effect here.  They see it but they don't know--I speak of a certain theatre that I work in, doesn't mean anything here unless you're well versed, you know, in that industry.  They just see something and they said, "Well, that's nice.  You have this review."  But they don't really get the total effect.  And I--it isn't that they don't appreciate it.  But unless you are a part of that environment, then you really don't understand it.
Story_ID: 251625
Speaker 1: Was there ever--is there a theatre that you didn't perform at but you really wanted to?
Speaker 2: Well, the one in Helsingor [Denmark], I really wanted to perform there.  It was a Swedish theatre.  'Cause it was a wonderful theatre and very progressive.   And I thought it would present for me a challenge, and maybe ultimately I would get engaged by the dramatic theatre in Stockholm [Sweden], which was headed by Ingmar Bergman, but it was not meant to be.
Story_ID: 251626
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  What is it about you that you want people to say when you're no longer here?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that without really seeing my work that it's not much that one can comment about.  But I think that overall, you know, if they know what I've done, you just accept it as another life in the arts, and he attained this and that and move on.
Speaker 1: But not even necessarily musically related, what is it that you want people to say about you?  People who know you, what is it that you want them to say about you when you're no longer here?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope they'll just say he's a good guy (laughter).  (Unclear) Yeah, really.
Story_ID: 251627
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important, and more particularly, why is it important to you to preserve it, especially in the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, so much of it gets lost.  We concentrate on the main figures of today, and the little people are making a contribution but, you know, so much emphasis--and that's the media.  The media grabs hold of those things and just shoves aside some of the less significant things that are taking place within the community.
Story_ID: 251628
Speaker 1: What was your favorite performance?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say my performance probably in Madrid [Spain] at the Teatro de la Zarzuela.  It was a very elegant production and probably was ahead of its time for Madrid, but--in some ways--but it was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 251629
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Oh, legacy.  I don't know.  I don't know that I have a legacy.  See, I think that the only legacy I could leave behind, if I were teaching; teaching young people.  And I certain thought that I wouldn't mind doing that, just to pass on what I know.  And, because I--there again, I was very fortunate to have a professor [Hedwig Fichtmuller] who came along at a time when the arts were revered in Europe.  And she worked with many great conductors and that information she's passed on to me.  So I wouldn't mind passing that on to some young person as well.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you ever go into teaching?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a great challenge, it's not easy; it's not easy at all.
Story_ID: 251630
Speaker 1: And is there anything else you'd like to add, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Georg] Koen, that perhaps we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you've covered my career in general.  And I'm very thankful for the opportunity to lay it all out (laughter), so to speak, on the table, and hope that someone might receive some inspiration from it, but know that you can attain anything you want if you just set your mind to it.  And it doesn't matter how famous you become.  It's being able to do what you love, and that's the key that'll make you happy.
Speaker 1: And for people who watch this, more particularly young people, what is it that you hope they gain from it years to come?
Speaker 2: Well, things will probably be very different years to come.  But they will also see the struggle and a different point of view about the struggle, 'cause people have encountered the struggle in different ways.  I think of--I can't think of his name now--from Chicago [Illinois], a writer; he was a German young man [Hans-Jurgen Massaquoi], and he ended up in Chicago writing for Ebony.  He has quite an experience, and it was wonderful that he was able that he was able to put his experience on paper in the form of a book ['Destined to Witness: Growing Up Black in Nazi Germany,' Hans J. Massaquoi], 'cause he lived through the whole Nazi era.  And when so many were killed, he was not--the Gestapo never routed him up.  We don't know why, but he lived through it and he lived through it to tell it.  But then he came to America and encountered racism here, and he had thought he was escaping from racism in Germany.  And his mother [Bertha Baetz] encountered it with her brother who had already moved to the United States.  And she didn't--they didn't live very far from each other in Illinois.  And she didn't speak to her brother anymore.  She said, "After all we've gone through, the two of us, for him to take on the attitudes of Americans, I just think it's despicable."  So I think much can be gathered, you know, from the experience of different people and how they've confronted it and moved on with their lives.
Story_ID: 251631
Speaker 1: This photograph is my father's [Maurice Koen] half-sister, Maybelle Koen [ph.].
Speaker 2: About what year do you think it was taken?
Speaker 1: Well, judging by the dress, I think probably in the 1930s, maybe, early.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: My paternal great-grandmother, Leona.
Speaker 2: Leona Koen.
Speaker 1: Koen, yes.
Speaker 2: And could you spell Leona?
Speaker 1: L-E-O-N-A.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think this one was taken?
Speaker 1: Well, this certainly was done in the 19th century (laughter).  When did photography come into existence?
Speaker 2: When, Matthew [Hickey]?  You should know that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Oh, 1930s.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's my aunt.  My paternal aunt Julia Koen [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year?
Speaker 2: I would suspect that that would have been in the 1920s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of my aunt Julia with her husband, and back of her is my father's half-brother; his name I can't recall right now.
Speaker 2: Hang on.  I'm sorry.  Hang on one second.
Speaker 1: On the other side of the photograph is Henry Koen [ph.], which is my grandfather's brother.  There were only two boys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.  The half-brother was William [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was my father's half-brother.
Speaker 1: Taken?
Speaker 2: Well, that was done by the Hooks Brothers in Memphis [Tennessee].  That probably was done, maybe in the late '20s [1920s]; could be '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this one is Richard Harry Koen.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Richard Koen.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 2: Robert Henry.
Speaker 1: And this is his son, Robert Henry Koen [ph.].
Speaker 2: So that's your uncle?
Speaker 1: That's my uncle.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 1: Who's this guy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now that's a guy that I recognize.  That's [HistoryMaker] Georg Koen (laughter).  That was taken in 1976.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Georg Koen at the University of North Dakota [Grand Forks, North Dakota] in 1953 or '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: That's Georg Koen in Malmo, Sweden, in 1961, '62 [1962] theater season.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Georg Koen in 1960 in Munich, Germany.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother, Minnie Jones.
Speaker 1: Minnie Jones.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  About what year do you think that one was taken, Mr. Koen?
Speaker 2: That could have been (unclear), maybe the 19--19 maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my mother's sister, middle sister, Delia [ph.].
Speaker 1: Her last name?
Speaker 2: That's her--Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)  Booker T. Washington [High School] in Memphis, Tennessee.  And that probably was around 1933.
Speaker 1: And that's a shot of my doing a performance, lieder performance, in the [U.S.] military in Germany.  That would have been 1958.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was taken in Belgrade [Serbia] in 1960, when I appeared there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Taken at the radio station in Barcelona [Spain] (unclear).
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965] or early in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is from the same radio show, standing with a famous actress Mary Santpere [Maria Santpere].
Speaker 2: Could you spell that?
Speaker 1: Mary, M-A-R-Y; Santpere, S-A-N-T-P-E-R-E.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And this was perhaps New Year's Eve at the Teatro de la Zarzuela [Madrid, Spain] in 1963 at the midnight celebration when the performance came to a close, and everybody went out onto the stage to do a simple number, and to drink champagne and get drunk.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you happen to remember the names of the other fellas?
Speaker 2: Well, the first fellow, I cannot recall his name.  He was with the Antonio Ballet [ph.], and that's the one to the far left.  Capre Javier Martinet [ph.] is the fellow next to him.  He was a writer.  And, of course, the third person is yours truly.  And the one to the far right--I'm trying to think of his name.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.  Ready?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's the building of the Koen shoe shop when the building was purchased from my grandfather.  And this is probably around nineteen-nine [1909] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --when he was renovating.
Story_ID: 251632
Speaker 1: These are photographs from my visit to Bulgaria on the Black Sea.  That's outside Varvara [Bulgaria] in 1962 in the summer.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Got that one?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 2: Sorry.  That was upside down.
Speaker 1: Another photograph of gang.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 2: They were wonderful people.  And that's a photograph where I was performing with a concert band in Germany somewhere in 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 1: And that's from a nightclub performance, I believe, in 1965 in Sweden with the orchestra and the other attractions.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 1: And that's just a reclund [ph.] of my work, for publicity sake.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 1: When I came to New York [New York] to study in 1954, I spent the summer in a work project at the St. Mark's [United] Methodist Church on Edgecombe Avenue in Harlem [New York, New York].  And there were two other members of this group that came here also, as one of eighteen university students across the United States.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's a photograph of me in 1962 in Barcelona [Spain] when I arrived from Bulgaria.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a snapshot probably taken when I was in high school.  I don't remember the year on that--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you had to guess, what would you say?
Speaker 2: Well, it probably could be 1950, '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: So early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)  All right.
Speaker 1: And the same would be true for this one, the early '50s [1950s].  And the lady standing there helped sponsored some of the students at the school.  And she and her husband were on their way south to the Gulf.  And they wanted to stop by and see how the money was being spent.
Speaker 2: You know who the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the other fella was a student at the college.  He was a Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] singer as well.  I remember his name, Greenie Small [ph.].  He was very tall and that always got a few chuckles (laughter).
