Story_ID: 94321
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name is spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Reverend Dr. Stanley Keeble, K-E-E-B as in boy, L-E.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Born March the 8th, 1937, I was born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Founder and Director of the Chicago Gospel Music Heritage Museum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are also are noted musician and radio personality and is that, you wanna kind of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You wanna comment on that just briefly 'cause we're just trying to establish who you are.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I began playing back in the early '50s [1950's] I began playing at the Fellowship Baptist Church, where the Reverend Clay Evans [HM] is the Pastor, in 1952.  Later I played for Inez Andrews, who was formerly of The Caravans shortly after she left the Caravans, and the first musician for Jessy Dixon.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: December the second, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we, at the present time?
Speaker 2: At HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Offices, right?  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. Are you looking for Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's fine, that's fine.  We just trying to slate it to make sure that--and have you state where we are, so that authenticates, you know, where we are.
Story_ID: 94322
Speaker 1: Before go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Boy, this is gone create some real, real response.  Vegetables, I love vegetables, most folks don't like them (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay, any particular kind?
Speaker 2: Primarily green vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite colors are blue and grey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I like the whole year and I was just saying to your partner here, I was born in Chicago so I'm accustomed to winter.  I like the winter, I like the summer and I like the fall.  Especially the changing of the color of the leaves on the trees when fall comes around.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, because I haven't been to--a couple of places that I really like to go for vacation, I have been to Europe but I worked the whole time I was there.  My favorite place to get away in the states is Las Vegas [Nevada], and I like Las Vegas because the food is reasonable.  And you can get a lot of food for not a lot of money and they have exceptionally good seafood, and I love seafood.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't believe so.
Story_ID: 94323
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'mma ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  I'm a start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Adola, A-D-O-L-A, Stuckey, S-T-U-C-K-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December the 8, 1913, Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Only her parents, her mother and father.
Speaker 1: Were they from Jackson too?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure, but I know that they were both from Mississippi.  I don't know if, you know their origin was, their being in Jackson.  But I know it was in the state of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did your grandmother or grandfather tell you any stories about any of the other ancestors or relatives?
Speaker 2: No, they never did, I remember my grandmother telling me about she was on the train traveling some place and she saw this person and they looked familiar to her.  And she decided to speak with them and discovered that it was one of her brothers that she had not seen in years.  I thought that was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your grandmother talk about her life at all or your grandfather about their life in Mississippi and what it was like?
Speaker 2: No, basically, I didn't see my grandfather that much, but whenever I saw my grandmother, she talked primarily about her children, okay, my mother and her siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many of them were there?
Speaker 2: There were five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were all raised in Jackson basically--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, there were six, 'cause there were four girls with my mother and that she had two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They all raised in Jackson, basically?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then they moved to Missouri, prior to coming here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where in Missouri or?
Speaker 2: Palmer.
Speaker 1: Palmer, Missouri, alright?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) nodding yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, then they moved to Chicago [Illinois].  Did--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, not all of them moved to Chicago.  My mother and two of her sisters moved here to Chicago and one sister and one brother to move to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother discuss the reason why she moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: They moved to Chicago looking for employment. They heard that there were places where they could get jobs here in Chicago. That's why they moved here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And about old was she when they moved, or what year did they move here, do you think?
Speaker 2: Probably '36 [1936] because I was born in '37 [1937] and they hadn't been here long.  Because my siblings, which are all older than me, my mother's children, they were born in Palmer, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 94324
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: His name is Josephus, J-O-S-E-P-H-U-S, Keeble, K-E-E-B as in boy L-E, and of course he's a Senior.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And how far back can you trace his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Just his father, his father was a preacher and I was probably around ten years old before I ever saw him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Might even been older than that, but what I know about him was that he was a Preacher and very prominent minister in the area of where he lived.
Speaker 1: Where did he live?
Speaker 2: When I met him, they were living in Poplar Bluff, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright and his name, your grandfather's name is Reverend?
Speaker 2: E. C. Keeble.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  E. C. Keeble, in Poplar Bluff, Missouri, okay.  Did he make an impression on you?  Well you know, I just wondered since you're a Reverend now, did your grandfather make a big impression on you when you met--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Actually I didn't see him that much, I only saw him when I went for vacation, which was two weeks, maybe three weeks out of the year.  Other than that, I didn't see him, but I was impressed by him because I think he had a particular liking for me because many times when the kids would get in trouble, including me, I was the only didn't get the spanking (chuckling)so I really liked my granddad (laughing).
Speaker 1: Were you equally guilty or just the only one--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Certainly, (laughing) but he saw something that I didn't see as a kid.
Speaker 1: So you were a favorite of your grandfather's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I'm assuming so, I'm assuming so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know why, do you have any idea why?
Speaker 2: I really don't, like I say, I would get into childish things like any of the other kids, but he had a special liking for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Well, tell us about your father, you know.  What was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father actually left Palmer [Missouri] and moved to St. Louis [Missouri] and he lived in St. Louis for a number of years and he had his own business.  He was a sod layer, okay, that's when they do people's lawns and so forth, that's the kind of business that he was in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very profitable business for him too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94325
Speaker 1: And did he [his father Josephus Keeble] have a chance to go to school when he was younger, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I am not sure, but I'm sure that was not that much education, because my mother [Adola Stuckey Keeble] didn't get much of an education, and none of their siblings did.  They spent most of their time--after they got up to a certain size and age, they spent their time working the fields and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother was raised in Jackson [Mississippi] basically and then moved to Missouri later--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Later, after, you know.  I'm sure she was probably 16, 17, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, I've never heard it discussed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't have any stories about courtship or anything or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So I take it your father wasn't around that much and your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah. They broke up after I was conceived when I was born, my dad was not around.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was--that was--your other had moved to Chicago [Illinois]--now did she move to Chicago after they broke up or what was it?  Or did he move with her to Chicago briefly or?
Speaker 2: Yeah. He was here very briefly and then they broke up.  But they broke up prior to my birth, I was already conceived, just had not been born.
Speaker 1: Okay. So when you grew up, you would see your father as you described your grandfather, but only periodically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were growing up, your household consisted of older brothers and sisters and yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had two sisters and a brother that were my mother's children, there were four of us.
Speaker 1: What are their names and what order do they come in?
Speaker 2: The oldest was my brother's name was Eddie and I have a sister named Sue and the youngest girl, her name was Helen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94326
Speaker 1: So you were raised in Chicago [Illinois] and can you tell me what community were you raised in?
Speaker 2: I was raised on 49th and Forestville, I attended Willard Elementary School. Well actually my first schooling was Emerson Elementary School; is on the corner of Paulina and Walnut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we moved south and that's where I began to take notice to things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you left Emerson in what grade?
Speaker 2: I think it was second, 'cause I think it was a third grade that I started at Willard.
Speaker 1: Second, okay.  That would've been 1944 or so I guess.  Would that be--is that about right I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '44 [1944] '45 [1945] somewhere in there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about growing up, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, living on 49th and Forestville meant that we were only a couple of blocks from Washington Park.  And Washington Park was, of course a favorite to a kid and we did go to the park a lot.  And back in those days, we did all of our shopping on 47th Street.  Everything that we actually needed we could get on 47th Street, and basically my travel was between 47th Street and 51st Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the neighborhood like, what did it look like?
Speaker 2: It was basically just an area where it was all apartments there were no homes in the area, but even with the apartments there was a lot of congeniality.  People were, you know friendly and caring about each other.
Story_ID: 94327
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Music was a great part of growing up, I begin to take lessons in '46 [1946] and start developing from that point.  And I got away from it for a while, but then went back to it by the time I was going to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were about eight or nine when you started taking--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, nine year--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Piano lessons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was teaching you was it--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The lady's name was Mrs. Crim (ph).
Speaker 1: Okay. Was she from the church--was she from the school or did she have her own--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I actually took piano lessons in her house.  She had a piano in her house and that's where I took lessons. I did not become affiliated with church until later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So church wasn't a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was mandatory, but I'm just saying as a young kid, I was not as involved as I became once I got older and in high school, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was exposed to more to the music as I grew, it was, as a small kid, the music was not that important.
Story_ID: 94328
Speaker 1: What were the most, I guess--what was your favorite music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, ironically it was gospel Music, I was fortunate enough to meet many of the gospel greats, who had a great impact on my life.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the circumstances under which you'd meet these gospel greats, 'cause I don't un--I guess--were they accessible for any kid that wanted to meet them or did--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I think what really began the relationships with them is they discovered that I knew how to play, didn't play real well, but a number of those that did play well, concluded that there was a possibility for me.  And as a matter of fact Professor Willie Webb, took me under his wings, he was a great mentor, one of the greatest musicians in this city.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was--what church was he affiliated with?
Speaker 2: When I first met him, he was at Grater Harvest Baptist Church; Pastored by the late Reverend [Louis] Boddie, and then he moved to the Fellowship Baptist Church, with Reverend Clay Evans as the pastor, that's where we really developed a mentor/student relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about some of the other gospel greats that you met?
Speaker 2: Roberta Martin, who eventually became one of the top musicians in Gospel Music, was actually a trained classical pianist, but she heard this new music and was fascinated by it and she became one of gospel music's greatest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who else?
Speaker 2: Of course there was Sally Martin, who worked with Professor Thomas Dorsey who wrote Precious Lord Take My Hand.
Speaker 1: Did you meet Thomas Dorsey?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met Thomas Dorsey but he was not one of those that I had an opportunity to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94329
Speaker 1: All right, now Chicago [Illinois], from what I understand, was really a sort of an incubator for new style of gospel music, right?
Speaker 2: Well, actually Chicago is considered the gospel capital because gospel music actually had its birth here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when we talk about gospel music as such, how would we distinguish gospel music from religious music in general or spirituals or?
Speaker 2: Well, the spirituals were actually songs that were sung primarily by slaves and it was songs primarily a message. I understand that the song Meeting Tonight, Meeting On the Old Campground, when they sang it, they were saying to others that we're going to meet tonight.  Because as slaves they didn't have freedom to do a lot of things that they wanted to do.
Speaker 1: And they couldn't just be direct and say what they wanted--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Or do what they wanted to do they had to sneak and do what they did, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So spirituals had a double entendre often, you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That didn't necessarily have to do with religion as much as they did about--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Communication.
Speaker 1: Yeah, communication, about any number of situations might be--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And gospel then would be?
Speaker 2: Gospel, the term was pinned gospel music and the term Gospel means Good News and the people that were involved in gospel wanted to bring Good News to people who were still sometime, even though they weren't enslaved, they were living in conditions that were not favorable.  So consequently those that were involved in gospel music felt it was their duty to create a music that would be uplifting.  And I can attest to the fact that it did uplift many, many people, I been to many concerts were there were thousands and thousands of people, and the people enjoyed it tremendously.   When I discovered that people in the thousands would attend the gospel Concert, it was just overwhelming to me.  I had to go to New Orleans [Louisiana] one year to play for a concert and they--the concert in the ballpark, Pelican Stadium, there were eighteen thousand people at a gospel concert.  I was just overwhelmed and some years later, when I was playing for Inez Andrews, we were in Atlanta, Georgia, and Inez was in the dressing room getting dressed, so I decided I'd go and peek from behind the curtain and see if anybody showed up.  I ran back to the dress room, I asked Inez, I said how many does this place seat?  And she said twenty three thousand, I said every seat is filled, and people are standing around the walls.  That had a tremendous impact on me to know that twenty five thousand people would come to a gospel concert to hear Gospel.  But they came because the music they heard was good news and it was uplifting.
Story_ID: 94330
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would it be correct to say that gospel music started with Thomas Dorsey?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, Thomas Dorsey is the one that started--you know his history was he was playing for the Blues Singer, Ma Rainey and when he left Ma Rainey and came to the church; there was not an awful lot of difference in his playing in church than what he played for Ma Rainey.  And of course it was met with great resistance in the church until, you know, finally they realized that he was not trying to bring the club into the church.  But bring music that was uplifting and inspiring because we were singing prior to gospel music anthems and hymns.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those would be the hymns that are usually sung in a white church basically?
Speaker 2: Basically, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Congregational style hymns and such.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we didn't have that many people that were writing so that was the music we had to use in order to do a service.
Story_ID: 94331
Speaker 1: We were, want to ask you about the decline, I guess of the spirituals in the Church. What they call Negro Spirituals, what do you--why do you think they declined in popularity and the?
Speaker 2: Well, because in the black church it was, it was the becoming of writers and arrangers so we felt that we had our own and we could use it in our own services.  We didn't have to any longer use music that was written by others.  And I think it is, you know, really wonderful that we have talented people and they could produce and that the church accepted it.  'Cause the church was certainly at liberty to reject it, and of course many did.
Speaker 1: So this was cutting edge musically it came out.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: It was great groundbreaking--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: In a sense that maybe people today, I guess could've liken the ascendancy of gospel music to the introduction of drums and that sort of thing into the church music.  Well now that you see in churches where--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Years ago you didn't see much of that, the guitars--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.  It was not, it was not even permitted in the church.
Speaker 1: Or even like gospel rap now, people are actually rapping, not--or rapping, there's a rap genre of church music that wouldn't have existed, you know.  People are probably still cringing about some-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I don't know if this is rap's time, because a lot of folks don't understand it and don't accept it.  My being in music, I like music period, but I just feel that the church need a specific music to deal with issues that church has to deal with.
Story_ID: 94332
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna get back to the history and the, I guess, your philosophy of music, but I wanna go back and pick up your childhood and take you on through, you know childhood and the chronology.  But what kind of little boy were you, when you growing up?  What were you like and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I guess like play ball and other games they would have at the Field House when we go to the park, that's basically what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, just recreation at the Field House?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you like sports?
Speaker 2: Only baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were you an outgoing young man, or were you shy?
Speaker 2: Not shy at all, extremely outgoing and I think it was one of the reasons that adults took to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could relate well to adults?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I think I related better to adults (chuckling) than, you know my own peers.
Speaker 1: Okay often adults, especially in church settings, say that you have an old soul and you can do that sort of thing.  Did they talk like that about you or?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the reason they took to me, I was always respectful to adults and always obedient. And that was what I was taught, and I dare not go astray from my teachings.
Speaker 1: Okay, but as you know, so many do, so many people go astray of past teachings, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But you had--your mother and grandmother were around too?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Make an impression on you, I guess?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And when you did see your father [Josephus Keeble], and did you have to go to Missouri to see him or was it here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I went to Missouri to see him, he eventually moved back to Chicago [Illinois], but that was, you know some years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so and your grandfather, you would see in Missouri when you'd go to visit?
Speaker 2: Right, just during the summer.
Story_ID: 94333
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about school.  Now, you went to Emerson first, then Willard School, here in Chicago [Illinois].  How was school life, how did you take to school?
Speaker 2: Well, let me just tell you this.  I was really being competitive, my oldest sister was a very, very bright girl, and I stayed in competition with her constantly.  'Cause I didn't want her to be smarter than me (laughing) even though she was.  I got in trouble once, my mother [Adola Stuckey Keeble] had to go up to the school, and she very calmly said to me, I don't ever want to have to do this again.  And that was a blessing for her to say that to me, rather than half killing me so I ended up graduating with all sorts of certificates and awards (chuckling).
Speaker 1: What did you do to get in trouble?
Speaker 2: I cut school one day, and my mother was furious.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a modest offense compared to what some could be doing (laughing).
Speaker 2: No, but we had a close knit family because in the building where we lived, my mother had another sister that lived in the same building.  And she had, you know three children as well.  So we were all there together and it was--it was good family, good family setting.
Speaker 1: Did your mother really emphasize the importance of an education?
Speaker 2: She did, she did, she wanted to make sure that I had a decent education, especially since she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: English, I loved reading, but I of course enjoyed, they called it back in those days Geography, but they now refer to as Social Studies.  I like learning about different places on the planet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your favorite places?
Speaker 2: My favorite place actually was America.
Speaker 1: Any particular part?
Speaker 2: Well, actually it was here in Chicago [Illinois], 'cause in the early years I had not been any place.  So I didn't know about other places and it wasn't until I grew up and was an older fella that I began to travel and see different places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who was some of the teachers in school that influenced you or made an impression on you or tried to help develop you?
Speaker 2: When I was at Willard, there was a music teacher, named Mrs. Lee.  Mrs. Lee was someone that was really special and very firm and stern, so when you to Miss Lee's room, you had to learn.  And I enjoyed Mrs. Lee's class because the music, first of all, was fascinating, and she was an excellent teacher.  I later went to Fisk Elementary School, which is on 61st and Ingleside because by that time, the family had moved, you know, over in the Woodlawn area.  And Mrs. Zion (ph) was a teacher that, I think she found me fascinating.  I think she considered me one of her brighter students, because she was always, you know, calling on me and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you made pretty good grades in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I made excellent grades in school; I was scared to carry anything home other than (laughing) great grades, yeah.  It was important that my grades be As and Bs.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you finish grade school at Fisk?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 94334
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, what year did you start high school, and where?
Speaker 2: I started high school in '51 [1951] at CVS [Chicago Vocational School].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, was your family living near CVS at that time?
Speaker 2: We were living in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], we lived on 63rd and CVS was on 87th and Jeffery and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is that a long--that's pretty long way to go, I guess.
Speaker 2: But there weren't many choices.
Speaker 1: But that wouldn't be your neighborhood school, right?
Speaker 2: No, the neighborhood school would have been Hyde Park.  But I was recommended for CVS by my Teachers when I'm graduating from Fisk and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay, now CVS was sort like a Magnet school in a sense, Chicago Vocational School?
Speaker 2: Chicago Vocational School that's what CVS stands for.
Speaker 1: Right, and had you decided to pursue a certain vocation and that's why they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I had not, but I think they were kind of hoping that once I got there that I would find the direction in which I really wanted to go.  And going to CVS first of all, was fascinating, it had the reputation of being the largest high school in the midwest of America.  And it--is a huge school, huge place.
Speaker 1: Now wasn't it--didn't it have--wasn't it a story about it being an Army or having some, yeah, some connection to the war, to World War II, or being a training place for soldiers or something during the war?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure; I do know that they did have ROTC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it is huge, you're right on that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, and proved to be a great place.  I did pretty good in CVS, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you involved in school activities at CVS?
Speaker 2: Just in the choir.
Speaker 1: And now--was CVS mostly white in those days?  'Cause I know--now their communities mainly black.
Speaker 2: When I went to CVS, I think it was about seven of us Blacks in the whole school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well how were you treated there?
Speaker 2: I was treated fine as a matter of fact, I made a number of friends and there was never an incident, I never encountered an incident.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who were some of the teachers and personalities at CVS that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't remember anybody's name from CVS but that doesn't say a lot, I'm old, and I forget a lot of things (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did you decide on a vocation at CVS when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the music, it was the music.  CVS has always had a great Music Department, great Music Department and some great Music Teachers at CVS.  'Cause CVS had a band, as well as the choir and the band was participating in a lot of parades and, you know,  sports events and so forth, they were doing a great job.
Story_ID: 94335
Speaker 1: Okay, so you sang in the choir, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  Did you get a chance to travel and do those kinds of things with the choir?
Speaker 2: Not with the choir, I did all my traveling with the gospel that I worked with.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were--you said you were active as a teenager in church and you became increasingly active as you got involved in gospel music.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what Church were you active with, in the beginning?
Speaker 2: I first started attending Sunday School at Zion Temple Baptist Church, which was located at the time on the corner of 48th and Langley.  That building is no longer there, they moved years ago, and this was pre-television days.  We didn't have television so we listen to a lot of radio and one Sunday I heard this Church that was on the radio and I was fascinated by what I heard.  And I asked my mother if I could go to that church and I went to the Greater Harvest Baptist Church, pastored by the Late Reverend Louis Boddie which was on 51st and State Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I was fascinated by it, because it was one of those real high energy churches.  They believed in really giving the praise.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the music was exciting?
Speaker 2: Yes, extremely exciting, but it had some great musicians and I never joined Greater Harvest, but I stayed there for two years, you know attending.  And then I joined the Fellowship Baptist Church in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Clay Evans [HM] the Pastor then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's actually the founder of the Fellowship Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well Fellowship Baptist is known for its music, but it's also known for its activism, as well.  Was there a lot of--was there a high level of activism going on when you joined in '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: No, because [Revered] Dr. [Martin Luther] King had not actually come on the scene at that point.  We became involved primarily because--first of all [HM] Jesse Jackson came to Fellowship and he joined Fellowship.  And he was the one that introduced Dr. King to Reverend Evans and from that in meeting and so forth is how we really became involved.
Speaker 1: Now that's not until the '60s [1960's] right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the time that you joined, you joined in '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: Fifty two [1952], yes.
Speaker 1: And at that time, how old were you?
Speaker 2: Fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're still a teenager, then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're experimenting with these churches at a young age.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well, we have to realize back in the early '50s [1950's] there was not a lot of other things to do, even though I'm glad I, you know, of course went the direction that I did go.
Speaker 1: I know some of the other things you can do were probably but were--well lot--there other things that people could do that would be condemned by adults.  You know hanging out and, other places where there's popular music (laughing) I guess.  I mean, so all, it's the church scene, you know offered an alternative.
Speaker 2: Yes, it did, plus it was something that I considered lifesaving.  They consider the church place for soul saving but, you know.  But your life can be messed up when you're out in the world dealing; you know what the world deals with.
Speaker 1: Now did you listen to jazz in those days, were you into jazz?
Speaker 2: I was not into jazz, but I was into R and B.  Now, my sister Helen loved the jazz and she thought no female could sing except Sarah Vaughan.  She loved Sarah Vaughan boy, and then we begin to listen like to Nat King Cole and, you know others that were really popular back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I listened to all of the music and most of if it I enjoyed, but gospel music was my preference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as a teenager, you eluded earlier to being taken sort of a leadership role as teenager in church?
Speaker 2: I think it was kind of thrust upon me, and what I like about the wisdom of older people; many times they see things in you that you don't see yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you may have been ready for responsibility but didn't know it at the time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 94336
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kinds of activities were you involved in at church?
Speaker 2: Primarily with the choir, singing, playing and directing, you know with the choir of the church.  I eventually became one of the regulars on Jubilee Showcase which was, you know a television show that came on every Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the history of that show?  When did it first come on the air and when did you get involved in it?
Speaker 2: It first came on the air in the early '60s [1960's], I'm not sure of the exact year.
Speaker 1: So you were involved for a while before you got involved with--I guess you were about 25, I guess when that show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm in my '20s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this the show that was sponsored by Sid Ordower, I think it was?
Speaker 2: Sid Ordower was the host; Al Abrams Pontiac was the sponsor (chuckling)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I became involved because Sid had a good friend of mine who he has chosen as his person that, is the talent coordinator and she would suggest different artists and so forth.  And I--of course by now, I know everybody that's in the industry and what their abilities are, and I think that's how I became involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94337
Speaker 1: Now I wanna backtrack a minute, go back to high school [Chicago Vocational School] and graduate you (laughing).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) So in your high school, you were involved in mainly in the choir as an extracurricular activity and you were heavily involved in music and did you have any--did you receive any honors when you graduated or anything like that at CVS?
Speaker 2: No, I did not, but what was happening, I was doing what I needed to do because even as a high school student, I was still extremely active.  In the church I spent a lot of time at the church.
Speaker 1: So the church was a big part of your--or significant part of your development and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, the church was actually, my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The church was my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you graduated in high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], '55 [1955], one of those.
Story_ID: 94338
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do after high school, did you think of going to college or?
Speaker 2: I thought about it, but I didn't go, I was so interested in this music and some friends of mine that were here were doing real well in gospel music.  And they were going a lot to New York to the Apollo Theater and they'd come home and they tell all these great stories about being in the Apollo [Theater].  And it was one of the things that I decided that I wanted to do; I wanted to go to the Apollo Theater in New York, because in those days, that's basically where the top people in Gospel could really go.
Speaker 1: Okay, in those days, did Chicago [Illinois] have a Venue that was comparable at all to the Apollo.  I mean was the Regal [Theater] doing any Gospel at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so and this being the home of gospel music then is you would think there would be some Venue.
Speaker 2: Well, I think what happened was, after Sam Cooke crossed over, and his first appearance at the Regal, guess who showed up?  It was the church folk who had been hearing Sam sing in the Church, so they packed the Regal out.  And after that, then I think someone had a Gospel Concert at the Regal.
Speaker 1: Okay, Sam Cooke was with the Soul Stirrers?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the beginning, right.  And he's from Chicago, here?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know him growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I sang at Sam's funeral.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was Sam Cooke like?
Speaker 2: He was a real nice outgoing fella.  He spent his time, I guess, like myself pretty much involved with his music, 'cause he was singing like they did in those days out on the corner.  The fellas would stand on the corner and harmonize and I think someone from the Soul Stirrers heard him and asked him would he like to become a part of the group.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Sam Cooke, you know he died at a sort of tragic circumstances.   Did you--what do you--do you have any thoughts about his life and death?
Speaker 2: I think it was tragic that a man that had as much talent as Sam had to lose his life under those awkward circumstances.  'Cause he could've, you know, contribute a great deal to the music industry.  Because, you now Sam was still a young fella you know when he was slain.
Story_ID: 94491
Speaker 1: So when you were out of high school, you were--you're basically were--you saw opportunity for a career in gospel music so you were--had you started to earn money already playing for churches and church events and gospel events?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my first television show, I was playing for a small group called the Clefs of Faith.  I made more money for this 30 minute television show than my mother made for two whole weeks of work, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that kind of convinced you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This may be what you wanna do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: And in order to play for the television show, I had to join the musician's union.  And what the union would do, many times they called if they get a call needing a keyboard player.  I've even played some clubs and when I show up they just tell me what we would have to do, what the chord changes was, and what the time was, we went for it.  And it was a good experience, I enjoyed it, I had to give it up because I don't deal well with smoke, and of course in those clubs you got to tolerate that smoke.
Story_ID: 94492
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did like the gospel work, you know I guess was steadily picking up too?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: You didn't necessarily have to do the, you know, this if you didn't want to?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have to, but I think I felt it was like it was good experience.  Like I said earlier, I like all music as long as it's music, I don't like junk, of course.  And I felt it was an opportunity for me to expose myself to other stuff, because I liked, you know even the Ballads and so forth.  I, you know, like the other artists, I like Tony Bennett, Perry Como, Rosemary Clooney and actually I have done some of those things with a Gospel touch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of the Rock and Roll performers in those days, like Little Richard and Jerry Lee Lewis, and others playing the piano and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Fats Domino, did they influence you any?
Speaker 2: No, because actually in those days, I wasn't as interested in the piano as I was in the organ and basically, you know organ is considered the Church instrument.  So my mentor, Professor Willie Webb, being one of the top organist in the city, I was really fascinated by that, and that's where my attention was primarily.
Speaker 1: So when you played secular gigs, did you play the organ?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They weren't using them that much in those days.
Speaker 1: I remember that Bill Dogett was very popular--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: On the organ.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Smith.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Jimmy Smith was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: See they were starting to come out you know the organ was starting really become popular.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Brother Jack McDuff later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jack McDuff, I remember him too.
Speaker 1: So were you ever tempted to become a secular musician to you know go into that world?
Speaker 2: No, I really was--like I said, I thought that was an opportunity for me to experience what it was like.  And I did it 'cause it helped make me decide where I was really going.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any strong feelings about gospel musicians who were crossing over to Secular Music?
Speaker 2: No, I think that people can love the Lord and the Creator regardless of their vocation.  Back in those days, my favorite artist was Gladys Knight and I found out that Gladys and the Pips would always stop and have prayer before going on stage to perform.  And that kind of just really heighten my respect for her and when the mother of the Staples passed away, she came and sang at the funeral, she sang, He'll Understand and Say Well Done.  I'll never forget the girl was absolutely powerful (chuckling).
Speaker 1: But so many Gospel Musicians became Secular Musicians, even when back and forth like Gladys Knight, Aretha Franklin, Marvin Gaye came out of a Church background.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so did [HM]Jerry Butler (chuckling)
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think the history is, you know, most of those; they got their development in the Church because the Church required a lot.  The singers and the musicians had to perform exceptionally well and if you didn't you didn't get to perform anymore.  Because the Church had a--had a duty to present what was good, you know.  The Lord doesn't deserve what is not our best.  So it's our duty to give him our best.
Story_ID: 94493
Speaker 1: Were you ever in a situation where you had to, I guess, for one of a better term, fire somebody from a choir or a--I mean because they just weren't good?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have to actually fire, but I decided I could no longer use--I organized a community choir in '68 [1968] called the Voices of Triumph and from my inception, Marvin Yancy was my musician.  Marvin who was like the top musician, as you probably know, later on in life he met and married Natalie Cole.  And so when I lost him, you know, I still had some concerts to do and I invited a guy over to my house one day, 'cause I had to sing that night, and I spent the day teaching him everything I needed him to do.  And at the concert that night, he did nothing (chuckling) that I had taught him.  Had to literally get him off the organ, and when it came time to pay, I paid the fella and one of my choir members that was acting as the manager for the choir say, Reverend why are you paying him, he didn't (laughing) at least I took up the  man's time, so I'm gone pay him.  It was a learning experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes, we put people in the awkward positions when we feel like that they can do certain things and when it comes time to perform, they really can't do it.  I remember a gamble on another occasion, we--my choir had to go somewhere and sing, and Marvin of course was not there.  And so I was asking couple other musicians about playing for me and they just told me no.  So I was discussing it with the fella that was the president of the choir, he say, Reverend, I don't blame those musicians, I wouldn't sit down and play behind you or Marvin either.  So, you know, sometime people are intimidated by certain personalities, but I feel, you know, that if what you going to do you need to perfect it, so you can do it and do it well.
Story_ID: 94494
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you're a young man in church primarily at Fellowship [Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois] now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're making a reputation for yourself.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As a musician and director.  And you--now did you go back to school at all during those experiences?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.  I went back I got couple of degrees.  As a matter of fact, I taught in the Chicago Public School System for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you to College, where did you go to College first?
Speaker 2: Daniel Hale Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, okay, Daniel Hale Williams and you were working as you were going or did you go exclusively to school and then?
Speaker 2: No, I had to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Daniel Hale Williams, does it still exist or?
Speaker 2: No, it does not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is that on the West side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's on the West side, on Madison, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's on Madison, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Madison and Laramie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I got my degree from there and ended up teaching there before I went into Public School System.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the history of Daniel Hale Williams, 'cause it's--I think that people see that there's still a--I think a sign is still out there, even though it's closed.
Speaker 2: No, the signs down too now, because--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: they built--there's a bank right there on that corner now.
Speaker 1: Well, it was up for many years--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: After it was closed and it was intriguing because, you know those who knew Daniel Hale Williams, you know was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: you know the great surgeon--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know were intrigue, what Daniel Hale Williams, you know.  A College name for a Black Surgeon, you know--what is--where is--who started it and how did it, do you know anything about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know who actually started it, what happened was, I remember a fella named Dr. Hurst was the Chancellor of the School and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is that Charles Hurst?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The same who became President of Malcolm X College later?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And basically that's about all that I knew about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your degree--your degree was in Education?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  So you taught public school in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it upper grades or lower grades?
Speaker 2: No, it was upper grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could never teach Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you graduate from Daniel Hale Williams, what year was it?
Speaker 2: I believe it was '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And you taught in what schools in the city?
Speaker 2: I did my student teaching, ironically at CVS [Chicago Vocational School], but I taught at Calumet High School.
Story_ID: 94495
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay.  Prior to going to school though, I guess you were a personality on television prior to going to school then, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about that.  You had started to tell us about that developed, and now is the time, I guess to really.
Speaker 2: Well, Fellowship [Baptist Church] was a real popular church in Chicago [Illinois].  Fellowship was full at every service and Reverend Clay Evans [HM], of course was a great Preacher, but he also a great singer.  And had great personnel, great musicians had some great musicians to play at Fellowship.  As I stated, Willie Webb, was there, after he left, we had Professor Charles Walker and Fredrick Young. Fredrick Young was the cousin to L. D. Young, who played with Ramsey Lewis.  I got a lot of exposure just playing at Fellowship, and then of course being a regular on television just, I guess shot the popularity up.  I remember on one occasion, I had to go downtown for something, and I'm riding the El [Train].  And the El's kind of crowded so I'm standing and I see these two ladies talking and whispering to each other and then look at me.  Then they would whisper back and then finally one of them pointed at me and then one of them got up enough nerve to ask me, are you Stanley Keebler that we see on (laughing), yeah, I am he, I'm guilty.  So, then I realized that, you know people were seeing me a lot and I was going to be recognized a lot since I was on television regularly.
Speaker 1: Now, you start appearing on television in the early '60s [1960's] right, you said '62 [1962] I guess it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did that take place again.  That's Sid Ordower's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Gospel--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Jubilee Showcase.
Speaker 1: Jubilee Showcase, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, so how did it happen again, how did they?
Speaker 2: Well, because of the fact that I had a reputation of being one of the better musicians, they used me a lot but, my personal first appearance as an artist-- there's a lady here in Chicago named Willa Sanders Jones who every year presented the Chicago Passion Play.  And she had the choir from Fellowship to render the music and I sang for that particular television show advertising the Passion Play.  And I sang a song that was very popular at the time for the Late Reverend James Cleveland, Peace Be Still.  As a matter of fact, I have a copy of that at home now; I looked so different (laughing) yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, James Cleveland, now, he's another Chicagoan.
Speaker 2: Yes, James was born and raised here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you know him well?
Speaker 2: James was one of my closest and dearest friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who eventually became the King of Gospel Music.  And James has been dead at least 12 years and he still reigns.
Speaker 1: Right I know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's difficult to find somebody to supersede James Cleveland.
Speaker 1: I remember growing up; that he was one of the few ministers whose record you could buy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the store, you know, his choir and his sermon would be on a LP.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One called the Football Game of Life, I think; it was well known by a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  James was a top artist for Savoy Records; did a lot of great things.
Speaker 1: Now is that located here in Chicago too, Savoy?
Speaker 2: No, Savoy's out of New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think James was in contact with Savoy because he's one of those that spending a lot of time in the Apollo Theater because he played for the Caravans for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Now what were the Gospel Caravans?
Speaker 2: It was female group that consisted of some great women.  Albertina Walker, who is now the current Queen of Gospel Music, Inez Andrews, Shirley Caesar, Casietta George, Johneron Davis, Dorothy Norwood and the list goes on.
Story_ID: 94496
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, on the show--so you became a regular on the show for how many years?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, however long the show stayed on the air.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were on it for the duration?
Speaker 2: Because like I said, Sid [Ordower] had this talent coordinator and we didn't use just Chicago artist, we got out of town artist.  And most of them, I knew and when they would come cross back in those days, the artist were traveling by vehicle.  And they'd bring just one musician, so a number of them when they get here and doing the television show, their pianist played the piano, but I played the organ.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your most memorable experience from the show?
Speaker 2: My most memorable experience was when we actually had Stanley Keeble and The Voices of Triumph do the show, and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now this is a group you formed, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And what was so great about it, I had greats, Marvin Yancy and Jessy Dixon were the musicians for me for that show, I didn't play that day, I did the singing (chuckling) yeah, that was a great time. And my other greatest experience was with a group from Birmingham, Alabama called Dorothy Love and the Gospel Harmonettes.   Dorothy Love passed away last year, but this woman was a tower in Gospel Music.  She's written a number of songs and many of them are still being recorded today, even in the Contemporary era.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94497
Speaker 1: Now, when did you become an ordained minister, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: I received my calling to become a minister in 1970, and I'm from the Baptist tradition, so I was not ordained, I was just licensed, which meant I could preach, but I couldn't do almost anything else.  And the Baptist Church the preacher primarily has to work for three years before coming ordained, so I was not ordained until 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why did you decide to become a minister as well a--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was an anointing from God to become more involved in his word and in the ministry that would let me share with people.  Because I'm basically a people person, I love people.  And I was inspired by, of course, my Pastor then, Reverend Clay Evans [HM] but my other inspiration was Reverend Consuela York who was--who had a jail ministry.  She spent a great of time at the Cook County Jail--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: She's known as Mother York.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: She's headquartered at Woodlawn, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: There's a mural of her on--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, right there on 62nd and Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: A great, a great woman.
Speaker 1: She and Jessie 'Ma' Houston and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And others, you know, I think.  I know Jessie 'Ma' Houston's daughter.  I can't think of her name right now, but she's also engaged in that same ministry, as is her daughter, you know still doing the same kind of ministry,  Helen St. Clair.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I couldn't think of Helen's name either (laughing).
Speaker 1: And Famita (ph) Newman is her daughter and they still deal--they all are dealing with that.  Yes, that interesting, so well, gone on about her, Mother York and.
Speaker 2: Like I said, I was fascinated because of her jail ministry and this was--this woman's life and we have to understand there were a lot of, you know people that were at the jail that were definitely guilty of whatever crime they were there for.  But her compassion was so great that she didn't care, she just wanted to care for the people that were the inmates at the Cook County.  As a matter of fact, she was getting ready the year that she passed away to feed all the inmates at Cook County Jail.  And she was stricken at the jail; they had to rush her to the hospital from the jail.
Speaker 1: Did you work with her at all?
Speaker 2: Of course, 'cause she was at Fellowship every Sunday before she start pastoring and she was also my Spiritual Leader.  Because Fellowship broadcast was on Sunday nights and Sunday nights that I had to sing on the broadcast, she was the commentator for the broadcast.  And when I get ready to sing, she grabbed my hand and have a quick word of prayer and say go head on boy and sing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, early on then, I mean you're part of a church that becomes sort of an activist church and you know with a--figures like Clay Evans and Mother York--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: That is a great blessing to anybody and I think that's why Jesse [Jackson HM] came to Fellowship.  Jesse said he was driving down the street and he heard Reverend Clay Evans sing, I must Tell Jesus, he said he turned the car around, he went back to that church to see who that fellow was (laughing) and from that, the relationship developed.
Speaker 1: Now Jesse was here in town to go to Graduate School, right at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, University of Chicago, right.  That was before he became famous.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Nobody knows, we didn't even know (laughing), but he's known now.
Story_ID: 94498
Speaker 1: Now were you a part of the activities when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: What was that like, what was some of your duties and responsibilities when Dr. King came?
Speaker 2: Well, my first meeting Dr. King is Reverend [Clay] Evans [HM] and Fellowship were having him down at the Arie Crown Theater and the choir was to sing and back in those days, you know, unless you are doing recordings or television, you know, you just a musician that play.  But in order to pay in the Arie Crown Theater, you had to be a member of the union.  So consequently, I was the member of the union and that's when I met Dr. King when Reverend Evans and Jesse [Jackson HM]brought him to Chicago.  We had this big affair down at Arie Crown Theater, a great man, full of great wisdom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a chance to spend time with Dr. King, you know?
Speaker 2: Very minimum time because I was more involved in the music aspect than the activist part of it.
Story_ID: 94499
Speaker 1: But I wanna ask you about the National Baptist Convention's split over Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s] activities and--and that happened earlier than Dr. King's arrival in Chicago [Illinois], but was Fellowship Baptist [Church]--how was Fellowship Baptist?
Speaker 2: Fellowship was definitely a part of the National Baptist Convention and very prominent in the Convention but Pastor [Clay] Evans [HM] understood the need of our freedom.  Freedom to live where we want, do what we want, work where want and evidently Reverend Joseph Jackson had a different view.  Reverend Evans did not leave the Convention because of the, you know the adversity.  He wanted to stay and prove that you can disagree without being disagreeable.  He has never left the Convention, as matter fact, he's still a part of the Convention, but he did not forsake Dr. King.  As a matter of fact, his commitment to Dr. King was a deterrent to him, because Fellowship was in the process of building a new church edifice and we had all the steel up and the work was stopped for seven years because of his relationship with Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Now the city stopped the work, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The city of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Under the leadership of Richard Daley?
Speaker 2: J. Daley.
Speaker 1: J. Daley, yeah.
Speaker 2: J. Daley, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And so some kind of bad position to be in when the city's against you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That's why we couldn't build for seven years that the steel just stood there for seven years.  But he was determined that he was not going to forsake his friend and the men that he felt really did have a vision for the people.
Speaker 1: History kind of caught up with the times--I mean history kind of redeemed his position, right?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Of course and the churches now there is a new church there, a beautiful Church.
Speaker 2: And we now have another Mayor, another Richard [M.]Daley, but the son Richard Daley has a very close relationship with Reverend Evans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the hatchet's been buried a long time ago.  Well, so tell me about, now 19--Dr King came here in '67 [1967] I believe it was or '60 [1960]-- was it '68 [1968], '67 [1967] or '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: I think it was '67 [1967], I'm not really sure myself.
Speaker 1: I know it was shortly before he was killed, he was here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he actually went, I think here to, from here to Memphis [Tennessee] and then to, I think--do you remember where you were when you find out Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: I was walking down the street; I was walking down what was then called South Park.  And I was right at 48th Street and I saw one of my choir members, we were meeting and he said to me, did you hear Dr King was shot and killed today?  I said, no, I didn't hear that, he says a matter of fact they're having a Memorial Service down at Liberty Baptist Church at 49th and King--49th and South Park.  So I did go to that service and there were hundreds of people that were there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you're, all the while, you're still teaching--well you hadn't started to teaching school, yet.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You hadn't even gone back to school at that point, yeah.  But--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I didn't start teaching until '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But as a young minster--when you went into the ministry shortly thereafter about two years after Dr. King was killed, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 94500
Speaker 1: Did you preach your sermons in the--in Fellowship [Baptist Church] basically, or did you?
Speaker 2: I preached my first sermon at Fellowship, because the tradition in the Baptist Church is whatever Church that you are affiliated with, you have to have the okay of your Pastor.  And Reverend [Clay] Evans [HM], of course was my Pastor, so I had to talk to Reverend Evans.  And this was really a strange experience for me, because I accepted my calling under kind of a tragic situation.  It was the Sunday night before Labor Day and this guy I know asked me if he could use my car.  He wanted to make a little run and while he was gone my car got literally destroyed and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Was he injured at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was injured and the car was totaled and anyway we went to the hospital and I actually received my calling at that point.  And so I went to Reverend Evans' house the next day to tell him that I had been called into the Ministry.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you know when you're called, I mean how do you, what actions, what happens?
Speaker 2: There's a feeling and there's a revelation from God that you've been chosen to do a work for him.  And when I got to Reverend Evans' house, he was in the bed asleep and his wife said to me she said, I normally don't wake him up when he's sleep.  She said, but for some reason I got to wake him up for you.  And so I went and I talked to him and we had prayer and then a couple of weeks later, we scheduled my first sermon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you went on into the Ministry from there, and you've continued to be associated with Fellowship in terms of?
Speaker 2: Well, Reverend Evans retired and I'm now playing for Reverend Donald Parson at Logos Baptist Assembly, and since I was playing there, I felt it was my duty to have my membership there.  I joined the Logos Baptist Assembly under the Pastorage of Dr. Donald L. Parson.  But Reverend Evans and I have a very, very close relationship, as a matter of fact; I had a meeting with him today, great meeting.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 94501
Speaker 1: Now, you formed your own group, tell me about how you formed your group.
Speaker 2: There were a number of young people because they were all in their teens at the time, who had said to me that they wanted to sing other than, you know just their church, because their churches, many times didn't have a lot of activities other than their Sunday worship service.  So I did organize the group and I named them the Voices of Triumph, the name comes from the 47 Number of Psalms that says Oh shout onto the Lord with a voice of triumph.  And we organized in the Greater Metropolitan Church of Christ, which was pastored by my good friend Reverend Isaac Whitman.  And from there we went a lot places, did a lot of concerts and so forth.
Speaker 1: Have you recorded with the group?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a matter of fact, I got the recording.
Speaker 1: You brought it with you, okay (laughing)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, good, good.  So you're still performing with Voices of Triumph?
Speaker 2: The Voices of Triumph are no longer in existence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have some music with The Voices of Triumph that were recorded back in the days when we were extremely active.  My very first recording, I recorded a 45 in 1969, in 1970 I recorded my first album, they weren't making CDs in 1970 (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of your first recording?
Speaker 2: It's called Stanley Keeble the Gospel Truth, Stanley Keeble Sings the New Thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's with The Voices of Triumph.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There it is, The Voices of Triumph.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, now this is 1970 then, right?
Speaker 2: 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 94502
Speaker 1: Now you have also been a radio host, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: How did you get involved with radio, I mean it's a natural transition for everything else you're talking about.
Speaker 2: I played for one of the radio stations on Sunday morning.  And back in those days on Sundays, they had what we would consider today open mike, a number of the groups and choirs and soloists and so forth would come.  It was called The Southmoor Hotel, which is on the corner of 67th and Stoney Island, which is long been gone.  And because I played for the radio station, sometime I would have to go to the radio station, and the on-air personalities would, you know talk to me while they were on the radio and let me talk to the radio audience.  And the--that's basically how I got involved in the--some of them liked my voice, they let me make the announcement and so forth, so.  And it developed into my having my own show.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your show?
Speaker 2: It's called The Joy Hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what radio station was it on?
Speaker 2: Well, currently I'm on WSSD eighty eight point one; I was formerly at WKKC eighty three dot one.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you still have the--you still doing the show?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I did a show earlier today.
Speaker 1: That's make you pretty busy, huh?
Speaker 2: I stay busy, I like being busy at my age, it's important that I keep active; I don't want to go somewhere and just do nothing.
Story_ID: 94503
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you become Dr. Stanley Keeble?
Speaker 2: I got my Doctorate in Divinity because of my ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Gospel Outreach Seminary, it's actually based in Texas, but they have classes here.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So did you enjoy the Seminary, I mean did you--were there?
Speaker 2: Of course, it's, it's a joy learning more about the word of God.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Probably a dumb way to phrase a question, but I (laughing) that's how I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But, but, where there--where there certain teachers that you remember, that you really or?
Speaker 2: Dr. D. E. King.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was formerly the Pastor of Monumental Baptist Church down on Oakwood Boulevard, he passed away some years ago but the man was one of the greatest teachers that I've ever known.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, Monumental is in that historical block with all those--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Holy Angels and Center for the Studies of.
Speaker 2: The area has a rich heritage, as a matter of fact, there was a Church there called All Nations that was pastored by the Late Reverend Mother Lucy Smith.  The building is no longer there, but that was first Church to broadcast Gospel Music on the air.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, then.  Her name again is Reverend--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mother Lucy Smith.
Speaker 1: Mother Lucy Smith, okay.
Story_ID: 94504
Speaker 1: All right. So I take it that you have--you've mentioned a couple of women that are really very, you know influential, I guess in your life Reverend Smith [Mother Lucy Smith] here and then you know Mother [Consuela] York.  And so you don't have a problem with women being Ministers in the church and that sort of thing then?
Speaker 2: I don't have a problem with women ministers because I feel God can call anybody that he want to do the work to do the work that he wants done.  And I feel many times the Lord appoint women because sometimes men are so busy doing other things, and men aren't as involved in church and with God as women are.  Reverend Attorney Jeanette Wilson, very, very dear friend, Reverend Mittie Collier, who gained fame being a Blues Singer.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I Had A Talk With My Man Last Night.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Who is now saying I Had A Talk with My God Last Night, yeah.
Speaker 1: Jeanette Wilson was Chairman of Operation PUSH for a while.
Speaker 2: She's Executive National Director for it for a number of years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 94505
Speaker 1: What do you think about some of the mega churches today, these huge churches, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I think people go to get lost in them (chuckling).  I think that's unfortunate because I think that the church needs to be able to communicate with its membership, and when it becomes a mega, then that's difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you think about the direction of gospel Music today and church music in the black community?  There, you know, I think religious music is being stretched now to the point where it's--you have to listen to the lyrics just to find out, you know whether there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And sometimes that doesn't help Larry (laughing).  First of all, I think there's a difference and it should be noted that there's a difference in church music and what we're now calling contemporary gospel music.  Have a young lady that's one of the outstanding musicians in this city whose father pastors a church.  She said to me one day there are a lot of songs that I would do in concert that I would not dare do in my daddy's morning service.  And I think this music deserves to be heard everywhere by everybody and it is a good music.  And I'm not saying that Larry, solely because I'm involved, I'm saying it because what I've experienced.  I went to Europe in '93 [1993] we sang every day, every night for almost three weeks.  Every night Larry, we would almost have to do another show, because the people would stand and stomp for five minutes or more if you didn't sing again for them.  And we were singing basically traditional gospel music.  So it is loveable and it is inspiring and it can help people in their lives, and it give homage to the creator.  I think now days a lot of the music is not about uplifting the people, but about praise and worship, but how are they going to do that if they haven't been lifted to that point.  I was taught as a young man, that the preacher stands behind the pulpit and it's called the pulpit because the preacher duty is to pull the people out of the pit.
Story_ID: 94506
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who are some of your favorite gospel musicians, you know, which ones really move you, the most?
Speaker 2: Well, the head of the list is Richard Gibbs, Junior.  Richard Gibbs is the son of Inez Andrews and his father was Richard Gibbs, Senior who was a member of the Soul Stirrers.  Richard is one of the top musicians in Gospel, even though right now, he's also playing for Aretha Franklin.  And there a number of greats, one of the young in town right now that's excelling is Percy Gray and Gerald Gray.  Percy Bady who played for The Tommies for a number of years is one of the top musicians.  Brother Kenneth Woods who formerly played for Sally Martin is top notch musician.  Chicago is fortunate enough, Larry to have a number of good musicians in this city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94507
Speaker 1: What are some of your concerns about gospel music in general now?  I mean are there concerns around--I know other--in other genres in music, there has been concern about ownership of music and rights--musical rights and people are concerned about being ripped off and that sort of thing, they--do you have the same concerns in gospel music?
Speaker 2: And the concern needs to be because for years, gospel artists have not been treated fair by record companies.  Basically in the early years, the gospel artists made they money from their performances, not from their royalties.
Speaker 1: So even a Mahalia Jackson who had tremendous sales or Albertina Walker or somebody wouldn't make their--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Inez Andrews who wrote a number of the top songs, and I'm saying I just feel these people should be able to get what is actually due them, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94508
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: I actually see that we are coming more together, there is not as much disconnection now as it was in earlier years.  People feel more free to move about and do things than they could before and I think there's going to be a real unity in the community.  'Cause we're finding now that there are ways that our public officials can do things to actually help our people.  I just saw on the news the other night where Congressman, Bobby Rush is involved in opening a center for the people of in the Englewood Community, where my good friend, and here I go again another Minister.  Reverend Shirley Coleman, who is the Alderman in the 16th Ward, is also a pastor and preacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you feel about, I guess, since, I guess in the last, I guess the last 40 years or so, black folks have been increasingly more diverse in their manners of worship and their philosophies?  Some have no manner of worship but have philosophies, then we have black Muslims now, black Buddhist, we have black folks involved in secular, you know yeah so.  What do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I think that the mere fact that they were exposed to these different religions that it was something that was interesting to them; they wanted to find out about it.  And I guess they went that way, I think people have a right to worship however they feel they need to worship, and I guess that's what they did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't have issue with, I mean-or do you think it's possible for people to for black folks to be diversed in terms of Religion and it's alright or?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've been to [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan's house, had dinner there, but I'm still Praising Jesus Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you think about black churches recently, it has been in just the last 25 years, I guess have become increasingly aware of their cultural roots in Africa.  There are churches now where you see--it's common in most Churches where the shawl that the Preachers wear as Kente now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Kente cloth, which is something that you never would've seen, you know, years ago, it would've been strictly based on the European model of what you should wear in church and what you should do as minister you know.
Speaker 2: But I think in the earlier years, many of them denied their heritage.  And I think the more people become aware of their heritage, when they realized that many of them are decedents of great leaders, Kings and Queens that it's nothing to be ashamed of.  And in the earlier church, you know it was based primarily on the European style and what they did and how they did it.  But we are creative people; we have to create what actually fits us and fits us well.
Story_ID: 94357
Speaker 1: Yes, sir let me ask you about the Gospel Music Museum.
Speaker 2: I am the founder and director of the Chicago Gospel Music Heritage Museum.  We were formed last year and originally we were in the Rothschild Building down on Michael Reese Campus.  They closed that building and so at this point, we are looking for some place to house the museum.  And we got quite a bit of artifacts and so forth and photos and so forth that we need to get up and display so people can see what we're doing.  We had planned our Grand Opening and our Grand Opening was going to be centered around seven of the people that we considered Pioneers in Gospel.  And they were Thomas Dorsey, Sally Martin, Professor Theodore R. Frye, Roberta Martin, James Cleveland, Mahalia Jackson and the Late Reverend Milton Brunson.  All of these have made such contributions to this Gospel Music; we are of the opinion that generations that are coming need to know about these great people and the greatness that they have made possible for this world.  In school and learning music, I had to learn about the great masters had to learn about Beethoven, Chopin, Bach and so forth and I think it's important that our children learn about these great people.  And it might inspire them to have a different kind of life that they might would have had otherwise.  I'm sure that gospel music is one of the things that helped keep me out of trouble and keep me from going astray.  And you mentioned earlier about my being busy, and I did stay busy.  And I think I needed to be busy, because I had folk that I know that were close to me, even family members that went a different direction.  So I said if we can have people like Thomas Dorsey who wrote Precious Lord a Gospel Song that is printed in 30 different languages, then we need to say to our children, here's a man that has written a song that is so popular and he wrote it back in the '30s [1930's].  And it's still popular.  And it's written in 30 different languages maybe that ought to say to you, I can do something that will last for years and years to come.  I want, even at my age, to leave some other legacy here in this music.
Story_ID: 94358
Speaker 1: Mahalia Jackson who for years was the queen of gospel music and what I like about her being the queen, Mahalia's music career started in Chicago [Illinois].  And people all over the world recognized the name Mahalia Jackson.  They tell me when Mahalia recorded Silent Night, the day it hit the streets in New York City, they sold out that very same day, because people heard Mahalia and people liked Mahalia.  I tell people all the time, I'm--me and my family are part of probably helping Mahalia become who she really was, because my family bought Move On Up A Little Higher, which was the recording that put Mahalia in the hearts and mind of people.  And in those days, they had 78's which were extremely fragile, right?  My family kept buying that same record, 'cause every time it get broke, we'd go and buy another one, because that was such a beautiful song, and it gave hope.  And remember me telling you earlier that part of the duty of gospel is to lift people?  And Mahalia singing Move On Up A Little Higher regardless of what is going on, you move on up a little higher, okay?  And then there's James Cleveland, king of gospel music and James has been dead now at least 12 years.  James is still the king; it's difficult to find somebody to replace James.  James was a great musician, sing, great director, great arranger, and a great businessman.  So I'm saying these are things that the younger people need to know that it might inspire them all of the things that James was, maybe you can do the same, or do even more.  Roberta Martin, Roberta Martin was a classical pianist, heard this music, and just fell in love with it and became one of the top gospel srtist in the country.  The Roberta Martin Singers and they sang all over this country and they even been to Europe, as well.  We had Sally Martin who worked closely with Thomas Dorsey; got her own group, The Sally Martin Singers, and they travelled this country.  At one point, I'm going to give you a real shocker here Larry, have one point, Della Reese [HM].  Star of television show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Touched By an Angel.
Speaker 1: Touched By An Angel, sang with the Sally Martin Singers, and I'm saying there is so much that can be inspiring to people.  They can't be inspired if they don't know, and that's why this museum is so important.  We've got to get this information out; I'm meeting with someone from the Board of Education tomorrow.  We're going to discuss how we can involve it more, I am the  first to teach gospel music in the Chicago Public School System as an accredit course.  The proposal was written by a lady named Gladys Swinny (ph) who also played for Sally Martin.  She presented proposal to the Board, they accepted the board, and I was the first to teach this great music.  And we need to make sure that Gospel Music get the recognition that it rightly deserve.  And I will admit, it is recognized more today than it was when I got started and even when I was extremely popular.
Story_ID: 94359
Speaker 1: But we still need to make sure that this message gets out so that it can inspire people.  And there's even the technical part of it now days.  I know there's engineers and technicians and now that we dealing these CDs, we need some folk to design covers and so forth.  There's a lot of ways that we can be involved, a lot of ways that we need to inspire people to be involved.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And with my being a member of the Gospel Announcers Guild of Gospel Music Workshop of America, you know we get all sorts of CDs.  And I saw one when I went to the convention in Tampa back in August, it was really unique how they had packaged their CD.  And I said Um, that's interesting; I think I want my next CD to be on this order.  And I'm saying if they're exposed to things, maybe they'll see things that they like, see things that they can improve upon, you know.  The old saying is, there's always room for improvement, but how you gonna improve on it, if you aren't even acquainted with it?  So we're working hard to get a new place.  I met with Congressman Bobby Rush [HM] on yesterday and he said he's really gonna be on the lookout for it.
Story_ID: 94360
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--now we have a Gospel Fest in the City of Chicago [Illinois] now that's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: About three, two or three day festival, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Downtown and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Grant Park
Speaker 1: That attracts thousands of people.
Speaker 2: Hundreds of thousands.
Speaker 1: Hundreds of thousands, yeah every year.
Speaker 2: They've been running about two, two hundred fifty thousand, each year.  Pam Morris [HM], who is the coordinator of Gospel Fest, is also an on-air personality, and we are working to keep this going.
Story_ID: 94361
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in this juncture, in your life, what do you see as your own legacy?
Speaker 2: An individual that made great contributions to great gospel music.  As the founder and director of the [Chicago Gospel Music Heritage] Museum, I will make sure that they know about the contributions that I have contributed and those that worked with me.  I am--I'm sadden by the fact that I no longer have with me Marvin Yancy who was almost like my child and who's a great musician, who many times wouldn't even let me play when I had to go sing.  Said no, you don't to play, I'll play for you, and that was a great blessing to me.  And I'm grateful that I'm associated with so many greats that have made great contribution.  My good friend Reverend Isaac Whitman who Pastors Greater Metropolitan Church of Christ, where I actually organized The Voices of Triumph was the first male gospel singer from Chicago to be nominated for a Grammy, yeah.
Story_ID: 94362
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, did your mother [Adola Stuckey Keeble] and father [Josephus Keeble] get a chance to see you become successful in this music?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  As a matter of fact, while I was playing at Fellowship [Baptist Church], they gave musical program for me and my mother did come and Fellowship was packed and jammed and we had a great time that night.  My mother was just as proud as she could be.  And since I didn't spend a lot of time, you know with my dad when my dad found out that I could sing and play, he had first--he of course first had to hear me (chuckling) and then after he heard me, then he wanted to tell everybody about his son who's this great musician (laughing). Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94363
Speaker 1: One last question is similar to legacy, but, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person that reached out to others because one of the reasons I want this museum [Chicago Gospel Music Heritage Museum] so desperately is because of school children who can be exposed just by coming to the museum.  And ironically, we have schools that have called and want to visit the museum.  And we have a long list of them, but we just don't have a museum for them to come.  And see what we have to offer, we have a number of artifacts from back in the early years.  And we've got photos of probably everybody that even hummed a gospel song.  We need a minimum of five thousand square feet just to get opened.
Speaker 1: Well, see like the audience is there for it, I mean and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Of course--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The resources are there if their coordinated, you know, 'cause so many people that are touched by this music love it.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  Like I said, people were calling like mad because we actually thought we were going to have our Grand Opening.  We didn't find out until a month prior to our Grand Opening that they were closing the building, so it sent us into shock but I think we're going to rebound real soon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much, it's been a pleasure.
Story_ID: 94364
Speaker 1: This photo is Reverend Stanley Keeble and it was taken in Houston, Texas.  I had gone to visit my son Dion.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  In what year?
Speaker 1: That was in '97 [1997] I believe it was.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, go ahead with this one.
Speaker 1: This is at a Voice of Triumph Concert that was held at Dunbar High School and on this photo; sitting on the organ is Marvin Yancy.  The guest artist there is the one and only Miss Inez Andrews and that's me holding the mike for her.  Back in those days when we didn't have hand mikes (laughing).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.  What about this one?
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at a service that was held at the Church of the Living God, where my friends Adelle and Richard Cleveland had invited me to come and participate on that service.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, and date as best as you can recall?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: REV. DR. STANLEY KEEBLE: This is my mother Adola Stuckey Keeble.  And this photo was taken probably in 1945; somewhere right in that general area.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at a fashion show, I'm modeling.  And this picture was taken in 1970.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Go head, next, alright go head.
Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandmother, my mother's mother, her name is Suzie Stuckey.  And this photo was taken probably in 1955.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Alright, next.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble presenting an award to the Revered Mittie Collier.  And that photo was taken in 1998.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Very good, alright, and here?
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble on the organ, singing and this photo was taken I believe in 1999.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Alright.
Speaker 1: Reverend Stanley Keeble singing at the Mt. Pisgah Baptist Church in 1970.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Boy, you're nailing it.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at an Awards Banquet for students that were involved in the Math and Science Program in their schools, sponsored by Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Medical Center.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at an Awards Banquet for students for the Public School System involved in the Math and Science Program sponsored by Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Medical Center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble with the Director of Community Affairs at Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Medical Center, at a banquet where we're presenting awards to students that have excelled in Math and Science.  And I believe this year is 2000.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Going to the next one.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble with his leather cap on, and what we're doing here, and I believe this is the same year 2000.  We had a raffle at Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Medical Center and in keeping with the song, the Twelve Days of Christmas; we actually raffled off twelve great prizes, including televisions.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at Rush Presbyterian St. Luke Medical Center getting ready for a Christmas party.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Year?
Speaker 1: 1999.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next go ahead.
Speaker 1: Reverend Stanley Keeble at Rush Presbyterian and the choir had a Gospel Music Concert and I'm the commentator.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Very good, year?
Speaker 1: 2001.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at a Banquet for Freedom Flyers it's an organization that cares about the Inmates at Cook County Jail.  The year is '95 [1995]
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Ok, next go ahead.
Speaker 1: Reverend Stanley Keeble with Reginald "Hats" Adams the Director Affairs at a Banquet for the Math and Science Program, that was held at the Chicago Hilton and that year is '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Ok, good, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: I believe this was in '94 [1994] and I'm going from my left to right.  The gentleman on the left is Mark Rizzo, who is the Director of Freedom Flyers, and this is his Banquet.  And next to him is Former Sheriff O'Grady, and next to him is one of Gospel Music's top artists, Miss Ethel Holloway and next to Ethel is Reverend Stanley Keeble and next to me is Brother Spencer Leak, the President of A. R. Leak and Sons Funeral Home.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Ok, next go head.
Speaker 2: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble at the Banquet of the Christian Love Baptist Church as they honored their Pastor, Pastor, Steve Nelson.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Year, best you remember.
Speaker 2: 1998.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble in 1997 for the cover of an album with I AM Records, Can't You Love Him.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMEMRA VOICE:  Okay, next.  Alright what about this one?
Speaker 2: This is Reverend Stanley Keeble's very first album that was recorded in 1970 for Torrid Records with Mr. Al Smith as the producer.
