Story_ID: 550080
Speaker 1: Let's get started on our HistoryMakers interview.  My name is Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today.  Matthew Hickey is working as videographer.  Tell me your full name and spell it please?
Speaker 2: Brumit Belton De Laine [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine].  That's B-R-U-M-I-T, B-E-L-T-O-N, D-E L-A-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: And do you go by B. B.?
Speaker 2: B. B., the initials.
Speaker 1: When were you born and where?
Speaker 2: Was born in Columbia, South Carolina, October 1, 1937.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 21, I believe, but (laughter) first day of summer.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 1: Where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: We're conducting this interview at 1706 Washington Avenue, Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm retired from Charlotte-Mecklenburg school system in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: You were a teacher?
Speaker 2: I taught for four years and moved into administration, middle level.  I retired as a director of student placement and student records.
Story_ID: 550081
Speaker 1: Just to get things started, I'm gonna ask you a few questions, fun questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably ice cream, nothing healthy.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, that's why I'm in blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Wherever I can afford.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: Yeah I have one, a friend of mine in college had.  And that was, tell a person to go to hell in such a way they look forward to the trip.
Story_ID: 550082
Speaker 1: Let's start talking a little bit about your family background.  What's your mother's name, where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mattie Belton De Laine, and she was born in Fairfield County, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o-seven [1907].
Speaker 1: And she was a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know her parents' names?
Speaker 2: Her father was David Charles Belton, Sr. [sic. David G. Belton, Sr.] and her mother was Josephine Weldon Belton.
Speaker 1: And their professions?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a farmer, later years after moving to Columbia [South Carolina] he did handyman type work.  My grandmother was basically a housewife.
Speaker 1: Do you know your great-grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Don't remember them.  One of them was Martha [Martha Roach Belton], I wanna--I think it was my grandfather's mother I think was Martha.
Story_ID: 550083
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: Joseph Armstrong De Laine [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.].
Speaker 1: When was he born and where?
Speaker 2: He was born I think in Clarendon County, South Carolina, 1898.
Speaker 1: What are his parents' names?
Speaker 2: Henry Charles De Laine [Henry De Laine, Sr.] and Tisbia Gamble De Laine.
Speaker 1: And where did they live?
Speaker 2: Clarendon County, South Carolina--
Speaker 1: And what were their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) primarily Manning [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: What were their professions?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a minister and I think he dabbled in a few other entrepreneurial type areas.  My grandmother, as far as I know, was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of their parents on either side?
Speaker 2: His, I think his father was, I believe Charles [Charles De Laine, Jr.], his mother [Caroline Garry De Laine] I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father's profession?
Speaker 2: Was a minister and teacher.
Speaker 1: And he had siblings?
Speaker 2: He had twelve other brothers and sisters, and a half-brother and half-sister.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Mattie Belton De Laine], did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: She had seven brothers.
Story_ID: 550084
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Summerton, South Carolina until around age twelve.  At the end of my seventh grade year, we moved to Lake City, South Carolina.  And I attended eighth through twelfth grade in Lake City.
Speaker 1: And when did you move to Summerton?  Where were you born?
Speaker 2: We were living outside of Summerton when I was born.  I was actually born in Columbia [South Carolina] bec- because of my [maternal] grandparents [Josephine Weldon Belton and David G. Belton, Sr.].  We lived in the parsonage for--at a church where daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was pastor and it's a few miles out of Summerton.  And when I was about three, he got another assignment and we moved into town, and that's where we stayed until we left in 1950.
Story_ID: 550085
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was at the house that we were living in when I was born.  There was either some trash that--that'd been burned in the yard or they had had a wash pot on it and I walked through the hot ashes.  And I remember that (laughter).  I know not to walk through hot ashes too.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I probably maybe one and a half, two, not much older than that.
Speaker 1: This is when you were living in Columbia [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, we were living in Summerton [South Carolina].  I was born on a visit in Columbia.  We, we actually lived in Summerton.
Story_ID: 550086
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about your household?  Are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, right.
Speaker 1: Of how many children?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Who are your siblings?
Speaker 2: My brother is the oldest of--of the children.  He's Joseph, Jr. [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.] and Ophelia [Ophelia De Laine Gona] is the sister.
Speaker 1: And when were they born?
Speaker 2: Jay, as we know him or call him, was born 1933, and Ophelia 1936.
Story_ID: 550087
Speaker 1: And so what are your memories around the house?  You said you spent most of the time in Summerton [South Carolina] in your early childhood?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the main things I remember is that the man on the, I guess you would call it a farm, and his pasture came up by our house, his house was at the other end of it.  And he had a bull and I was scared to death of that bull.  And when we moved into the house, the house had not been finished and we didn't have any walls in it, other than around the bedrooms.  And it seems like the bull wanted to stay on that end of the pasture.  And I would see him coming and run in the house and hide behind the china closet from him.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Three, three to four.
Speaker 1: Do you remember di- excuse me--dinnertime inside your home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We usually had dinner together, sometimes daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] wouldn't--was not at home and we would have dinner without him.  We had a round table and we would have dinner around the table and that was also where we did most of our homework around that table.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of cuisine, what was the meal time like, what did you eat?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess as folk would say now, mostly south- southern cooking.  I was a picky eater and I got a lot of whippings about meals, because I didn't wanna eat what was put before me.  And during that time, kids didn't have a (laughter) choice.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you push away?
Speaker 2: Mostly--most of the vegetables got pushed away.  Sometimes I would get in trouble about grits if they were too lumpy for my--I shouldn't say appetite, I'd--probably for my visual pleasure, let's say.  And I would procrastinate and they would get cool and then I didn't want it.  And I'd get a whipping and had to stay there until I finish.  And by the time I finished them you could flip them over, you know, like just catch them and flip the whole bit of grits like you'd flip a plate.  So I got--got a quite a few whippings over my eating habits.
Story_ID: 550088
Speaker 1: In early childhood did your parents tell you stories, read you books?
Speaker 2: Mother [Mattie Belton De Laine], I think, did most of the reading.  Daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] talked to us a lot, but I don't remember daddy reading to us.  I remember daddy more for wanting to go places with him, because I always liked cars and whenever he went he was usually willing to take me unless he was going somewhere where that he would be gone for a prolonged period of time.
Speaker 1: Tell me about one of those trips with your father into town?
Speaker 2: Well, one was not necessarily into town and I was good bit older then, I was probably eight--seven or eight years old.  But we went away and stayed longer than anticipated and we were in Columbia [South Carolina].  And when we got back to my grandmother's [Josephine Weldon Belton] house my mother said, "Where have y'all been?"  And I calmly said, well--we had--got a '39 [1939] Ford and it was ragged, the floor was rusted out and no trunk.  So I calmly said, "Well I fell out of the car through a hole in the floor and daddy had to come back and look for me."  And his mouth dropped open and she said, "What?"  And I'm just sitting there, you know, as a matter of fact, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was a joke?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no truth to that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what kind of trips did you guys take, where did you go?
Speaker 2: We'd just go--quite often daddy would be visiting members of--or other business kinds of contacts, more informal and he would take me along, especially if he was going to someone's house who had children, because if there was a ballgame going that was right down my alley.
Speaker 1: He was a minister at the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those visits?
Speaker 2: Oh I remember lots of those visits.
Speaker 1: Give me one example?
Speaker 2: Oh, we would often go visit someone, they'd have other children around my age and we'd get off in the field and the barn, and if they had a ball we'd get a ballgame going.  If they didn't have a ball, we might make one or somebody would create some other game.  There was always a, a creative homemade game that we could find.
Story_ID: 550089
Speaker 1: Well, what was your father like, Joseph De Laine, Sr. [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.]?  Was he fun, was he strict?
Speaker 2: He was both.  Da- daddy was a unique person.  You knew your limits with him.  He expected you to obey.  But he never whipped you without you really knowing why you were--when I say whipped, I'm including all punishment.  He was gonna calmly sit down and explain why you were being punished before he crucified you.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one such occasion?
Speaker 2: I remember lots of (laughter) such occasions.
Speaker 1: Give me one example of one time?
Speaker 2: He, he didn't forget anything either.  If he said--if you did something and he said, "All right I'm, I'm gonna get you for that," you may go six months without getting a whipping, but the next time you provoked him to the point that you got a whipping, then he'd call the roll, he would go all the way back to the last whipping.  And he never missed anything.
Speaker 1: Tell me one time, tell me one story about a time you were whipped?
Speaker 2: Like I said, usually about food.  I probably got more whippings about food than anything else.  Daddy didn't believe in leaving anything on your plate.  And I did not like fat on meat, and daddy thought fat was good for you, he said it kept your body lubricated.  And we would get ham and there'd be fat on it and I'd start pulling off and pushing other stuff away, and he would quite often take me out and he had a razor strap that he used, you know, to sharpen razors, and he used that to whip us with.  So I knew that strap quite well.
Speaker 1: And, but he was also a leader in the community?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you witness that as a young boy?
Speaker 2: Quite often when I followed him around, he was going to meetings related to leadership roles either as a minister, as a teacher, and as time went on the deeper he got involved into civil rights.  I would go to more of those meetings.  But daddy was always a person who was an activist on things that he believed in.  He had a keen sense of justice and responsibility for others.  During the war [World War II, WWII], he was one of the agents who issued rationing tickets, and I'm sure he got into that because of--of his social conscience.  I can--I never heard him say this, but I can just imagine that he felt that African Americans were not getting their fair share of rationing tickets.  And he made it known--his concerns.  And I'm, I'm confident that that is what led to his becoming one of the agents to issue rationing tickets.  And I also remember an incident where we stopped to get gas one night and a storm came up and blew the rationing tickets out and we had to get out and find (laughter) every one of them.
Story_ID: 550090
Speaker 1: You said your mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] used to read stories to you, do you remember one of those stories?
Speaker 2: I, I can't tell you the stories because my mind was probably on getting a good baseball game started.  But most of the nursery rhymes and since she was an elementary teacher, obviously she would be interested in the children's literature type stories.
Speaker 1: Did your parents teach you to read at home?
Speaker 2: They said they tried their best to (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you resist?
Speaker 2: I resisted to a point.  They--my sister [Ophelia De Laine Gona] was a real reader.  She was always reading and they wanted me to read like my sister.  And I wasn't interested in that.  I was interested in a ballgame or--or tinkering with something.  Now, daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] would let me tinker with his car and I'd get it screwed up where it wouldn't run and he'd go straighten it out.  But I always liked tinkering with things.
Speaker 1: Did you play baseball with your brother [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't like baseball (laughter).  He--in fact he didn't like sports.  He was--he and my sis- well, he was the most sociable one of us.  My sister was the most studious one of us.  And I was the more, I don't know whether to say mischievous, but I, I had to find a ballgame.
Speaker 1: And did you play with other black kids in town or did white kids play (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, just--no just black.
Story_ID: 550091
Speaker 1: What school did you attend, elementary school?
Speaker 2: I started school and went to first and second grade at Liberty Hill School [Liberty Hill Elementary School, Summerton, South Carolina].  That was a school where my father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was teacher and principal.  A four teacher school and I think it went through, I believe it went through seventh grade at one time.  In third grade, I went to Scotts Branch [Scotts Branch School, Summerton, South Carolina] which was across the street from our house and that was a school that my mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] was teaching at at that time.  Initially, she taught at Springhill [Springhill Elementary School, Summerton, South Carolina] and when we moved into town, my father started teaching at Liberty Hill.  So my sister [Ophelia De Laine Gona]--well all of us went to school with him for a while.  And he became sick and was out of work for several months, and the following year is when we transferred to Scotts Branch, which was directly across the street from our house.
Speaker 1: So at Liberty Hill School, do you remember any of your classes?
Speaker 2: One of daddy's sis- he had two sisters teaching at the school.  One taught me in first grade, one taught me in second grade.
Speaker 1: Which sisters, wha- what were their names?
Speaker 2: Carrie [Carrie De Laine] was the sister that taught me in first grade and Rovena [Rovena De Laine] taught me in second grade.
Speaker 1: What did you--what do you remember about their teaching methods and lessons?
Speaker 2: Rovena at that time we considered her mean.  As she got older, I don't know maybe we got older too and she mellowed.  But Carrie was an interesting person.  Oh, she was known to have her tantrums too, but she would take children and just go.  Lots of trips during the summer.  I have a picture of my cousin and another girl that she lugged all over the country, the three of us.  But she was the type person would come by your house and she would hear about somebody being sick across town and she'd scoop the kids up and put them in the car and--, "I'm going to see So and So."  Then she'd get across town and found out that there's something in Columbia [South Carolina] that is interesting.  Then she'd take off to Columbia.  People never knew when their children were coming back home when they left with her.  They might be back that day, they might be back six months or six weeks later.  But I have known her to take children to Detroit [Michigan] and Buffalo [New York] when they left to go ten to fifteen miles away.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--well, what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I guess science, but I really didn't rate school too high on the favorite (laughter) list.
Speaker 1: What was on your favorite list? Baseball we know.
Speaker 2: Baseball and summer vacation.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But your parents, both educated--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --really stressed education?
Speaker 2: Really stressed education in more ways than one.  Some--sometimes they stressed it rather violently with me (laughter).
Speaker 1: But that didn't work?
Speaker 2: Well it did in--in the long run.  Didn't like it any better, but I knew that I was gonna have to do it.  So, I did what I had to do to see the sun rise the next day.
Story_ID: 550092
Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your home?
Speaker 2: Usually we went to Columbia [South Carolina] for many holidays and I don't remember a whole lot about holidays at home.  I can remember that I--
Speaker 1: But in Columbia what do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I liked going to Colu- Columbia because my [maternal] grandmother [Josephine Weldon Belton] fixed more of what I wanted to eat then at home.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, she was big on potato custard and that was always good.  And you know grandparents tend to let you slide when your parents won't.  And she would, she would let me get more of what I wanted without being grumpy about it.  But now, she always wanted--she didn't want us to play too much, she always wanted you to sit down and tell each other bible stories and that was too calm for me.
Story_ID: 550093
Speaker 1: You left Liberty Hill School [Liberty Hill Elementary School, Summerton, South Carolina] and went to Scotts Branch [Scotts Branch School, Summerton, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] was teaching there or your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, my mother.
Speaker 1: Tell me about classes at Scotts Branch?  Did your mother teach you?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I went in third grade, I had--the principal's wife was my teacher.  But I was a lot younger than other students, because I started school just before turning five years old.  And I don't think I really officially started school, I think they needed a babysitter and I went to school and at the end of the year I had done what the other children had done, so I was promoted.  But when I went to Summerton [South Carolina], the other students were much older than I and it was a frustrating time.  The boys were bigger, I was always a little runt.  And there was a lot of conflict.  I was a tattletale and constantly getting beat up because of that.  And I repeated fourth grade because of my immaturity.  And when I found out I wasn't being promoted, oh I was hysterical, but two weeks into the second round of fourth grade, that was the best thing that ever happened to me.  Because I was more in line with the age of the bulk of the students.  You know, at that time, it wasn't uncommon to have sixteen, seventeen year old students in third and fourth grade.  And you know, being small, naturally small, then being younger than the average student in the class made it tough.  And I was much, much happier after I repeated fourth grade.  Then my mother taught me in fifth and sixth grade?
Speaker 1: What was that like, having your mother as a teacher?
Speaker 2: For the most part it was good.  But you know, at that time if you got a whipping in school you got one when you got home also.  And my best friend was bad.  He was the devil--I mean he wasn't that rude, but he was the ty- the type of youngster he would do something and he would get caught, and while the teacher is punishing him for what he had just done, you could see the wheels in his mind turning, what can I do next.  And he was always doing something to needle teachers.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Andrew Lee.
Speaker 1: Andrew Lee?
Speaker 2: Well his last name was Reagan [Andrew Lee Reagan (ph.)], but his middle name was Lee and we called him Andrew Lee.  But he, he was a very creative nuisance (laughter).  He wasn't, wasn't--I don't ever remember him being rude to teachers, but if he could figure out a way to annoy them, it would--if there were a way, he would come up with it.  And if he got a whipping, mother would whip me too because she said he's my friend, if I weren't your teacher you'd be in it with him.  So she'd whip me in school and I'd get home and he would whip be again--she would whip me again.
Speaker 1: Guilty by association.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 550094
Speaker 1: Do you remember the white kids in town?
Speaker 2: Nah, we didn't associate with them.
Speaker 1: Did you see them?
Speaker 2: Going downtown you would see them.  There was one white family that lived on the side of town that we lived on that we would see them in passing.  But, I didn't know anything about the white kids.
Speaker 1: Well what did you notice about that white family, how were they dressed and how did they behave?
Speaker 2: Actually they were pretty nice people.  They were poor and they were probably ostracized by the white community because they were poor and they lived on the black side of town.  But as far as I know about them, they were, they were nice people.
Speaker 1: Was there a clear dividing line between the black side of town and the white side of town in Summerton [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The blacks lived primarily on the west side.  There was a street south of town named Gipp Street that was black and there was another section, I guess northeast that had some blacks.  But there may have been a few black kids who's had a relationship with white children because of their parents may have worked for whites.  But we didn't and daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] did not allow us to participate in anything that was segregated.  When--as far as the movie, he absolutely forbade us to go to the movie because it--it was segregated and he wasn't--you weren't gonna spend his money to go to the balcony.
Story_ID: 550095
Speaker 1: Tell me about the movie theater in town, did you go?
Speaker 2: No, I think I was in it one time and that was, was without daddy's knowledge.  But blacks had to go to the balcony and as I remember it, you had to go up some narrow steep steps and then once you got up there, there were homemade benches, very uncomfortable.  But daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] didn't allow us to go to the movie because it was segregated, and you were not gonna spend his money to go to a segregated facility.
Speaker 1: What happened at school when your friends went to the movie?
Speaker 2: Well, every Saturday everybody went to the movie except me.  And you had the feature film and then you had the newsreels and you had what they called a chapter.  It was a soap opera of that time, and I was proud of folk having televisions.  And the kids would go see the chapter and they would show a fifteen minute clip that would go on some--for months and months before you got to the end of the chapter.  And every Monday they'd come back to school talking about the chapter.  And I wanted to go to the movie to see the chapter, and I no- never got to see the chapter.
Speaker 1: In Columbia [South Carolina] did you get to go to movies?
Speaker 2: There was a black movie in Columbia named the Carver Theater [Columbia, South Carolina].  We could go there.  And daddy's sisters and one of mother's [Mattie Belton De Laine] sister-in-laws would often take her--take us to the movie.  They would go downtown to the white movie that was also segregated, but the balcony was much nicer than in Summerton [South Carolina].  Daddy didn't agree with that either.  The only picture I can remember that daddy agreed for us to see at a segregated movie was 'Pinky.'  And that movie was so significant because you didn't--didn't see black movies too often, even in the black theater they were very limited.  But 'Pinky' came and daddy agreed for us to see that.
Speaker 1: Was that a big deal?
Speaker 2: That was a big deal, yeah.
Story_ID: 550096
Speaker 1: What about other public facilities in Summerton [South Carolina]? Restaurants, stores? Segregation?
Speaker 2: Segregated.  If you didn't work in the white restaurant, you didn't go.  There were a couple of black places that you could go eat.  Public facilities either did not have accommodations for blacks or they were very inferior.
Speaker 1: Give me an example of some of the restaurants in town?
Speaker 2: Black or white?
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: Well the black restaurants, the primary one was Oliver's [Oliver's Cafe, Summerton, South Carolina].  In fact it's in existence and it was a typical type restaurant, barbeque, fried foods and so forth.  And that's where most of the blacks would go to eat and in a sense, socialize.  The white restaurants, you, you didn't go to.  In fact, I don't even know if the black restaurants in Summerton had a back door that they would feed blacks.  Some, some restaurants you could go to a window or a door in the back and get served, but--
Speaker 1: So you remember any of the names of those restaurants?
Speaker 2: Well the Summerton Diner in Summerton is still there.  And that was one that was very segregated.
Speaker 1: Did anyone ever try to enter, any black citizens try to enter these restaurants during your childhood?
Speaker 2: I'm sure they did, but you know, you could get lynched for that.  That was not--that was not a healthy thing to try to do.
Story_ID: 550097
Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing about any lynchings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember?
Speaker 2: Folk disappearing, people being found dead.  That was the way that whites either sent messages or tried to keep fear stirred up to keep blacks in line is to either get somebody that they would refer to as an uppity nigger and either beat them up or kill them.  Sometimes they didn't even have to get someone guilty.  They just scooped somebody off the street if they wanted to send a message to stay in line (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are--what were some of the stories, do you remember anyone who disappeared, anyone who was lynched?
Speaker 2: I remember the story of one man who objected to selling his crops at a price that he considered too low.  And he sho- showed up dead.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I forgot his first name is--he had a brother that was also murdered and he was murdered about two months later.  McKnight [ph.] was the last name, I don't remember the first name.
Speaker 1: And was that a big deal in town [Summerton, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  It wasn't a big deal among the establishment.  The African American grapevine, the word spread real fast.  He lived a good ways out of town.  He was a member of daddy's church at that time.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that church?
Speaker 2: Antioch [Antioch A.M.E. Church, Rimini, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where was that church located?
Speaker 2: In an area known as Rimini [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: And how old were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's about--it's about ten miles out of Summerton.
Speaker 1: How old were you at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, ten. Ten, eleven, somewhat.
Story_ID: 550098
Speaker 1: Do you remember your father's [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] work against discrimination?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember, what's your first memory of his activism?
Speaker 2: Well as long as I can remember he's been active, an activist.  When things star- started to get started that evolved into the Briggs case [Briggs v. Elliott], I was nine, seven, eight, nine years old.  And the people in what's known as the Davis Station [South Carolina] area started trying to get transportation for their children from the--to get to high school because they had a long distance to walk.  And daddy became involved and at first I didn't know very much about what was going on.  Then the black parents bought a bus and I became more aware, aware then because then we had this bus bringing kids to school when it was running.  And as that evolved and they tried to get the county to pay the operating expenses and labor for a driver.  There were more and more meetings and I became more aware of it then, and eventually they went to court.  And with--they filed a case, Levi Pearson filed a case in his name known as Pearson v. Board of Education [Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County and School District No. 26].  And when that was thrown out of court then it really became a more, a greater movement toward better education, rather than just transportation.
Story_ID: 550099
Speaker 1: Do you remember this thing of crisis, you were seven, eight, nine years old at the time.  Do you remember kids walking a long distance to get to school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Even in elementary school [Liberty Hill Elementary School, Summerton, South Carolina], and I had classmates and it wasn't uncommon for them to walk three or four miles to get to school.  And at the high school level, it was even further.  And because of the lack of transportation, there was somebody living with us most of the years that I can remember.  At first it was a couple of cousins that stayed with us to go to high school because we were right across the street from school [Carver High School, Lake City, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: What were the cousins' names?
Speaker 2: Daisy [Daisy De Laine Block] and Arlonial De Laine.
Speaker 1: Daisy and?
Speaker 2: Arlonial, A-R-L-O-N-I-A-L.  And when they graduated from school, then another young lady that lived out near the church [Springhill A.M.E. Church, Summerton, South Carolina] where daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] pastored when I was born and in fact they lived on the farm that daddy had bought.  And she stayed with us several--oh two or three years to go to high school.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Rafonia Gibson [ph.].  And her sister stayed with us for a brief period.  But there were other students who lived in town with friends or relatives, or people that their parents made arrangements for them to stay and go to school.  Most of them probably stayed with these folk on a barter system, where the parents would provide farm products and they would keep the child during the week and the child would go home weekends.  And I knew some others who walked long distances, you know, six, seven, eight, nine miles.
Speaker 1: Were you aware that white students had buses to bring them to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they always came along about time we got out of school and they were well stocked with Coke [Coca-Cola] caps and water balloons, and anything else, spit or anything else that they can throw out of the window at the black kids.  So, we--we saw the buses in the morning and evening.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like this was an injustice?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, yo- I think there was probably a different feeling from what people would have now, because it was so ingrained that this is the black person's place and this is the white person's place, whether you agreed with it or not.  You saw it a little differently from which person would look at a similar situation now where you have not been forced by state statutes into this inferior position.  I think people now have a problem seeing and understanding because when you talk to students and you say, "Well what would you have done if you were in that?"  "Oh, I would've done so and so."  And the reality of it is they would have done what everybody else did.  Otherwise they probably wouldn't have lived to talk about it.  So, you knew it was wrong, but there was a tolerance regardless of how much you were working to overcome that wrong, you had to stay within a certain limit in order to survive.
Story_ID: 550100
Speaker 1: Now your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was instrumental in the Levi Pearson case [Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County and School District No. 26].  Did you know Levi Pearson's children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: His oldest son was or is Ferdinand [Ferdinand Pearson, Sr.].  I knew Levi's nephews a little better because they were closer to my age and he had, you know, the children that were close to it, but his brother's [Hammett Pearson] children I knew a bit better.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: One was Frank [Frank Pearson (ph.)] and I think W.N. is Willie [Willie Pearson], and there's a daughter Ethel Mae [ph.], Pinease [Pinease Pearson] I know because, well I see her now more than the others.  And Levi's nephew Jesse [Jesse Pearson], I also, you know, know better than some of the others.
Speaker 1: And did they have to walk a long distance to school?
Speaker 2: If they came they usually walked.  Now sometimes if a wagon was available, somebody might drive a wagon to school.  There were not that many folks that had cars or trucks, but once in a while somebody had access to one, they would drive.  But once in a while when the kids were walking somebody would pass and give them a ride either part of the way or all of the way.
Story_ID: 550101
Speaker 1: Now your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] always had a car, a Ford, from what I understand (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did he often give kids rides to school?
Speaker 2: Where we lived, daddy was going the wrong direction to just pick somebody up and bring them to school.  'Cause if he were going to work, he's going the opposite direction that the kids who had to walk furthest would be traveling.  But it was common for people to just stop and whether they were going to school or not, just stop and pick up a person who's walking, because chances are you knew them.  There was no other transportation and folk would pass in a wagon, pass a person walking and they may run and jump on the wagon.  The wagon may not even stop.  But even some whites would stop and let a black person get on the back of a truck and ride a way.  But it was a--a kind of a different attitude, attitude toward other people then you have now.  It was more trusting, number one.  You know, you pick somebody up now you're not sure what's gonna happen.
Story_ID: 550102
Speaker 1: Did you know who the nice white families were?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm gonna say yes.  The folk who came in contact more often would know people who were more moderate from those real rebels.  And even, you know, even a Klansman might give you a ride.  I mean, they, they may not like you, but if they know you and look at you as a--you know, they always used the N-word--good, you know.  They would probably pick up a person.  They wouldn't put them in the car, but if they had a truck they'd let them ride on the back.
Speaker 1: Did you know who was involved in the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]?
Speaker 2: I had a vague knowledge of it, but at that time not a very good.  I would--I would often hear people talking about a person and you knew the m- the people who were or should I say the ones with the meanest streak, you knew them, yeah.  You also knew the ones who were more moderate.
Story_ID: 550103
Speaker 1: Can you describe the activism you noticed, your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.], his involvement with the Levi Pearson case [Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County and School District No. 26] and perhaps your mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] as a supporting figure, what did you witness?
Speaker 2: Daddy was often talking to people about exercising their rights about things that you need to do.  Daddy was big on counseling people about personal habits such as spending.  You know, he would pound into his students the information about how you use money and he was very anti-credit.  He said if you had to borrow, you couldn't afford it.  And he also stayed on young people about looking a person in the eye when you talk to them, and that was something the conservative white person did not like.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have an incident where you looked somebody in the eye--a white person?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did, but I can't recall anything right offhand, where there was a confrontation about it.
Story_ID: 550104
Speaker 1: During your childhood, your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was teaching where and where was he pastoring?
Speaker 2: Okay when I was born, daddy was pastoring at Springhill A.M.E. Church [Summerton, South Carolina].  That was what they referred to as a circuit, there was more than one church.  Springhill was the primary church.  He taught at Bob Johnson's school.  That's where my brother [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.] started school.  And I'm not quite sure of whether daddy left Bob Johnson [Bob Johnson School, Clarendon County, South Carolina] before he was transferred from Springhill or whether he left Bob Johnson and went to Liberty Hill [Liberty Hill Elementary School, Summerton, South Carolina] at the time that he was moved from the Springhill circuit.  But when he taught at Liberty Hill School, for the most--the major part of that time he passed it at the Pine Grove circuit.  He had two churches at Pine Grove [Pine Grove A.M.E. Church, Clarendon County, South Carolina] and Society Hill [Society Hill A.M.E. Church, Manning, South Carolina].  Society Hill became important in the movement toward the bus transportation case because when Lake Marion was being built and the water was dammed up, it cut off the road that a lot of people use to get to school and to church.  They had to go several miles around and a youngster was drowned.  They had come to church or either on--was on the way to church and the boat that they were in capsized and the youngster was drowned.  The same boat was used by children coming to school.  And this was around the time the folk in Davis Station [South Carolina] was pushing trying to get the county to pay for their transportation.
Speaker 1: What do you remember, what happened next with this Levi Pearson case [Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County and School District No. 26] and the effort to get buses to the black schools?
Speaker 2: It was thrown out of court on--withdrawn from court because of a technicality.  His house apparently straddle the district lines and the county had said that his taxes were accredited to one school district and that was the one that did not have a high school and his children were attending the other district that he had fi- filed the case against.  So they withdrew that because of that technicality.  And the parents who were involved in the transportation case were determined they were gonna do something to improve their children's opportunity for an education.  And as a result of that, the meetings were set up and eventually convinced the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to take the case and that's when the first Briggs case [Briggs v. Elliott] asking for equalization of schools was filed.  Now there were some other events that had happened that influenced people's thinking.
Story_ID: 550105
Speaker 1: Do you remember discussion of Thurgood Marshall in your home? The NAA- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember meeting him, I don't remember meeting him at home, but yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me, when did you meet him?
Speaker 2: He was at one function at a church that I kind of remember and I think I saw him at Columbia [South Carolina].  But at that time I knew what was going on, but again, a ballgame would've taken precedence over (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, how was your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] perceived in his role as a leader in this fight?
Speaker 2: Daddy wa- was a person that I think was--he was highly respected by well, both black and white community.  Because he was a straightforward person regardless of who he was dealing with.  And he was not gonna back away from a challenge because it was challenged by a white person.  And whites basically knew it.  And you know like anybody, when you know a person is not gonna tolerate injustices and you know that that person comes to you in a respectful way rather than coming with arrogance or hostility you kind of get a different perception.  And daddy was the kind of person, my saying that my friend has about going to hell and looking forward to the trip, daddy was the kind of person that could really tell you off in such a way that he'd walk away, and then stop and think about it, you know, he just told me off.  Yeah, if he believed in it he was gonna be persistent.  He was not gonna back down.  And he was not gonna waver unless you could justify a good reason why he should.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the death threats?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What do you remember?
Speaker 2: I wasn't with him.  I remember him coming home talking about what had happened.
Speaker 1: So while you were in the home, none of that happened?
Speaker 2: Oh it happened.  I knew that daddy was a minister, but I knew that he carried a gun, and I knew that he could use it.  And I had no doubt that if he needed to he would.  Because daddy's philosophy is that God helps those who help themselves.  And he did not like, in fact he got rather furious with people who would say, "Oh I'm praying and waiting on the Lord."  'Cause his thing was, if you're waiting on the Lord, you deserve to sit back on your laurels and perish.  He believed that God had put resources out for you to use and you pray for guidance and for God to help you see and find those resources.  But it was up to you to find the resources and use them.  He didn't think God was gonna put the resources out there and then come use them too, that was up to you.  And he thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how--
Speaker 2: --and thought that God had put weapons out there for him to use for his protection, not to be aggressive, but if he had to use it against an evil person or to stop evil, then he thought that was his responsibility.
Speaker 1: What ultimately happened with the Pearson case [Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County and School District No. 26]?  It was thrown out?
Speaker 2: It was thrown out of court and it evolved into the Briggs case [Briggs v. Elliott] asking for equalization of schools.  And that case was withdrawn and another Briggs case was filed asking to desegregate schools as of--because segregation was a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Story_ID: 550106
Speaker 1: Well where you in ha- in high school, where did you attend high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school [Carver High School] in Lake City, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did you--and this was a segregated school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that you were receiving an inferior education?
Speaker 2: Ah, you didn't have to be too smart to figure that one out.  You know, you just look around, didn't even have to be wide awake to see it.
Speaker 1: Tell me what the signs were?
Speaker 2: The white school was a nice brick school, central heat, modern conveniences, indoor toilets.  The black schools, you had a lot of small one, two, three, four room schools scattered across the county.  The black school--the white schools had been consolidated and transportation was provided for them to get to school.  Black schools you walked regardless of how far from the school you lived.  Textbooks, you got textbooks that had been used in the white schools for five, six years.  They'd been signed and often torn up.  They would send them back to the state book depository and they called it reconditioning, but they would make some--erase some of the marks out of the book, but often we got books with sweet potatoes between the pages and other food.  And if you knew the whites in town, you knew who had that book for every year, because they had to sign it.  We had wooden fuel stoves that we had to go out and gather wood for, whites didn't have to do that.  We had to make our own fires when we got to school during the day.  We had to clean the building, we had no custodial services.  No cafeteria.
Story_ID: 550107
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Carver High School, Carver Colored High School.  Course, whenever a school's named Carver, you really don't have to put the colored there because you know it's colored.
Speaker 1: And that was in Lake City, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any clubs there?
Speaker 2: Other than the 4-H club and the Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization], I don't remember any clubs being there.  And I didn't belong to either one of those.  I think it was--was it my junior or senior year, that we had student council and I was active with the student council.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in sports?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No baseball?
Speaker 2: Other than sandlot, never played any organized sports.
Speaker 1: Did Carver have organized sports?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had football, basketball and baseball.  And I was awful at basketball and I wasn't gonna let anybody run to jump on me, throw me on the ground and pile up on me, that's football.  And I probably ran too slow to play baseball.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: Probably science.
Speaker 1: Did you have science labs?
Speaker 2: Not until halfway through my junior year.  We--we moved into a new high school, that was the Carver building, prior to that was Lake City Hi- Colored School [Lake City Colored School, Lake City, South Carolina].  And we had a nice chemistry lab with nothing in it but stools.  And my senior year I didn't take a science I don't think.
Speaker 1: What were your dreams when you thought about the future, what were you hoping to do?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to be a mechanic.  And I knew that I was gonna have to go to college.  And I didn't know what I was gonna do in college.  If I got in, I didn't know what I was gonna major in until I had to get one, I probably flipped a coin and--to select a major.  And the coin must've landed on the edge, 'cause I majored in psychology and economics.  So, I don't even remember why I chose those two.
Story_ID: 550108
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: And how were race relations at that time?
Speaker 2: Still very much segregated.  The 1954 [U.S.] Supreme Court decision in Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was--came down at the end of my junior year.  The second decision in Brown, the one that required the schools to desegregate with all deliberate speed, came down either the day before I graduated or the day after, I don't remember which it was, but it was one day separation there.  So, it were still segregated.  There were no whites in South Carolina, to speak of, that even would entertain the thought of integrated schools at that time.  But, because of the Briggs case, we did have the new high school.  That was a part of the equalization effort that the State of South Carolina went into to try to stave off the integration issue.
Speaker 1: So this was one of the concessions in the Briggs v. Elliott case and your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was instrumental in that case, and Thurgood Marshall argued the case?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: One of the concessions to avoid seg- desegregation was to build the high school you attended, Carver public high school [Carver High School] in Lake City [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Right.  In--in the district court hearings, the state conceded that the schools were not equal and that the governor had proposed, and it was rushed through to get a $75 million bond to equalize schools.  The bulk of that money went to equalizing black schools.  But there were some white schools that were brought up to standards also.  And in 1952, I think it is--was, a new school was built in Summerton [South Carolina] and transportation provided for black students.  Lake City, they were not as far behind so it took a little longer to get a school there.  When we went to Lake City, they had--the elementary building was a cinderblock building.  I think it had central heat in it also and then they had another brick building, that was the high school wing.  Those--both of those buildings were not too old as schools went during that time because it had not been too very long that the high school--that the school, a black school had burned in Lake City and that's when the cinderblock building was built.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the burning of that school, when did that happen?
Speaker 2: I--I'm not sure what happen--what year that was.  But, I don't think it had been fifteen years.  In fact, it probably wasn't that long because some of the people I know that said they were in school at that time would not have been in school fifteen years back.  But--
Speaker 1: You were alive when this happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know anything about that because it was before we moved to Lake City.  But when we got there, they did have a building that had indoor restrooms, and they had central heat.  Did not have a cafeteria.  But it--it was--it was a pretty nice building as far as black folk were concerned.  And--
Speaker 1: This was the 1952--
Speaker 2: This was 19--
Speaker 1: --construction?
Speaker 2: No, this was 1950 and in Lake City, the new school did not come until 1953.  So it was about a year after--ni- yeah, the end of 1953, '54 [1954] school year we moved into the new building.
Speaker 1: Was there a sense that your father was part of this movement, a big part of this movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  People knew where or why the schools were being built.  Now in other parts of the state I'm not sure that they were as aware of why they were getting new buildings, as they were in the Clarendon County [South Carolina] area.
Speaker 1: How many buildings?  How many new schools, colored schools?
Speaker 2: All over the state.  Yeah, I don't know how many, but I know all over the state they were built.
Speaker 1: And this all began in Clarendon County?
Speaker 2: Right.  In fact, I spoke at a school in Aiken County [South Carolina] about three years go and one--they--the school where I was speaking had been a black school and it was one that came from the bond issue.  And the staff there, the principal and the teachers didn't know until I told them that that was a part of the state's program to equalize the schools.
Story_ID: 550109
Speaker 1: Was there a celebration of any kind after the Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] suits were decided?
Speaker 2: (Pause) As far as the, the average citizen, I would say no.  Now I'm sure the lawyers celebrated.
Speaker 1: What about your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh he jumped up and down, he was overjoyed.  But, other than talking about it and doing some backslapping, I don't remember any other celebration.
Speaker 1: But in your house, your parents were happy?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, uh-huh.  Now one other thing that happened, at my senior year in high school [Carver High School, Lake City, South Carolina], I drove a school bus.  And daddy was walking home from town one day when I was coming in off my route and I stopped and picked him up.  And to my knowledge this is the only time in his life he ever rode on a school bus.  But he was so proud, he got on, he didn't say a word, he just smiled and he sat down and he got up and moved to another seat.  Now we only had about three blocks to go to get home.  So I realized what a ball he was having and I just sort of rolled down the street a couple of miles an hour and he went from seat to seat.  And when we pulled up in the yard, I parked the bus and he just sat there and smiled.  So I u- my--the first thing I usually would do is to sweep the bus out when I got home.  So I just let him sit there and smile.  But, I think that's the happiest I ever saw him.
Speaker 1: He knew that his efforts were instrumental?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yep.
Story_ID: 550110
Speaker 1: How many new buses did you get?
Speaker 2: In Lake City [South Carolina], we went from--they already had I think it was one--one or two buses in Lake City.  Lake City was far ahead of Summerton [South Carolina].  I don't know when they started providing minimal transportation, but they--they did have a little.  But, my sophomore year, we had, I don't know, fourteen or fifteen buses and they had consolidated and sent some students in from some other areas where they had been going to, you know, three or four room schools.  And they took all of the high school students out of those small schools and consolidated them. And--
Speaker 1: Was the education becoming more and more equal?
Speaker 2: It was improving.  I wouldn't say it was equal.  Because when I graduated in 1955 there was still no equipment in the science lab [at Carver High School, Lake City, South Carolina].  But we did have a science lab then.
Story_ID: 550111
Speaker 1: So then, in 1955 you went off to college?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where did you go and why?
Speaker 2: I went to Allen University in Columbia [South Carolina] mainly because I didn't know what I wanted to do, where I wanted to go and--
Speaker 1: That's where your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] went?
Speaker 2: That's where he went.  And that was also near grandmamma's [De Laine's maternal grandmother, Josephine Weldon Belton] house.  I could al- always go get something to eat when I--even though I stayed on campus I had an escape.
Story_ID: 550112
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you this though, I noticed in high school you went to Carver, Lakeside [sic. Carver High School, Lake City, South Carolina].  Why didn't you go to Mather [Mather Academy, Camden, South Carolina] like your older brother [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Well my brother and sister [Ophelia De Laine Gona] went to Mather.  But I thought it was kind of ridiculous to leave a well stocked refrigerator at home to go to boarding school and starve (laughter).  I always wanted to go to C.A. Johnson [C.A. Johnson High School] in Columbia [South Carolina], I wanted to stay with my grandparents [Josephine Weldon Belton and David G. Belton, Sr.] and go to school.  But my parents [Mattie Belton De Laine and Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] never consented to that.  But on the Mather issue, I think they decided why waste your money on--on him, because he's not gonna leave home.  And so I just stayed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Plus it was nice being at home with no other siblings, you know, to boss me around any longer.
Story_ID: 550113
Speaker 1: And so how long did you stay at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Seven weeks.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why?
Speaker 2: Because an incident in Lake City [South Carolina] resulted from the [U.S.] Supreme Court's decision that caused--well, let me rephrase that.  Because of the Supreme Court's decision, things in Lake City started to become more tense when it was realized that daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was the person primarily responsible for the Briggs case [Briggs v. Elliott].  The Klan [Ku Klux Klan] and the Citizens' Council was becoming more active in Lake City.  And things started happening, a lot of vandalism to the house over the summer after the second Supreme Court decision, the 1955 decision.  And that culminated in October with daddy being sent a letter telling him he had ten days to get out of town.  He didn't go, the church [Greater St. James African Methodist Episcopal Church, Lake City, South Carolina] was burned about the seventh day, and the tenth day, a posse came by the house shooting and he fired back at them.  And that resulted in his leaving town.  And they took me out of Allen and I went to Washington [D.C.] and stayed a year and attended Howard [Howard University] in Washington for a semester.
Speaker 1: Oh so you came up--up north, Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were at Howard from what year to?
Speaker 2: I would say one semester, the spring semester, the '55 [1955], '56 [1956] school year.
Speaker 1: How was that time in Lake City when there was tension and the KKK became more active focusing on your father?
Speaker 2: I wasn't there that summer, I was in Columbia [South Carolina] working with an uncle.  And they didn't tell me everything that was going on.  And I came home late in August, one weekend, and all of a sudden, a bunch of garbage and rocks came through the front window.  And not knowing what was going on and I--daddy wasn't there and I grabbed the rifle and I was gonna head out to shoot whoever was doing it.  And mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] slowed me down just enough that I got outside and saw the car turning the corner at the end of the block.  And that's when I started finding out what had been going on for several weeks.  And that's when I got weak in the knees too, because if she hadn't slowed me down, you wouldn't be doing this interview now (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was your objective, at that time, with the gun?
Speaker 2: Well I was gonna shoot whoever it was.  Because I, I knew it was so--somebody associated with the Klan, but see I was too stupid to figure out, yeah I wasn't gonna win that battle.  And daddy was gone in the only car we had so, you know, if I had fired the gun, there would be no escape.
Speaker 1: You would've been killed, lynched (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I'm sure I would have, especially if I had hit the target.
Speaker 1: So your parents escaped--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --headed north, brought you with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that particular incident, they didn't leave until, what five weeks after that.  We called the police, they came out and collected or destroyed all of the evidence that we pointed out to them and said there was a car speeding and they took off after a phantom car, because a car hadn't even gone up the street.  And they covered up all of the tracks that, you know, that we'd pointed out to them.
Story_ID: 550114
Speaker 1: But when daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] left, he went to New York [New York] and I had no intentions of going to Washington [D.C.], but the next day I came in from class and came in my room and the only thing that was in there that belonged to me was my uncle.  Everything else was in the car ready for me to go to Washington. So I went to Washington and stayed with Dr. Mance who was a medical doctor who had actually saved daddy's life back in the early '40s [1940s] when he became ill.  And he was then the treasurer for the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, the denomination.  So I went and stayed with him and worked with him.
Speaker 2: What's his full name?
Speaker 1: Maceo Mance, no not Maceo, Robert Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.].  Maceo [Milligan Maceo Nance, Jr.] was president of South Carolina [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  Robert Mance.  But I stayed there and worked for a year, and hated Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Washington with a passion.
Speaker 2: Ho- why did you hate it?
Speaker 1: I just did not like Howard.  Didn't wanna be there.  Didn't like the school.
Speaker 2: What was Howard like at this time?  This was, what, you said 1956?
Speaker 1: Right.  It--it's--it's just a bad memory to me.  That's about all I can say about Howard.
Speaker 2: Your brother [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.] mentioned the snobbery up there?
Speaker 1: That--that's a part of--I could not stand that.  I don't have but one good memory of Howard, and that was from ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] they would take us flying and I enjoyed that.  And I only had one person that I considered a friend there and I don't even remember her name now.  So, that'll tell you about my social life at Howard.
Speaker 2: Were there lots of cliques at Howard?
Speaker 1: I felt like people in Washington and at Howard were--well the way I looked at them was being--as they were hypocritical.  And that may have been inaccurate, but to me there were not too many genuine people that--in my mind that I met.
Speaker 2: Was there--was there colorism at all?  Did they have a hierarchy?  You always hear about the paper bag test in D.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah and--and they were very status conscious in my opinion.  And if I had wanted to I probably could've gotten a lot of mileage out of daddy's situation, but that wasn't--that wasn't my thing.  And I enjoyed the sightseeing around Washington.
Speaker 2: What did you see?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, just the regular tourist things and--
Speaker 2: Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I would often take Dr. Mance's kids.  Just I didn't like his daughter, but his son and I, we got along.  We'd, you know, go just riding sometimes.  But I just don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you belong to any clubs during that semester at Howard?
Speaker 1: I didn't belong to anything that I didn't have to belong to to exist for those eight or nine months in Washington.
Speaker 2: Did you live on campus or you lived with Dr. Mance?
Speaker 1: I lived with Dr. Mance.
Speaker 2: Do you know who was president of Howard at that time?
Speaker 1: Didn't know and really didn't care.
Story_ID: 550115
Speaker 1: How did you depart from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I had--I had taken three of my exams and I had seven days between those three and the other exams.  And I went to New York [New York], and mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] finally said, "Well if you don't like the place, you know, that much, you don't have to go back."  And I got in the car and I went back to Washington [D.C.] and I got my things and told Dr. Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.] and his family bye (gesture) and I did not take the rest of my exams.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went and stayed in New York and daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was given an assignment in Buffalo [New York] to organize a church there.  And spent the summer in Buffalo, got a job and mother's brother was public relations director at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  And just before school opened, they were asking what was I gonna do and had no idea because folk were trying to get me to go to University of New York at Buffalo [State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York].  I looked across that campus and said no way under the sun will I be up here with all this snow and I have to walk across this campus.  And so he said, told daddy, "Well go ahead and send B. B. [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine] back with Ophelia [Ophelia De Laine Gona]," and I came back here and never really applied to Smith either.  I didn't--didn't formally start any school except Howard.
Story_ID: 550116
Speaker 1: Let me ask what race relations were like in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the time?  Did you notice anything?
Speaker 2: About like it was in South Carolina.  The trolleys and the buses were desegregated, but for the most part it was a segregated city.  It was a southern city.  You could go to a concert or Constitution Hall [Washington, D.C.] if you could afford it, but not many black folk did and the ones that went were the ones that I put on the other side of my line.
Story_ID: 550117
Speaker 1: At Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], what was your first impression?
Speaker 2: Number one it was a smaller school.  And I felt more at ease there.  Number one and a half, the same thing had happened that happened when I repeated fourth grade, now I'm finally with my age group.  So, you know, that was a plus.  And--
Speaker 1: How old you when you entered Johnson C. Smith?
Speaker 2: Eighteen.  And the other thing that made it easier at Smith, I had had--had two colleges behind me so, you know, freshman hazing, I knew the tricks around that and they--whenever they came to me with something, "I'm not a freshman, I'm an advanced freshman," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the hazing rituals at Johnson C. Smith?
Speaker 2: Mostly verbal because Smith was very strict on hazing.  I'm not sure when it happened, but they had--as I understand it, they had two incidents.  One involved hazing, another involved throwing a snowball and I think the girl got killed with the snowball.  They, you know, packed it and hit her on the temple.  But you didn't think about picking up a snowball unless you wanted to be disciplined.
Speaker 1: Do you know who the president of Johnson C. Smith was back in 1956?
Speaker 2: He was Dr. Liston [Hardy Liston], but our class never saw him.  I knew him because my uncle worked there and you know, coming back and forth to Charlotte [North Carolina] over the years.  But when we got there in September, he was in the hospital.  In fact, I think he was in a coma at that time and he died homecoming night.  So our class never saw him as, as president.
Speaker 1: Who became president?
Speaker 2: Dr. Seabrook [James Ward Seabrook] was the interim president for about a year, and then Dr. Perry [Rufus P. Perry] came in as the permanent president.
Speaker 1: Did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 2: I pledged--I'm an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], but I have not been active since I left Smith.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you recall about that pledge process that you can share?
Speaker 2: Well, I often wondered why did I pledge.  Course I know--know basically, why I hadn't planned to pledge.
Speaker 1: Well your brother [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.] had pledged?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm not a very sociable person when it comes to just socializing and I didn't see any need for pledging, but I was freshmen class president and we were supposed to have had a class meeting and nobody was there but me.  And most of the other folk who would come to class meetings were over at the library annex where they were having pledging that day.  So I went over and I looked around, saw all of my other friends there and I went on and pledged.
Speaker 1: So you were freshmen class president?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was that by choice?  Did you run or did the students kind of flock to you?
Speaker 2: They kind of flocked to me.  I never became very much of anything by choice.  I kind of stumble into everything.  And during freshman week, you go through this routine of, you know, they gonna make Smithites out of you.  You have to learn the school song and ever--you have, have to have a freshmen talent show and at that talent show you have to sing 'Let Me Call You Sweetheart' to the upperclassmen.  And every night you'd go in the auditorium and you practice the school song and you do the practice for the talent show and you would stand up and turn around and sing 'Let Me Call You Sweetheart' and you turn back around.  And just over and over, you never did it right.  And my sister [Ophelia De Laine Gona] was the person who was primarily in charge that was giving us the hard time about turning around.  And the student council president walked across the stage with a hat on while we were singing the school song.  And at the end of it, she got up, "That's not right."  I said, "Why do you expect us to do it right?  This is your school already and that was your school song that we were singing while your student council president walked across the stage with a hat on."  And that just turned the whole thing out.  And that's what propelled me into becoming freshman class president.
Story_ID: 550118
Speaker 1: What was your major at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Psychology and economics.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I was a better student then my grades reflect, but--and then that was primarily because when I got the--I started driving the school's bus and I was away too much.  That had to kind of get priorities in order and back off of some of the trips that I was making after my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Were there other students at Johnson C. Smith at the time, people who went on to great achievement, names we may know?
Speaker 2: I don't know about names you may know, but Talmadge Fair [T. Willard Fair] is the director of the Miami-Dade Urban League [Urban League of Greater Miami, Miami, Florida].  There was another Indian student who passed away a year or so ago, Eric Rahm [ph.] who became quite influential with the world health council.  Freddie Neal [Fred "Curly" Neal] was, I think, a freshman when I was a senior who went on to play with the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters].  There were some other students, football players who went to the pros.  There're quite a few students who went on to get their doctorates.  Argie Knox [Argie K. Johnson] was one of my classmates, she became superintendent of Chicago schools [Chicago Public Schools].  She was Argie Johnson then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was Johnson C. Smith a highly regarded school with a good education?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was, you know, a small black private school [HBCU], but--for African Americans.  It was a good school and still is.  In fact, who is that--Newsweek that has them rated among the top fifty I believe it is as far as quality and cost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It doesn't rate with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], but it, it's up there (laughter).
Story_ID: 550119
Speaker 1: Was there any noticeable activism at that time with respect to race relations in Charlotte [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: After the lunch counter demonstrations started in Greensboro [North Carolina], it quickly spread to other towns, other cities, including Charlotte.  And Charles Jones, he was a year ahead of me [at Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], he was in the seminary at that time, came up with the idea of starting a protest here.  And he and another student came to my room and said, "We've been talking about the lunch counter sit-ins here and we want you involved, are you interested?"  And, you know, I said yes.  And it wasn't something that I would've thought about myself probably, but it was something that I certainly supported.  And I had the kind of relationship with the students, as well as the administration that that they came to me primarily to get me to get the other students in, in the effort.
Story_ID: 550120
Speaker 1: Did students and administrators know about your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  When I got to Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], the upperclassmen had daddy's picture from Jet magazine all over the boys' dormitories.  And they had had a picture of daddy and I don't remember if he had his rifle with him, I don't think he did.  But the headline of the article was, "I Shot in God's Name."  So daddy was a hero to them.
Speaker 1: Did you reap some of that, not the benefits because you were a leader in your own right?
Speaker 2: I would have to say yes, I rec- reaped some of the benefits because well that's why I got in Smith without applying.  I'm sure mother's [Mattie Belton De Laine] brother had something to do with it, but I don't think it would've been as easy if the administration had not known the circumstances.  And I'm sure that's why I got in Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the time that I got in was because of the notoriety that daddy had gained from what happened, you know, back in South Carolina.
Story_ID: 550121
Speaker 1: So what were race relations like in Charlotte [North Carolina] at the time, at the time of the sit-ins?
Speaker 2: Things were still segregated, but Charlotte was much more moderate than most southern towns.  I think that's good and bad because Charlotte has always tried to keep the lid on problems and resolve them before they get the negative press that some other places have gotten.  But then after they get the initial problem resolved, I don't think Charlotte has stuck with it to get the root causes corrected.  And because of that, I think some of the issues that we are still struggling with now are still here and they could've been resolved in my opinion.  But during the lunch counter demonstrations, the City of Charlotte, the official policy was, that if we did not val- if we as the demonstrators did not violate any city ordinances they would not hassle us.  Now if some individual policeman did underhanded things, but that was not the official policy of the city.  And we did not have the violence that other towns experienced during the sit-ins.
Speaker 1: Now which restaurants, stores did you target as activists?
Speaker 2: All of them downtown.
Speaker 1: Name a few?
Speaker 2: Kress [S.H. Kress and Co.]--Kress, Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company], Grants [W.T. Grant Co.], Ivy's [J.B. Ivey and Company], Belk's. Ivy's is a department store, you would probably have called that the most upstale- upscale store we had.  Belk's is still in existence, Ivy's is--that was a family owned store that's not in existence now.  But we--you could not eat anywhere downtown except one place, and that was a little stand known as Tanner's [Tanner's Snack Bar].  And if you remember Harry Golden's vertical integration theory, that's why he came up with that because Tanner's had no seats.  You could go in and buy--they specialized in orange juice but you could get a hotdog and some delicious orange juice.  And they were not segregated, because they didn't have any seats.  You just stand up and eat it.
Speaker 1: It was white owned?
Speaker 2: It was white owned.  But all of the other downtown eateries we targeted and they closed for the duration of the sit-in.
Speaker 1: And what, what did you do exactly as activists?
Speaker 2: Initially, when Charles Jones and the other student, Heyward Davenport, he lives in New York now.  Charles Jones is here in Charlotte.  When they came and asked me about joining that was a Sunday night.  We had a mass meeting Monday night and we started the demonstrations Tuesday morning.
Speaker 1: Was this SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 2: SNCC was organized--during that year Charles was active in the organization of SNCC.  But basically that was a student movement.  We--once we got started there were some adults who, you know, provided guidance.  There were some who would come by and assist with transportation.  There were people sending donations to cover bail if--should we need it.
Speaker 1: And you would, boycott?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: We--we went into the restaurants and once we took a seat generally they closed.  Because it had already started in Greensboro [North Carolina] so they had a little idea of what they were gonna do.  And they would close and we would keep them closed.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't throw you out?
Speaker 2: No, there were always policeman around.  We picketed, we would get students get the counters full and we had pickets outside.  Initially, we started off with the largest number, I believe, at that time.  The Levine Museum [Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte, North Carolina] here said we started with over two hundred students.  And that's probably right.  Because without the school's permission I took the bus and transported students and I made about three trips initially with fifty to sixty kids on the bus.  And then there were the students who walked.  Some caught rides.  Some rode the city bus downtown.  But we started with Kress, Woolworth and Grants.  Those were five and ten cent stores.  And once we closed those, then we moved onto Ivy's and Belk's, and the other stores downtown.
Story_ID: 550122
Speaker 1: How long did these protests last?
Speaker 2: Over unt- they started in February, early part of February--
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]? Seven [1957] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 2: And the city worked out an agreement I think in July.  I wasn't here then because when I graduated I went to New York [New York], but the students who were in summer school and the city students continued.  And they worked out an agreement where a small party of blacks and a small party of whites would get together and go to a restaurant and eat.  And, see Charlotte [North Carolina] didn't want the negative press and Charles Jones, he was a se- a first year seminary student then, but Charles could talk circles around the professional politicians and, and other folk.  He had the gift of gab.  Heyward Davenport had been in the [U.S.] Air Force and I don't know whether he--whether that's where he got his skill at strategic planning, but he was a very good strategist.  And I became more of the operational person to get the other students involved.  And my first thing that I did was to go out and get other key students such as in the girls' dormitories alerted to what we're doing and get them to pass the word [around Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  And when we had the meeting that Monday night, the auditorium was jammed packed.  I think probably 95 percent of the students on campus were there.
Speaker 1: So your efforts were successful in integrating, ultimately--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the businesses downtown Charlotte.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now we didn't have the violence and the hostility and the unrest that other places such as Rock Hill [South Carolina] which is just down the road.  They, they sent students to the chain gang for their efforts.  And they, they can tell some interesting stories about their time in jail and the treatment that they got.
Story_ID: 550123
Speaker 1: But no one was arrested during your protest?
Speaker 2: There were some students arrested, but they were arrested because--we had established the--these are things that we're gonna do.  And we knew that if we tried to conduct a violent protest, we're gonna lose because the police were just looking for a reason to pulverize our heads.  And there were a group of students who felt like violence was the way and they were arrested, because they deliberately challenged the city ordinance.  And I'm not--I'm not necessarily saying that they were wrong because of--folk that commonly called militants.  You kind of have to have both sides, because if you have just one side and they nonviolent and they meet the city figures--or the power structure maybe I should say--we don't have to deal with them.  But if you get a group of what they consider insane nuts, I don't know whether that's redundant enough or what some (laughter) some of them appeared to be.  But when they look at these folk, then they say well, you know, we can't deal with this group maybe we ought to just go ahead and deal with these.  We had a Dr. Hawkins [Reginald Hawkins].  Dr. Hawkins was a minister and a dentist, and Dr. Hawkins probably did more in North Carolina to move things forward then he'll ever get credit for.  Because while somebody else is over on one side talking and negotiating, Dr. Hawkins is saying things that probably need to be said but in such a way that he gets the attention and the power structure figure, well maybe I better go over here and deal with these calmer minds.
Story_ID: 550124
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: And what was your mission upon graduation?
Speaker 2: Find a job (laughter).  I went to New York [New York] and floated around into different things from unemployment to welfare to working for welfare, and that was a job I could not stand.
Speaker 1: You worked for the welfare department [City of New York Department of Welfare; City of New York Department of Social Services]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: Social investigator.  But even though I didn't like the job, that job and driving a bus in New York did more to help me understand people than anything else that I can think of in my life.  And I doubt that I would've succeeded at teaching if I had not had those two experiences.
Speaker 1: Why, who did you meet?
Speaker 2: At welfare, I met a lot of good people and I met a lot of deadbeats.  And having to look at and deal with people with serious social and economic problems and seeing the kind of treatment that good honest appreciative people got versus demanding, aggressive crooks, it made me more compassionate with people with problems who were not as ag- as aggressive as they needed to be for their own good.
Story_ID: 550125
Speaker 1: At some point you meet your wife. When does that happen?
Speaker 2: We were classmates at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  We came in as freshmen together and graduated together.  And she was the first person that I went to when we got ready to start the demonstrations because she was--well what they call now resident assistants, we didn't call them that during those days, but she had a good bit of influence with the girls and well respected by them.  So when I went to her and--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Edith Strickland [Edith Strickland De Laine].
Speaker 1: And what was her major at Johnson C. Smith?
Speaker 2: She majored in biology, but after she graduated and we came back to Charlotte [North Carolina] she went back and completed an elementary ed [elementary education] major and certification.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Where--where did you get married?
Speaker 2: In New York, in Buf- in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: So did the marriage happen--the wedding happen while you were working for the department of welfare [City of New York Department of Welfare; City of New York Department of Social Services]?
Speaker 2: No, it happened while I was unemployed (laughter).  And then it wasn't a big wait and daddy [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] married us.  And my mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] and her mother [Josephine Weldon Belton] were the witnesses and her brother, baby brother and sister and her roommate were there.  We had a big church wedding with just a very few people in it (laughter).
Speaker 1: What church?
Speaker 2: Calvary A.M.E. Church [Calvary Fellowship African Methodist Episcopal Church].  It was the church daddy pastored in Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 550126
Speaker 1: And at what point did you enter NYU [New York University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I--after I left welfare [City of New York Department of Welfare; City of New York Department of Social Services] I went through another unemployment period.  And started working at a auto repair shop.  Then sh- my wife [Edith Strickland De Laine] was pregnant, so I had to get steadier money than that and I started working for the Transit Authority in New York [New York City Transit Authority].  And when my oldest son [Boris De Laine] was born I went into get--take the civil service physical to go on permanent and they fired me because I flunked the color test.  And so I was looking for a job.
Speaker 1: Were you color blind?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, but I had passed, it depended on which one of those pages they stopped on on that color chart, because I had passed it when I got the job.  But they flipped to a different page the next time.  But, while I was looking for a job after that, I saw a driver ed [driver education] car go by and I said I can do that until I get another job.  So I went out to the employment office and they sent me to NYU and I started there with the intention of taking one course to teach commercial driver ed.  And I took the application home and got her to fill it out while I looked for a job.  And less than two weeks I was admitted and I was admitted to get a master's in safety.  And I said these folk are nuts, I didn't ask for that.  So when I got in, during the first course, there was--somebody didn't show up for a grant so they came and announced that and the instructor said, "Why don't you apply for that?"  I said, "I wouldn't get it."  He said, "Apply."  So I applied and got it.  And, I just kept taking classes and after I got about halfway through I said, you know, I like safety and my intentions were to work in the transportation industry.  And that was around the time that the Occupational Health and Safety Act [sic. Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970] was being implemented.  And when I said I think I'm gonna go ahead and get this master's since they admitted me, she told me, "That's what I applied for I just didn't tell you."  And see I didn't read it, I just signed the application.
Speaker 1: Your wife had applied for you?
Speaker 2: Right.  So that's how I got a master's.  Another one of things that I kind of stumbled into.
Speaker 1: It was a master's in safety?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 550127
Speaker 1: What was the climate, social climate like at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] at this time?
Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early 1960s?
Speaker 2: The, the social climate at NYU was--there wasn't a problem with it.  I think it was probably more me because, you know, I was still a southern hick and you know New Yorkers they like to talk all the time and make you think they know everything.  And I'm sitting there thinking, you know, all these folk keep expounding on stuff and then test time come, folk will be asking me questions.  I'm--why they asking me.  And it took me awhile of--figure out, you know, they don't al- they don't always know what they're talking about.  But they was--I didn't have a problem with the other students, and--
Speaker 1: Did black and white students socialize together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there wasn't a problem.  Most of the classes I took were primarily white.  The classes I took during the summer, there were a much higher percentage of blacks because you had black teachers from the South who were coming to New York working on graduate degrees that would be in the summer classes with you.
Speaker 1: How many black students were in your class during the year?
Speaker 2: At NYU?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: During the winter, most of the classes I was the only one.  There were a few classes there might've been one or two.
Speaker 1: Did you see many black faces across campus?
Speaker 2: Well on campus, yeah I would see them.  But as far as--
Speaker 1: Was there ac- was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as far as I can remember, the classes where there were the most blacks during the winter were the sociology classes that I took and an education class.  But for the most part, the classes in the safety department during the winter, I think I was about the only black person there.
Speaker 1: Was there any sort of activism at this time, civil rights activism on campus?
Speaker 2: Not that I knew of.  I didn't know very much about what was going on on campus because by the time I got into the third class I was working and I was driving a bus for another company.  And when I went to class, usually I got out of class and I had to make a beeline back to work.  The company that I was working for was real good about the--working out a schedule that I could go to class.  And I really think they had in mind making me their safety director, because they didn't work with anybody else to the extent that they did me.  Because then when I went in for the interview, the only thing the interviewer talked about was the safety program I was in at NYU.
Story_ID: 550128
Speaker 1: Was there a big contrast between life in Charlotte [North Carolina] and life in New York City [New York, New York] with respect to race?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm--I'm gonna say yes, but I don't know because the time that I spent in Charlotte prior to going to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] I didn't have any contacts with whites other than the couple of white teachers at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  And that--that was the extent of it.
Speaker 1: Was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], did he make his rounds through New York City, NYU while you were there?
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember him coming to NYU, but he came to New York City while we were there.  But and I had a young family and a job, and so I didn't go to any of those rallies.
Speaker 1: Were you still interested in civil rights at that time?
Speaker 2: Interested yes, active no.  See I never really set out to get in any of these positions they just kind of fell in my lap or fell on my head or whatever.  Because with the sit-ins, I just happened to be at Smith and the other two people had enough confidence in my being able to rally the other students and they came to me, and I came back to Charlotte to work, I just happened to get an assignment that put me right in the mix of the school integration process and things just happened.
Story_ID: 550129
Speaker 1: Tell me about your kids, when were they born and what are their names?
Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest child is Boris [Boris De Laine], that's B-O-R-I-S.  He was born in 1962.  All of them were born New York [New York].  My daughter is Brenna [Brenna De Laine McQuilla], B-R-E-N-N-A, she was born in 1963.  In 1964 we took a vacation and my youngest child Buane [Buane De Laine] was born in 1965.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: B-U-A-N-E.
Speaker 1: And what are your children do for a living, where were they educated and what do they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My oldest son is a computer programmer for Vanguard [The Vanguard Group, Inc.], but he--his major was aerospace engineering and he attended North Carolina State University [Raleigh, North Carolina].  And while he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, he got a master's in mechanical engineering.  My daughter is a medical doctor.  She attended Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  My youngest son, attended South Carolina State College at that time, South--and is South Carolina State University [Orangeburg, South Carolina] now I think.  He is into computer stuff too.  He's not a programmer, and I don't exactly know how to define what he does, except I can say it's more related to systems and software and security.
Speaker 1: And you said Boris got his master's [degree] from?
Speaker 2: From University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from NYU [New York University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Story_ID: 550130
Speaker 1: Tell me about your sojourn into teaching?
Speaker 2: Well after I completed my master's [degree] I had no intentions of teaching.  My intentions were to find a job in safety in the transportation industry.  And I never talked to the folk at the bus company I was working at, so--about it, but I was looking for other jobs.  And the only thing I could find was either in Dallas [Texas] or in Chicago [Illinois] and I would spend half of my life on the road.  And that's--no that's not for me.  And a driver education teacher in Chappaqua, New York had a nervous breakdown and NYU [New York University, New York, New York] referred me to the job.  They didn't refer anybody else, I don't know whether I was the only person not working.  Of course I was working, I was making more money too (laughter).  But, when I got the referral I started not to respond to it, but I said I'll go see what they're talking about because I'd never heard of Chappaqua.  And once I found it on the map and found out where it was, I went up for the interview and when I looked around and saw the community, I said boy, you don't need to be here.  So I said well I've driven all this distance, I'm gonna go ahead and get the interview and went in and talked to the superintendent.  And it went quite well.  And he said at the end of it he said, "Well as far as I'm concerned you're the person.  But I want you to talk to the principal first and I think I should warn you that we've never had a black teacher before."  And I said to myself, get in your Volkswagen and go back to the city.  So I came back a couple of days later and talked to the principal and he said, "If you wanted the job, it's yours."  But it was an interim position because they wanted a coach.  And I decided I'll go ahead and take it and get this experience and I have to give up the job driving the bus and I was taking about a 25 percent pay cut.  And, so I took the job and I had the--went to vacation and we went to Alabama to visit my wife's [Edith Strickland De Laine] people.  And I stopped through Charlotte [North Carolina], I'd already sent an application down by that time and got an interview.  Went back, never heard from them.  Had a job offer for the next year to do three days a week at the school I was in and two days at another school system.  And the other school system wanted me to be the transportation coordinator.
Speaker 1: Where was this?
Speaker 2: North Salem, New York.  And I was gonna take it, but the boards had not approved my application and four days before school opened here I got a contract from Charlotte.  So I called, I told them that I had taken another job because I had a contract and I came to Charlotte and had not thought twice about it.  But that's how I go- how I kind of stumbled into teaching.
Story_ID: 550131
Speaker 1: What year did you return to Charlotte [North Carolina] to teach?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].  That was the first year of integrating the school staff.  Prior to that, they had some white teachers who were working in black schools.  Either teachers who volunteered for their assignment or teachers who were on the verge of being fired or being disciplined for some reason and they gave them a choice of working black schools or being fired.  Most of the teachers who were there were teachers who either felt like they could make a contribution or they wanted a tr- a challenge and they accepted assignments in black schools.  The year I came was the first year that teachers were assigned to white schools and nobody got a choice for that.  They deliberately pick what they viewed as better teachers and more highly qualified, because when I came I had a master's in safety and nobody else in the State of North Carolina had that.  So, I--I was hired and two years later, the director--well the per- person who was in charge of driver ed when to the state department.  They split his job four ways and I applied for the job.  I didn't even get a response from the school system.  In 1969, the federal district court ordered the school system to integrate the adminis- administrative staff more thoroughly than they had.  So at that point, they called me in and asked if I wanted the job as director of driver education.  And that's when I moved from the classroom into administration.
Speaker 1: What were you teaching in the classroom?
Speaker 2: Driver education.  And I worked in the driver education program from '65 [1965] until the end of 1990, and that's when I went into pupil assignment and student records.
Story_ID: 550132
Speaker 1: Back in 1965, you were, you said, the first black teacher to integrate the white schools in Charlotte [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, I was the first black teacher at Garinger High School [Charlotte, North Carolina].  That year there was a black teacher in every school in the system, and I was the token at Garinger.
Speaker 1: Describe that experience, how were you received?
Speaker 2: I can't complain about how I was received.  I always joke about it that they didn't have to call the role to see if I was in staff meeting, because they just look around for the period (laughter).  But I had an excellent principal.  In fact, I was very fortunate in New York too, I had a very good principal.  But the principal here, he had been principal of Central High [Central High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] in '57 [1957] when they integrated the students or desegregated with the black students coming to the white schools.  And excuse me, he was a no nonsense kind of guy.  Grew up in Plum Branch, South Carolina outside of McCormick [South Carolina], and McCormick is about as big as this room.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Ed Sanders.
Speaker 1: And this was a white man?
Speaker 2: He's a white guy.  And I had heard about, you know, a lot about Ed Sanders before I saw him.  And I was looking for this guy about 6'2", you know, the former football player and when I met him we were standing there looking eyeball to eyeball, and I think he was a little bit lighter in weight then I was.  But he did not tolerate what wasn't right.  You hear a lot about what happened to Dorothy Counts at Harding High School [Harry Harding High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] because that principal wasn't supportive of desegregating.  You don't hear anything about what happened at Central because Ed Sanders says this is the law and this is what we're gonna do and we're gonna do it right.  And when I went to Garinger, the first staff meeting he said, "I told you last year that we're having as great a teaching staff this year, we have Mr. De Laine [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine].  I told you last year I didn't want any foolishness and I still mean it."  That's all he ever said the whole while I was at Garinger about the, the integration.
Story_ID: 550133
Speaker 1: How did the students receive you [at Garinger High School, Charlotte, North Carolina]?  Did you teach in the classroom, did you also teach on the road?
Speaker 2: We had--I had both, uh-huh.  Most of the students, I guess some of it might have been a curiosity, but the majority of the students were quite pleasant.  There were a few that had some minor problems with.  One student that I probably came closest to getting trouble about the problem because I kind of manhandled him, but we became very good friends.  And I had another student, a female, she was a very nice student, we were already friends.  But her father found out I was black and wanted her out of my class.  And the department head said we weren't gonna change.  And so the father went to Mr. Sanders [Ed Sanders] and told him he wanted her out of the class and Mr. Sanders said, "Why?"  So the guy said something to the effect that he's colored.  Mr. Sanders said, "Well she can get out of class, she's got a choice of taking driver education from Mr. De Laine [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine] or not taking it at all."  And that was the end of it.  But he pulled out of the class and what he didn't know was that every day during lunchtime the girl would come down to our office and just sit and talk.  So, you know, he, he didn't accomplish anything except deprived her of, of getting the class.
Story_ID: 550134
Speaker 1: Any other problems along the way?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't call it a problem, but there was one teacher in particular.  I didn't pay it any attention, but Garinger [Garinger High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] was a large school and it was built in cubicles.  We refer to them as A, B and C building at that time.  And when it was bad weather, we would go from where the driver ed [driver education] office was through B building, through C building to the cafeteria.  When the weather was good, we'd just walk across campus.  And when we'd go through the building, every time we'd go that way for lunch I noticed this lady.  She would come out of the lounge in A building and about the time we'd turn the corner she'd stop like she forgot something and turn around and go back in.  So the other driver ed teacher that was with me, Mr. McMullen [ph.], he said, "Look at that old redneck."  He said, "You know what she's doing don't you?"  "Oh, I guess she forgot something."  He said, "No she doesn't wanna meet you in the hall.  She goes back through the lounge and comes out the other side and come around."  So the next time we came through and she turned around, Mr. McMullen said, "Come on."  So we turned and went around the other way and stood at the corner until she got there because we could hear her heels coming.  And when she got there we stepped out and said, "Good morning," and she turned as red as a beet.  But, the other teachers new that Ed Sanders would not tolerate a problem about race whether it was a student or, or a staff.  So they, if they had to, they put on a good front for him.
Story_ID: 550135
Speaker 1: Had Charlotte [North Carolina] changed significantly since your departure in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: When I came back?
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it was--in fact it was so different I was a little uncomfortable.  I felt som- somebody was trying to trick me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What was the difference?
Speaker 2: Well, when I left there was strict segr- everything was strictly segregated.  And when I came back I asked about a place to have lunch because most of the other teachers went home to eat that first day because the cafeteria wasn't open.  So they sent me to a restaurant and I was a little apprehensive about going.  And I got there and this little white waitress came up and--, "Can I help you sir?"  And you know, it's like a different world.
Speaker 1: You were treated with respect inside that restaurant?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, everything was "Sir," and "Yes sir."  And I, I hadn't had a white southern girl tell me sir.  And you know, I was a little afraid are they trying to set me up for something (laughter).
Speaker 1: How do you think, I mean, did the laws do this, did the laws actually change the behavior and the mindset of the people?
Speaker 2: It changed the behavior and the mindset to the extent that people allowed it to.  And with the restaurants, for the most part, it was more econm- more economical to go along with the change then to fight it.  Because, well number one, during the sit-ins, the restaurants were hurting.  And then after they opened up, black folks spend a lot of money in restaurants.  So it's more economical for them to go along with it.  They were still--and even today, there's still some vestiges of prejudice and discrimination, and it'll al- probably always be.  But it, it changed the mindset more with public accommodations then it did with schools.  And I've got some theories about the schools, might be right, they might be wrong.  But my theory about the problems that we still face, I mentioned that the--the system, this sit-in account and state government really did not follow through and resolve the root causes.  But the problem we face now is more with northerners and westerners moving into the area then the southerners.  Because my experience in pupil assignment, it surprised me, but southerners were more supportive in the long run of the desegregation plan to transport students to desegregate.  Now that's not saying that they support busing. But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me about busing?  What did busing look like in Charlotte?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a lot of turmoil and it was a lot of movement of students, and it was--the burden of it was on the black students.  Because the younger black students had to travel the greatest distance and for the, and for the longest period of time.  But what I started to say about the southerners, they--people from this area had seen the turmoil that we went through back in the late '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s].  And they didn't wanna go back through that.  They wanted to see the school system improve.  In the long run whether they agreed with busing or not, as long as they were seeing improvement and seeing academic achievement they were more supportive.  The immigrant- immigrants coming in primarily from the north and the west, they didn't care what the improvements were, they wanted it like it was back at home, where they came from communities that the school system was attached geographically to the boundaries of the city and the boundaries of the township hadn't changed in seventy-five years and won't change in the next seventy-five.  But here--
Speaker 1: So they wanted to reverse all of the--the busing?
Speaker 2: Right.  And you see they still can't comprehend a countywide school system where you've got the whole county in one district that they can't control.
Story_ID: 550136
Speaker 1: Tell me--you mentioned the situation, I just wanna make sure I capture what it was like when you returned here.  You mentioned the restaurant situation, were there any other eye openers?
Speaker 2: There still, there was some social mixing, but that was not to the extent that the restaurants had been desegregated.  You have more social interchange between the races, but you also have a lot of strict lines.  Because if you go to many of the churches here, if you go to a black church you're gonna see all black faces.  If you go to a white church you're gonna see all white faces.  Now there're some churches that are pretty well mixed.  But you don't see the extent of mixing in the churches that you saw in the schools in the 1980s.  Now the schools are becoming re-segre- have become re-segregated.  So we see schools that are primarily black or white.  But if you go to a church, most of them are gonna be one or the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It says that--did you leave the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and join the Presbyterian church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: When I moved back to Charlotte [North Carolina] I joined the Presbyterian church.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: One reason was a compromise that my wife [Edith Strickland De Laine] and I made.  She was Baptist and I was Methodist, and she said she wasn't gonna become Methodist and I wasn't gonna become a Baptist, and we'd gone to a Presbyterian college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  But a more personal reason with me was because of the politics of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: And the--in what they did to your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: That and what I saw when I was in Washington [D.C.] working for Dr. Mance [Robert W. Mance, Jr.].  Because he was the treasurer of the whole denomination.  And I know that you have stuff going on in all organizations that are not exactly kosher, so to speak.  But I saw some things there that I didn't think should've be happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the politics of it and how poor people's money was used or misused.  I felt--felt like the Presbyterian church was a little more honest in what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the Presbyterian church you joined?
Speaker 2: I joined, it was Biddleville [Biddleville Presbyterian Church] at that time, but it's now Memorial Presbyterian Church [Charlotte, North Carolina].  We moved to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's a black church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 550137
Speaker 1: When did you leave, is it Garinger [Garinger High School, Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: To the Education Center [Charlotte, North Carolina], the board of education.
Speaker 1: What did you do there?
Speaker 2: I was director of driver education and safety.
Speaker 1: And what did your job entail?
Speaker 2: I was--initially I was responsible for the driver education program and safety education instructions in the elementary level.  That was sort of a confused area because it--I had some responsibility for it and the physical education staff had some.  So, we kind of got together and decided who's gonna do what.
Story_ID: 550138
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the leaders were in Charlotte [North Carolina] at this time, late '60s [1960s], black and white?
Speaker 2: Well, the Alexanders, Kelly [Kelly Alexander, Sr.] and Fred [Frederick Alexander], were very definite leaders.  Fred went on to become city councilman and then state senator.  Kelly was a state president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  White, I've got Brok- Mayor Brookshire [Stan Brookshire] in mind, but he was mayor during the--when I was in school here [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  And I'm trying to remember who was mayor when I came here, I can't recall right off.  But John Belk became mayor after we--after I got here.  And he was a popular mayor.
Story_ID: 550139
Speaker 1: So the schools moving from the late '60s [1960s] into the '70s [1970s], were they adequately integrated at that point?
Speaker 2: There was a lot of turmoil in the early '70s [1970s], but things started to settle down and the later part of the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s], probably was the most shining hour for the schools and then it started to--
Speaker 1: What happened at that time, late '70s [1970s] into the '80s [1980s], why was it so great?
Speaker 2: They had worked through the turmoil or gotten over the turmoil and the mindset of segregation.  The students had kind of gotten out from--of the adult population and they were taking the attitude that this is our school, we're gonna make it work.
Speaker 1: Were parents protesting when students were bused?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the protests?
Speaker 2: The--my first year after I left Garinger [Garinger High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] and went to the Education Center [Charlotte, North Carolina], they bused black kids from black neighborhoods to white neighborhoods.  Our assignment doing--from the central office, we had to ride buses and so forth to help ensure safety.  The next year when we had the cross busing, when the white kids were bused to black neighborhoods, that's when all hell broke loose.  Because parents were not supportive and they were actively fighting it.  Some parents really never supported it, but by 1975, the kids were starting to take the lead in letting things settle down.  Some of what happened earlier years were really not related to school desegregation, but in many instances kids saw a fight start at one school and they got out of school, so they get with their friends and say, "Let's start a fight here."  You know, some of white and black kids.  They'd start a fight so they turn the school out.  Now a lot of those cases it started off as friends doing something to get out of school, and when it was all over they were enemies.
Story_ID: 550140
Speaker 1: So you rode the buses, did you ride both, both sets of buses, black kids going to white neighborhoods and white kids going to black neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: I rode the black kids going to white neighborhoods, but the following year, we were assigned teams, a black and a white, and I was in a radio car.  They put me and the white physical ed [physical education] director who didn't weigh ninety-five pounds wet together.  And we had to patrol and if we saw something that looked suspicious we'd radio it in and the school administration would evaluate and either relay it to the police or send extra help.
Speaker 1: Can you relay any specific stories about those rides?  Anything powerful?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the ride, itself, we saw this white guy one day and he saw--looked over at us, this black guy with this white woman and he started to get notions about what we were gonna do about it.  So, when I got--I was driving--when I got a chance, I kind of shook him and we went the other way.  But both of us--
Speaker 1: Wait, say that again, what was the situation on the bus?
Speaker 2: We--no, we weren't on the bus, we were in a car.  And some white guy on a truck saw me and this white female person in the car and he got rather upset about it.  And he was trying to start something wi- and first chance I got, I made a quick turn and kin- he was in the right lane and couldn't follow us.  So we shook him, and both of us got rather nervous about that.  But the biggest problem we had was Ed Sanders who had been my principal was now at the Education Center [Charlotte, North Carolina] also.  And we were sent to a middle school where they've ha- where they had had a big fight that day.  And when we got there, we went in the office and the principal just asked us to have a seat.  And then he asked us would we take some students home.  So we took the school station wagon and we're bringing those kids from this white school across town over to a housing development on the other end of Oaklawn [Charlotte, North Carolina], which is a street behind us.
Speaker 1: These are black kids?
Speaker 2: These are black kids.  And at that time, this was a rough neighborhood where we were taking them.  And one of the kids kept glaring at me all the way over here and I didn't know what his problem was.  And then finally he looked at me and said, "Tom."  I said, "What was that about?"  It turned out that the principal had told these students that Ed Sanders and I had seen them doing something on campus, which was not true because we had just gotten there.  We hadn't gone any further than the office and the kids were already in the office when we got there.  And they blamed it on us and sent us to bring them home.  Well when we got over here at Double Oaks [Charlotte, North Carolina], they decided they're gonna call the guys from the hood on us.  And you know, winos and druggies standing on the street, they call them over and they start rocking the car threatening to turn it over and you know, we're sitting there wondering how we're gonna get out of this without killing somebody.  And so finally, Ed said, "Fellas no matter what you think, Mr. De Laine [HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine] and I had nothing to do with your being sent home.  We were asked to bring you home.  You were in the office when we got there and you saw us come in, and when we came in we were coming from West Charlotte High School [Charlotte, North Carolina], we had not been anywhere on Eastway's [Eastway Junior High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] campus other than our car to the office."  So they finally backed off, but we really expected them to turn the car over and set us afire.
Speaker 1: Did any of the white students threaten you in anyway?
Speaker 2: White students were more subtle then the black kids.  Much of the turmoil was caused by the white kids who would walk down the hall and get close to a black kid and whisper something derogatory to them, and the black kid'd turn around and deck them.  All right, nobody heard what the white student said, but everybody saw the black kid pop him.  So the black kid get sent home and when the black kid sent home, then his friends are gonna get the white kids and then it gets on again.
Speaker 1: I see.  So in the '70s [1970s] things started settling down a little bit?
Speaker 2: About '74 [1974] or '75 [1975] it started to settle down.
Story_ID: 550141
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's around the time your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] passes away?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that situation?
Speaker 2: Well, he--he's had cancer and he passed in August of '74 [1974].  But he lived to see the integration process here.  He had visited me at Garinger [Garinger High School, Charlotte, North Carolina].  He knew some of the teachers.  He's--were taken--he was taking my children to school quite frequently and going sitting in on classes and talking with students.  The school where my oldest son [Boris De Laine] was, oh my father was a regular part of the fixture around there.  You know, he'd greet the kids, tell the kids stories.  The principal said she saw him one day, some boys outside had done something.  And she said, "Your dad calmed it down."  She said, "I'd never would've been able to control that situation.  And he just had them sit down on the steps and talk to them."  And he [sic.] said, "I've never seen anybody, you know, work with kids that way."  But he just had a way of working with people.
Story_ID: 550142
Speaker 1: Did you do some teaching at North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I taught some extension classes with them.  In the early '70s [1970s] the state required all of the driver education teachers to become fully certified in traffic safety, and I taught some of their classes.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] visit you ever on campus?
Speaker 2: We had an extension class down in Moore County [North Carolina] and I took him one night.  And he sat there and other teachers after class, they were all laughing and finally they told me what daddy was doing.  Said he was sitting there just counting over and over the black teachers and the white teachers and smiling.
Speaker 1: What do you think he was recognizing?
Speaker 2: Oh he, he talked about it on the way back.  You know, his pleasure of seeing, you know, integrated classes and it was even more of a pleasure for his youngest child to be there teaching.  And you know, he saw my sister [Ophelia De Laine Gona] work in integrated situations in New York, but I think it was more of a pleasure seeing me work in an integrated situation in the South.  And I think next to the ride on the school bus, that, that probably was one of his higher moments.
Speaker 1: Did he generally feel a sense of accomplishment for his own contribution, as well as the contribution of his children in this fight for equal rights?
Speaker 2: I think he felt more of a sense of accomplishment for the plaintiffs and supporters because for the most part, I think he saw himself as being a little better off than the sharecroppers and farmers, and service workers in Summerton [South Carolina] and Clarendon County [South Carolina] who supported the case and who were strictly dependent on whites for a livelihood and it took a lot for those people to stick their necks out to accomplish what was done.  And I know in his later years he talked more about his concern that people would forget the sacrifices that were made to achieve what had been achieved through the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: Did he ever do any speaking, any lecturing to tell his story?
Speaker 2: He did when in New York [New York].  When he came back to Charlotte [North Carolina], he would preach occasionally at a church, but not to the extent that he did in New York.
Speaker 1: And he passed away in 1974?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 550143
Speaker 1: You obtained another degree from UNC, Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: That was the sixth year advanced certification in administration--school administration.
Speaker 1: What was the UNC campus like at that time in 1977?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it really was not a campus course, it was a program that Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools in Gaston County [North Carolina], which is the next county over, a program set up specifically for their administrators.
Story_ID: 550144
Speaker 1: Moving into the 1980s in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg public schools, you said that was a, a highlight period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd gotten over the turmoil and the riots that we experienced in the early '70s [1970s] and students were really taking pride in their school, whichever, regardless of which school they went to.  And even to the extent that when all of the turmoil in Boston [Massachusetts] started, a group of students from West Charlotte [West Charlotte High School, Charlotte, North Carolina] that was a former black school here went to Boston.  Some parents were quite apprehensive about it, but it was something the students believed in and were, they were proud of what they were accomplishing here.
Speaker 1: So they went to Boston?
Speaker 2: Right.  Now when they went to Boston, they were not--I don't think they were allowed to live with families, so they were put up in a hotel.  And really what they wan- wanted to do was have the black students live with white families and the white students with black families.  I don't know whether that was a decision by the administrators in Boston or whether that was something the school system here, whether it was a mutual decision.
Speaker 1: But it was a kind of exchange program?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 550145
Speaker 1: Any other pivotal events in the 1980s with respect to the integrated schools, any memories?
Speaker 2: No, things were kind of rolling along pretty well the last part of the '80s [1980s].  We were getting more and more people moving in from the north and from the west, and more resistance to the desegregation plan.  And Judge McMillan [James Bryan McMillan] had retired and a more conservative judge who had been a lawyer for the plaintiffs early on who opposed the desegregation plan was on the bench.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: Judge Potter [Robert Daniel Potter].  And people started--and plus the Supreme Court and other district courts were starting to back away from some of the decisions that had been made.  The admin- the fed- the U.S. administration was not as supportive, you know, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had his own ideas.  It was not--the ideas were not supportive of desegregation.
Speaker 1: What happened in the 1990s to the school system here, and were you in the classroom or still an administrator?
Speaker 2: I was still an administrator.  By the '90s [1990s], the Supreme Court had made several decisions that made it easier to challenge or to declare, you know, school systems unitary.  And, and I don't remember what year, '93 [1993] or '94 [1994] a case was filed that went to court and the judge declared the system unitary, so it was released from--in fact it was prohibited from using race as a criteria for assigning students to schools.  And that was just after I retired, I was still working part time for the system, but after I retired.  So I saw the system come full circle.
Speaker 1: So desegregation completely reversed?
Speaker 2: For all practical purposes you might say it was completely reversed.  It's--the assignment is based more on attendan- on geographic areas which is not well integrated.
Speaker 1: So kids, beginning in the 1990s, began going to neighborhood schools and in many cases the neighborhoods were segregated in a way, by race (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. They were assigned by neighborhoods, not always a school in the neighborhood.  When you get a system like Charlotte-Mecklenburg [Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools], there's no such thing as a neighborhood school because anyway you cut it, a large percentage of your students won't be going to the school closest to their home.  And with the growth in the district, they may be going to two or three schools away.  And you've got to design the whole thing and maintain it for a neighborhood school and that hasn't been done and it's practically impossible to do.
Story_ID: 550146
Speaker 1: What year did you retire?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: And what did you decide to do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I started volunteering with Habitat [Habitat for Humanity] and with the food bank, and the trolley service.  They had a, a nonprofit that was setup to restore old trolleys and they were operating one as a tourist attraction.  And I would volunteer with the restoration there, but then the city took that over when they started moving toward light rail.  And then I became more heavily involved down in Clarendon County [South Carolina] with the Briggs-De Laine-Pearson Foundation and had cut some of my volunteer work here so the food bank was the odd man out, so to speak.  I still--I'm still quite involved with Habitat.
Speaker 1: Building--building homes?
Speaker 2: I don't do as much in the construction area as I like because that's what I really like.  But I do do some primarily in the fall when they have the blitz with what they call Building on Faith.  Churches do a lot of the construction in September and I do that.  But year round I'm on the Family Selection Committee.
Story_ID: 550147
Speaker 1: And your mother [Mattie Belton De Laine] passes away in 1999?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Is that a turning point for you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, it was something that was inevitable, and she, you know, lived a long time and she was, you know, deteriorating pretty fast.  So it wasn't a shock, a shock of any sort.  And she was ready to go.
Story_ID: 550148
Speaker 1: If you had to sort of define the contributions of yourself and your family, how would you define those contributions?
Speaker 2: Well, my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Starting with your father?
Speaker 2: With my father, I think his contributions and the other people who supported the Briggs case [Briggs v. Elliott], both the plaintiffs and those people who were not actual petitioners, I think they played a role in redefining our whole society and probably the society of the world.  Because in 1955, the U.S. was pushing other countries on their human rights issues and they were saying, you know, hey look what you're doing.  We look at your news and see what's happening in Birmingham [Alabama].  And I think that played a role in redefining the whole national and international polices of the U.S.
Speaker 1: Would you say your father, Joseph De Laine, Sr. [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.], was as important as someone like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: With the civil rights, I guess I look at it a little differently from other people.  I don't look at the Civil Rights Movement as starting in 1955.  Civil rights, you know, there's always been an effort for civil rights.  And some of these people who played key roles in moving the nation or the world forward I think were more important than people like Martin Luther King, but not as well known.  But when you look at the results of the contributions, they were certainly important.  When you look at Martin Luther King, I'm not trying to take anything away from his contributions, he was a great leader, he was a great orator and he was a great thinker.  But if Martin Luther King, had come along three or four years earlier, you never would've heard of him.  Because when he came along it was at the right time and he had the right skills to capitalize on the timing.  TV news had just reached the point where something could happen in Birmingham in the morning, it could be taped and put on a plane and flown to Washington [D.C.] or New York [New York] and be on the six o'clock news.  If it had not been for TV news, you wouldn't have heard of Martin Luther King, because the media and the local media controlled what got on the AP [Associated Press] and the UP [United Press International] press wires, and if they didn't put it on, it didn't get there.  And by the time they could get it from the black media, it was a week or two weeks old.
Story_ID: 550149
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be and the legacy of your family?
Speaker 2: I would like the legacy of the family to be one of causing the nation and the world to become more humane in the way it treats people and not penalize others for things that they have no control over, such as skin color or economics when they were born into a particular economic group.  And I guess my legacy, I just hope it's one of continuing to do at least a little bit to move us along in that direction.
Story_ID: 550150
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is my grandmother, Tisbia Gamble De Laine, who was born about 1867 and died in 1940.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and who is this?
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is my paternal grandfather, Henry Charles De Laine, Sr. [Henry De Laine, Sr.], who was born 1849 and died around 1929.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, who is this?
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is my maternal great-grandmother, Martha Roach, R-O-A-C-H, Belton, B-E-L-T-O-N [Martha Roach Belton].  I don't know her birth and death dates.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  These are my maternal grandparents, my mother's parents.  David George Belton [David G. Belton, Sr.] and Josephine Weldon, W-E-L-D-O-N, Belton [Josephine Weldon Belton], B-E-L-T-O-N.  The photograph was taken at their wedding in the late 1900s.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Eighteen hundreds [1800s]?
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  Eighteen hundreds [1800s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is a photograph me, J.A. De Laine, Jr. [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr.], Robert Dodson [ph.] from Lawrence, Kansas, and I've forgotten the Korean soldier's name.  And it was taken in Central Korea not very far from the demilitarized zone in 1955.
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is a photograph which includes most of the plaintiffs in the Briggs v. Elliott school desegregation case.  And it also includes a photograph of my father and my brother, [HistoryMaker] B. B. De Laine is in that photograph.  B. B. is the seventh male from the right hand side.  My father is about center in the rear.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, go ahead and point to that, I can see your father there.
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  My brother is B. B. De Laine right here, and my father is standing almost center, here.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  Of my maternal grandparents at their fiftieth wedding anniversary, I believe 1953, which shows also my mother [Mattie Belton De Laine], the only daughter in that family and her seven brothers.
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is a photograph of the graduating class at Mather Academy in Camden, South Carolina for 1950.  I, J.A. De Laine, Jr. am a member of that class.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay where are you?
Speaker 1: Point yourself.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  (Laughter) I gotta go back and look at it closely.  You want me to do that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  Shall I repeat the whole thing?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, no, you can just point out yourself.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  I am standing at this point in the class.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this please.
Speaker 2: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is a photograph taken at a civil rights rally at Madison Square Garden in New York City [New York, New York] in 1955.  The individuals from right to left are:  Tallulah Bankhead, Autherine Lucy, Eleanor Roosevelt, my father Reverend J.A. De Laine [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.], Mr. Gus Courts, and the man whose head is turned away is Roy Wilkins.  I don't know the last individual on the picture.
Speaker 1: (JOSEPH A. DE LAINE, JR.):  This is a photograph taken 1954 of African Methodist Episcopal bishops appearing in front of the U.S. Supreme Court in prayer for a favorable decision on the Brown v. Board case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about that one.
Speaker 1: Okay that's a picture of me, Brumit De Laine, my sister Ophelia De Laine Gona and Olivette De Laine [ph.], she's a child that our parents adopted, but was reared by one of my father's sisters.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Somewhere around 1955--'56 [1956], '55 [1955] or '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Bottom left.
Speaker 1: And that's a sweet little fella who was probably in about fourth grade, which would've been somewhere around 1945 probably.
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: That's me, Brumit De Laine.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay sir, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me Brumit De Laine 1956 during a short stay at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] as a freshman in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
