Story_ID: 485402
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Earl Francis Lloyd, Earl is E-A-R-L; Francis is F-R-A-N-C-I-S, please.  The last name is Lloyd with two Ls, L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Well I've got a couple of nicknames.  I was called--in college they called me Moon Fixer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well you know the school I attended and I mentioned to you earlier was West Virginia State College at that time.  Now it's West Virginia State University [Institute, West Virginia], but you know when you're isolated you have a lot of campus activities, and we were isolated, so they were big on freshmen probation, and so every freshmen had to wear a sign called a dog tag or a doggette [ph.] tag and your name, and your city and your high school, and every freshmen was assigned a job.  I was the tallest guy on the campus so my job was to make sure that when the guys were out walking with their girlfriends and all that stuff, I had to make sure that the moon was where it was supposed to be.  So to this day anybody who calls me Moon, I mean you know what part of your life today that they were in.  No one else other than West Virginia State people call me Moon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you had another name in the NBA [National Basketball Association], right?
Speaker 2: Well they say--well somebody called me the Big Cat which it always made me nervous 'cause I kept waiting for somebody to say the big black cat.  It never happened you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 3, 1928, Alexandria, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm extremely retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you at one time were an NBA--in fact the first NBA, black NBA player to play in the game, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --and if I'm not mistaken a school administrator in the City of Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Detroit, yeah Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District].  I was the civilian deputy chief for the Detroit Police Department and after I retired--I retired from the board of education.  I went to work for one of my ex-players, Dave Bing.  There was a company called--it was, it's five companies and it's called the Bing Group [Detroit, Michigan], and I handle his community relations for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So all right, so before we go into depth, there are--oh, let me ask you what is today's date?  I'm sorry, we do this for history.
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's the 16th--
Speaker 1: Of?
Speaker 2: Of March--
Speaker 1: Two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home at 15 Pineridge Court.  That's Crossville, Tennessee 38558.
Story_ID: 485403
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Smothered pork chops.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite place to go to, but I like to go to places that's driving distance.  I ain't--flying and all that it doesn't particularly appeal to me anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So whenever we plan a vacation, we try to find some place we've never been before and to make sure it's in--within the eight, ten hour drive and it is amazing the number of places that's available to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably.  I like to say, "It gets no better than that."
Story_ID: 485404
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Theodore Lloyd] side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Daisy Mitchell [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd], M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I can give you her place of birth.  Hamilton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you approximate her date of birth, you think?  About how old was she when you were born, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, it--you know that escapes me.  The dates I remember, you know it's like when she used to come you know, and it's like 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Well from my early understanding, she was adopted, and she was adopted by this family of Mitchells, and I recall them only because I mean you know Hamilton was considered country.  Of course Washingtonians [residents of Washington, D.C.] considered us the country, we're only eight miles away.  But every summer we'd go up there for a couple of weeks and it's--it was entirely different you know.  And at the end of the second week, I'm looking down the road you know watching for the car to come so I can get back to my friends, but that's the only memory I have of my grandparents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: And those are the Mitchells that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --raised her?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they were farmers basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother know anything about her birth parents at all?
Speaker 2: I--you know it's never discussed so I'm assuming--course I shouldn't assume 'cause you know what the saying about assuming is.  I'm just guessing that that she probably didn't know a lot about her, you know, parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So she was--was she raised in Hamilton?
Speaker 2: She stayed in Hamilton until she was about fifteen and she left, she left Hamilton, went to Alexandria [Virginia], and took a job and that's when my father met her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she get a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She probably--fourth or fifth grade somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she have any stories of growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  You know, a young girl leaving Hamilton, Virginia going to Alexandria, you know is--and to work you know, is not a lot of stories for her to tell.  I think she might have shared a few stories because she was a domestic that's only available to young ladies at that time in my hometown.  She was domestic but very smart, and you know it's--if her employers were smart, she would be smart because she would emulate that kind of stuff you know, but this was a bright woman.
Story_ID: 485405
Speaker 1: Give me your father's full name and spell it for me.
Speaker 2: Theodore, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, Benjamin Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D [Theodore Lloyd].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Alexandria [Virginia].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 1: I never--if you looked at that questionnaire rather, I never knew my paternal grandparents.  I mean, absolutely nothing about them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did he ever talk about them, or?
Speaker 1: Very little.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My father was uneducated so he always deferred to his wife, my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd].
Speaker 2: Okay.  No stories or anything about growing up or?
Speaker 1: Well I was told he was a tremendous baseball player, you know, on local sandlots, but beyond that he's a hardworking guy you know, working on the coal yard.  Those were the kind of jobs available to black men in Virginia during that time and he was a good provider.  But again, you know in almost all situations including discipline I mean he deferred to my mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was smart because she was real good at it.
Speaker 2: Now is there a story as to about how they met?
Speaker 1: No.  They never told it to me.  Maybe they told it to my two older brothers [Ernest Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd], but it didn't work its way down to me.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they didn't talk about their courtship or nothing?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's see.  So did you--okay so did he have a lot of friends in Alexandria?
Speaker 1: Not as I know of.  He had a hard time.  You know he--the guy worked hard all week long, you know, Monday through Friday and then I mean he brought his money home and you know gave it to his wife and took what he thought he needed and he just seemed to enjoy himself.  Kind of a--now I don't know who he was enjoying himself with, probably some of the guys he played baseball with I don't know, but he was kind of a solitary figure, and I think his childhood raising didn't serve him well, or he was unsure of himself, you know, my mother had to teach him how to write his name so he could sign his check.  So you know, and people have to understand, if you don't know how to read you're lost.  When you can't even read a bus schedule, so he, well he did what he was supposed to do and did it well, and that's all we expected from him you know.  I mean he wasn't able to direct us in anything like it's time you go to college.  I mean my folks depended on the professionals to direct us, and most of the parents during my time in Virginia, Alexandria, they truly deferred to the professionals, the teachers, and my coaches, and they had no whims about it because they always knew that those folks had our welfare at heart and they trusted them implicitly.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now was he a member of any organizations, or either one of your parents that you know of?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Now did you have a family church?
Speaker 1: Roberts Chapel [Roberts Memorial United Methodist Church, Alexandria, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Presbyterian [sic.].
Speaker 2: So, Presbyterian church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's--that was my mother's church.  My father didn't attend.
Story_ID: 485406
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] or your father [Theodore Lloyd]?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother.  I mean she was the lead person, not necessarily by choice but by necessity I would say.  And I was talking about her last night.  I said, "You know I could have sworn at one time in my life I saw this woman, my mother, come out of a telephone booth with a S on her chest," and it's--she was E.F. Hutton in the family man, you know, when she talked I mean you listened, and even if you didn't wanna listen, you had to fake it because she was in complete control.  I mean she wasn't a control freak, but very smart.  You know, she was so smart that she would never ever put you in a position where you had to lie.  Like some folks will know that they kid was messing up last night some place, and they'll ask 'em, "Where were you last night?"  And that's a trap.  You know, 'cause I mean most kids gonna lie.  So she would do it differently.  She would say well it got back to me that you and so and so and so and so you were over at such and such a place doing this and doing that and my answer was, "I was there but I wasn't doing anything."  And she had a fabulous reply to that that I've used down through the years and all she told me was, "If you're not in the picture, you can't get framed."  And I mean for a fourth grader or fifth grader, that's profound.  You know, and all she's saying is, if you got some friends who are fools who are going east to do something crazy, you need to go west and let somebody see you going west so you can corroborate it.
Speaker 1: That makes a lot of sense to me.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you think about today.  A number of our athletes you know they--like the Pacers [Indiana Pacers] had a kid last--a couple of weeks ago, a nice young man, carries a gun and they're in some night club somewhere and something is going on and he claims he fired shots in the air to break up a fight and that's crazy.  And I mean Larry [Larry Crowe], that's really crazy you know but that's what this lady was.  She would tell me, like she'd say to me--I played three sports in high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] so you always--and she would say to me like if we had a home game, say now this is tonight, tomorrow we play and she would say, "Don't y'all have a game tomorrow?"  And I'd say--you know I had a very extensive vocabulary.  It was yes ma'am, no ma'am, yes sir, no sir, please and may I?  That's it.  I had a good vocabulary but you didn't get to use a lot of it you know.  She said, "Don't you have a game tomorrow?"  I said, "Yes ma'am," you know.  She said, well, you know--she liked to lecture to you.  She said, "You know it's come to my attention that you are a pretty good player."  Thank you.  She said, "And it comes to my attention that if you don't play well, your team might have a good good chance at losing."  "Yes ma'am."  She said, "Well if you don't play well tomorrow, it won't be because you weren't well rested."  And you--immediately you headed for the stairs you know and that's the way she was you know.  It's--you have to be, but she used to tell us all the time, you can be the most talented person in the world, but if you don't show up to do it, it's a waste.  So you know it's--and folks are depending on you.  So I got a lot--I got a heavy dose of responsibility man, and to this day, to this day I, like I did a thing last night for a church, a men's club, and what I've always tried to do is if you invite me to speak at some forum that you know that you put together and if I'm--and if the thing is due to start at five o'clock, if I walk in at five o'clock sharp, you've been sweating you know.  So to me to make that problem up I always try you know to get there about twenty minutes before so the guy in charge can exhale and then he can worry about something else.  But the main--you have to keep the main thing the main thing.  As long as the person that you have engaged to come gets there on time or early, you'll feel better about the whole thing.  So, then my high school coach [Louis Randolph Johnson], man they--he and my mother were like bookends.  Not like bookends man they were bookends but it's just, you know, is my folks taught me and my mother did most of the teaching.
Story_ID: 485407
Speaker 1: I'm not--now I'm not knocking my father [Theodore Lloyd] but I mean you know he didn't have the capabilities because his folks denied him.  And--but he always let me know that he wanted something better for us.  I had two older brothers you know and the only way you gonna get it, and that's why my folks are huge on education, now you know you got to go to school.  And when you go up there, you know those folks have what you need to make it out here.  So don't go up there disrupting no classes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me, now you grew up with--you have two older brothers?
Speaker 1: Two older brothers.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And how much older are they then you?
Speaker 1: Well my middle brother [Theodore Lloyd] was four years older and my oldest brother is six years.  So you know my oldest brother was like, you know he was like almost like a figment of my imagination because we went two different ways you know.  And then Ernest [Ernest Lloyd] always seemed to hang out with guys older than he was, joined a club that older guys which I mean that didn't divorce us but we didn't spend a lot of time together--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he, I mean yeah, you know, he checked on me.  You know, how you doing?  You need something, you know?  How's it going?  That kind of thing, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So your household was basically you and your middle brother and your mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] and father (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Oh yeah.  It's, it's--I had a good childhood.
Story_ID: 485408
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.
Speaker 1: No, an earliest childhood memory?  Your first thing you ever remember?
Speaker 2: Probably going--what I remember early is going up to Hamilton, Virginia, because that's been repeated.  So I remember those kind of things.  But as youngsters in Alexandria [Virginia], there wasn't much for young kids to do.  I mean you--when you were five and six I mean your whole world was you know your house and your immediate environment.
Story_ID: 485409
Speaker 1: Now are your other family members tall?  Now you're 6'5" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm 6'7", just about.
Speaker 1: 6'7", okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Well from what I understand in my immediate family, I'm the only tall person.  But I understand that that my father's father, my grandfather, was a hulk.  You know he was that big 6'6" black dude that everybody was afraid of.  That's the only recollection I have of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I got the genes that made me this size.  But my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd], she's a short lady man but it didn't matter.  I mean she had tremendous presence, tremendous presence man.  And, and what I really appreciate about her the most, she had a tremendous affinity for young people.  I mean a lot of old folks, "Man these young kids, this, that and the other," you know, and to the day she died man, she would tell you that most young people who are messed up were messed up by some messed up adults.  That was her mantra, you know, I mean and the young kids that I grew up with playing ball with man they--I mean man this lady was like the Holy Grail, man.  So when people ask me what person had the single most effect on me, and they expect you to say--'cause you an athlete, they expect you to say my coach--high school coach, tremendous influence.  Man, that lady at home man, and just to give you an example, when you play three sports, I mentioned this earlier, you're going to different places a lot and she would tell me, "You know, you going someplace where people don't know us and they will invariably judge us by how you conduct yourself."  And her last word was, "Do not embarrass this family."  And she wasn't talking about winning or losing.  I mean she was talking about you know in a gentlemanly fashion you know how you were trained to conduct yourself, don't forget that.  So I--you know it's--I had a decent upbringing.  My father [Theodore Lloyd] was there for us, you know, I mean he was a breadwinner, and my mother was--I called her killer Joe sometimes man (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 485410
Speaker 1: To come up during the times that I was a youngster in Virginia man, it's, it was crazy but it was dastardly crazy, and then you know from kindergarten like up to eighth grade, you're like an automaton, they just wind you up and send you where you wanna go, and you're oblivious to what's going on around you.  But when you reach high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia], particularly the last two grades, the eleventh and twelfth grade in high school, you know, things start to crystalize, and you look around and you can see, you know, all of a sudden that for coloreds sign on the bus takes on a whole different meaning.  And I became inquisitive, and I would ask people in responsible areas, you know, somebody help me with this, you know.  What have we done as a people, you know, to deserve this kind of treatment?  And that's a tough question because a lot of folks don't wanna answer it.  And I had one person tell me, it's probably clergy because the Lord was mentioned prominently, and he said, "The Lord would test you," and my reply to that was, "I understand that.  But it's been going on for two hundred years.  Would you think by now somebody would tell me if I passed this test or not?"  You know, so that's when you know anger started creeping in.  I mean not anger where you wanna throw bricks and all that, but you--it was distasteful and so someone said, "Well how do you handle all that?"  And I said, well you learn, and that kind of situation Larry [Larry Crowe], you learn to make lemonade out of lemons, and where it helped me you know I was always--not I but the guys I played ball with in high school, we were always driven.  We were driven because you know you look at George Washington High School [Alexandria, Virginia] over on Mount Vernon Avenue, and they would say to me in Alexandria [Virginia], you know, if a black kid ever got caught over on Mount Vernon Avenue, he better have a mop and a bucket 'cause otherwise there no reason for you to be over there.  And we knew where not to go, when not to be there, you know, because something funny could happen to you.  So you learn and these kids today don't feel a need for it.  I mean you learn about where not to be and what not to say, you know, but it served its purpose because my parents [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd], all my teachers, my administrators in high school, they always, they made a concerted effort, a concerted effort to reassure you about your worth as a person in spite of what's going on, and that in spite of what's going on you, you know you got to get it here because this is your safe haven right here.  They can't take that from you.
Story_ID: 485422
Speaker 1: Now we always just ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well you know, it's amazing growing up in Alexandria [Virginia], it, just as we sit here and talk about it, it's amazing.  We never set foot on a school bus for one reason.  There were no school buses to set our feet on.  So the sounds you know it's--it wasn't a lot of--most of the sounds you heard were the buses and you know cars because there were no factories in Alexandria.  The only thing they had was a fertilizer mill and that was way down by the river, you know, you stayed away from that because of all the dust and stuff you know.  But most of the sounds, and I tell people this, we never needed a truant officer because if you miss school, you miss the social event of the day.  Everything that's gonna happen that day in school and after school.  You're gonna learn it in school.  And in my hometown if you were seen by some of our parents' friends, you out in the street during school hours, you know they checked you, you know.  And when they stop you, don't say the wrong thing, like, it's none of your business.  It's killing time then.  But the sounds and the smells, you know, most of our mothers, most of our mothers were stay at home mothers and you could smell food being cooked because you know those little hammers we were forced to live in, they were tight, and most of the things that, that you would hear, you would hear kids, particularly in the summer, kids frolicking you know that kind of stuff you know.  But.
Speaker 1: Was there a black side of town in Alexandria?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Did it have a name?
Speaker 2: Well, there were about four pockets, maybe five pockets of black folks.  I lived in the toughest one, a place called the Berg [Alexandria, Virginia].  If you remember, if you remember the movie 'Remember the Titans,' remember the white kid that had the accident and eventually died, in that movie, he mentions about going down to the Berg to play with some of his friends, but the Berg was tough you know, and it was a place where most of the kids didn't finish high school.  Now my oldest brother, and my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] admitted it, she said she did one of the biggest mistakes she ever made, Ernest [Ernest Lloyd] was old for his years and she let him quit school, and she to the day she died, she kicked herself for that.  Because that went against everything that she really believed in.  So he must have given her a hell of an argument you know about quitting, but Ted [Theodore Lloyd] and myself never--Ted, my brother Ted, you know, he's a real young looking guy.  We used to call him baby Lloyd because his face you know he--but National Honor [National Honor Society] student.  Man this guy was really bright, really bright.  And I got to follow him.  Elementary school was a snap for me.  Even skipped a grade [at Lyles-Crouch Elementary School, Alexandria, Virginia], which if you got any kids and they wanna skip them a grade, don't let them do it.
Story_ID: 485423
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: My elementary school was a school called Lyles-Crouch [Lyles-Crouch Elementary School, Alexandria, Virginia].  That's two words.  Lyles-Crouch.
Speaker 1: Lyles-Crouch?
Speaker 2: Right.  C-R-O-U-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: You know it's, our teachers, if there's an upside to segregation, it was our teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a black school, segregated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ain't no question, no question.  Well you have to understand man, from kindergarten to college graduation I never had a white classmate.
Speaker 1: Now tell me was Lyles-Crouch a black educator or somebody?  Who was the school named for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean Lyles-Crouch was two early educators 'cause you know the only people we had to name stuff after were educators.  I mean even the W.E.B. Du Boises and the Benjamin Bannekers, and almost every town had a Frederick Douglass High School and they had a George Washington Carver High School.  So these were--
Speaker 1: Or Dunbars [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School], you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Lyles-Crouch you imagine there were some educators probably in from that area.  Okay now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Now, you know I was good in school.  I was real good in school elementary wise.  I was still good in school in high school but when you're playing three sports, you can get distracted you know, and in my school, my high school, we had 286 people, and Larry [Larry Crowe], during that time there were no designations because of the size of your student body, but now you got AA and AAA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you were a high school with twenty people, if you go to play somebody that got two thousand people, they're not gonna show you any mercy.
Speaker 1: Two hundred and eighty-six, that's kind of a small high school.
Speaker 2: Oh it's really small plus when you realize that, that in most schools there's always more girls than boys.  So if you were a boy at Parker-Gray High School [Alexandria, Virginia] and you could walk, I mean you got to try out for something man.  And if you made the baseball team and the basketball team you got to--and basketball players I--you know I had pretty good hands and I always say that you know I was a--I played baseball, I played basketball and I was on the football team, you know, it's a whole different connotation.  I played but I was not a football player as such.
Speaker 1: Now were you the largest kid in your class most of the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah most of the time I was the biggest kid in my class--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and played baseball, enjoyed baseball.  I was 6'5" in my senior year in high school man, throwing the ball you know I had--if they were clocking then, I know I was throwing at ninety miles an hour man in high school.  I mean it was wild--it was wild you know and everybody was scared to stand in (laughter).
Speaker 1: So control might have been an issue?
Speaker 2: Well you know you didn't get--when you got one guy [Louis Randolph Johnson] coaching three sports, you're not getting a lot of teaching.
Story_ID: 485424
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Parker-Gray [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia].  Another hyphen, Parker-Gray.
Speaker 1: Grave?  G-R--
Speaker 2: G-R-A-Y.
Speaker 1: Gray, okay.
Speaker 2: But you know high school was a fabulous place for us.  I mean they--this was our safe house.  I mean, this is where we knew we didn't have to be protected for those hours we put in the school you know, and again like I said, you know, if you miss high school, you miss the social event of the day.  So but what really drove us like when I say my watch I'm talking about the four years that me and my guys, not me and my guys, I mean the guys on--all our parents had to root for.  Not just our parents, all the black folks in Alexandria, Virginia, the only thing you had to root for were the children.  And they looked to the folks who had exceptional talent, they expected more from you, which they should, and we never let them down man.  I mean you know I can't recall, I cannot recall any guy that I went to high school with or any girl who had to go to juvenile hall for something.  I mean lawyers started--black lawyers in Alexandria during my time, they'd starve to death man.  You know, wasn't nobody buying homes.  So they didn't do that kind of work and nobody was going to jail.  Man you wouldn't dare--like Richard Pryor's father told him, you know, he said, "Do I have to go home with him?"  Oh yeah, you got to go home.  But you know, for example, Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School] in Baltimore [Maryland] and my high school, this was a very unique place man I'm telling you.  There were unique people and there were extremely unique people.  Here's a school, Parker-Gray High School, 286 kids, sitting right in Alexandria, Virginia, eight miles from Washington [D.C.], we played--this school played in two conferences.  We played in what they called the South Atlantic Conference, which encompassed all the Washington schools, two schools in Baltimore and one school in Delaware.  And we I mean, we played everybody and anybody.  Give you an example, homecoming, now it's one thing you know about homecoming, the team that you invite for homecoming, you always invite somebody you think you can beat 'cause you don't--man you don't wanna lose homecoming game man, you lose a lot.  But Douglass High School, Douglass, Douglass is the biggest, biggest high school in Baltimore, Maryland.  They came over, they must have six buses man and we never seen buses I mean you know.  The team had two buses, uniforms and stuff, and there were four buses of fans man.  They looked at our little school, it was total denigration man, they denigrated us man, "What kind of place is this?"  And all the while we were laughing a little bit you know because they're hollering about, "Is this an elementary or high school?"  And to ourselves we're saying, "When you leave you gonna think it's a college right?"  Homecoming, Douglass, we beat them 38 to 12.  We had a young guy named Oliver Ellis, man; Oliver Ellis was one of the best high school athletes I've ever seen in my whole life.  And what Douglass got that night, they got a steady dose of Oliver Ellis.
Speaker 1: This is in basketball, right?
Speaker 2: No, this is football.
Speaker 1: It's football?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Football, you know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: We was successful in football but not as successful as baseball and basketball because you know in football the sheer numbers can wear you down.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the number of big students--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --can really make a difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they wear you down.  I mean they keep throwing good fresh people at you, you know and during that time, it wasn't no yeah, yeah it wasn't offense and a defense you know.  The offense became the defense when the ball changed hands.  I mean, you just played.  I mean you were out there, particularly for us because we were short of people, but we were miracle workers man.  We had a magical coach [Louis Randolph Johnson].
Story_ID: 485425
Speaker 1: Now what was your coach's name?
Speaker 2: Louis Randolph Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I tell people, you know your high school coach is really important.  I mean this is a guy that you know, he's gonna leave some handprints on you, be that good or bad.  He's gonna leave something.  Because at that stage in your life now you're very impressionable and you know we wanna be told what to do by somebody that you think had some sense.  This guy, if he had done a worldwide computer search to find the right high school coach for me, he'd a wasted a lot of time and a lot of money 'cause the very right guy for me was right at Parker-Gray High School [Alexandria, Virginia] man waiting for me to leave Lyles-Crouch [Lyles-Crouch Elementary School, Alexandria, Virginia] and go to Parker-Gray, never raised his voice, never cursed, a perfect gentlemen.  But he was good at what he did.
Speaker 1: Now what was his background, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, he went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  He was coaching--to show you how timing is important in your lives, Coach Johnson and his wife, they're both West Virginia State graduates, were coaching--the two of them, were coaching at Jefferson High School, it's a black high school in Charlottesville, North- Charlottesville, Virginia, and about two years before I became a high school student, he and his wife came up from Charlottesville to coach at Parker-Gray.  Now that put all the pieces, so now here I come, and like I said the man never raised his voice but he had presence.  When he walked in that locker room you know how locker room shenanigans are before the coach comes in there, they're throwing stuff and you know, when he walked through there, they stopped.  And if he stood, if he stood in that room for two hours and didn't say a word, it was quiet for two hours.  He had us so trained that we used to beat people badly and we thought we played well.  But you know, he has to let us know if you played well or not.  As a consequence, you wouldn't dare take off your shoes until he comes in and critiques and says hit the shower, then you start taking clothes off 'cause if you didn't play up to the standards he expected from you that day, you might practice after the game.  So you know that's how you condition folks. I mean we knew that we didn't dare take off our shoes or take off your uniform until he came in and critiqued everybody and everything you know and boom.  But this I mean here's a guy there was a school in Richmond, Virginia called Maggie L. Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia], man let me tell you something, man, when you play Maggie L. Walker, you better have your A-plus game.  Now Richmond is a hundred miles from Alexandria [Virginia], now my coach is--when he says we're leaving at eight, you're gonna leave at eight.  Now you know as a player when you see one of your starters getting left behind man, you know, oh it's--that's catastrophic man, you know.  So we're in cars and I'm in the car with the coach, you and a couple of other guys.  And you know there were no super highways, and you know U.S. 1 [U.S. Route 1] just ran right from Florida man all the way up to wherever, Maine somewhere.  So we're on U.S. 1 going south and about twenty miles outside of town I got, I mustered up enough courage, I said, "Coach, did you see Red [William "Red" Jackson]?"  He said, "Yeah, yes I saw him."  And kept right on driving.  Now that's a lesson to be learned, I mean you know I started in three sports for this man and I played well.  I mean I've never been a football player, but I played well.  I made all-conference as a player, you know, in all three sports, that kind of stuff, you know, but I knew when the man said eight o'clock that was 7:30 for me.  Man, I'm at the school with the morning's paper.  You know, if you wanna play, you, it's embarrassing to get left.  I mean you know the team is down in Virginia playing and you're still back here and somebody said, "Well why aren't you with the team?"  "Well I was a little late and the coach left me."  And that's totally you know unequivocally unacceptable, you're late.  Man, you know, well see he had no problem with me man because my parents [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd], my parents, my mother, my father, my two brothers [Ernest Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd] and my mother is very literal, man, about time.  If she said--if I say to her I'm gonna pick her up at eight o'clock, if I get there one minute after, you know, you might get chastised and all she said was, "You said you gonna be here at eight."  So eight is fixed and that's the way, my whole career.
Story_ID: 485426
Speaker 1: When you live in the Bible Belt, Larry [Larry Crowe], you know the word blessed gets thrown around a lot.  I mean even the heathens use that, right?  But and I tell people, I say, "Let me tell you something man, when I tell you I was blessed, I mean you can take it to the bank man," and the people that I, that put their handprints on me.  I had a--my seventh grade teacher man, a lady named Helen Day, and you can believe this, you believe it, when I tell you this you believe it.  When they named in Alexandria, Virginia, when they name the postal station after a black elementary school teacher, she's a heavyweight, Helen Day, man.  That woman, man, and you know when she closed her doors to teach you know I mean it was like a whole new world opened up.  She was probably, Helen Day was probably the most revered person in the black community in Alexandria 'cause see this is a time where you know doctors are there when you need 'em, lawyers are there when you need 'em, but your teacher man let me tell you something man I mean they're to maintain a vision for you.  They were there every day for you.  I remember one time I did something really stupid, disrupted Ms. Day's class, and she almost knocked me into next week.  But they were allowed to do those kind of things 'cause that's what my mother would have done.  So I'd go home and say to my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd], you know, Ms. Day is picking on me.  Now my mother ask hard questions that's what I learned when I raised mine.  She said, "Now how many kids in your class?"  I said, "We got about fifteen kids, small school [Lyles-Crouch Elementary School, Alexandria, Virginia]."  She said now, and here's the phrase, here's the buzz phrase that you know you're in trouble, "Now are you telling me," right that means don't think about lying right.  She said, "Are you telling me Ms. Day walked into a classroom where there're fifteen kids and she arbitrarily decided to pick on you?"  Now you're dead in the water 'cause the next question was the one that's gonna get you killed.  "What did you do to attract Ms. Day's attention?"  Oh God you know all I said was--and that's it.  That's as far as I got man.  And she was on me like a wet blanket man.  Oh, she said now--called you boy, told you that those people at that school, what you need, they have to offer it, but they can't--you know but her thing was disrupting a class was a dastardly thing because she said, "What you did, there was a learning process going on and you disturbed it, and it's unfair because you know you denied the kids that really wanted it, you denied 'em.  That's unacceptable."  And I mean you know you're wrong going in.  But it's--that's, now that's the kind of upbringing I had man and you know and it's continued because my college coach [Mark Cardwell] and my high school coach [Louis Randolph Johnson] went to the same school, and they played for the same coach [A.P. Hammond (ph.)] who was my biology professor, so it's--man I was really connected you know.  Now I think that my biology professor is gonna be easy on me because I played for two of his boys.  It's just the opposite.  He's gonna be hard on me so I don't embarrass his boys, so you know it's amazing man you know it's--I called it when I accepted you know the hall of fame thing and I just called it, I said, "This is an incredible journey man."  I mean for a young black kid to be born in Virginia, 1928, his prospects were slim and none so I say now I went from a huge question mark to standing up here, the pinnacle, and I went from being a question mark to becoming an exclamation mark and I used the phrase I told you I like to use.  It gets no better than that.
Speaker 2: Yeah it really sounds like a special place to be raised with people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh man you know it's--you heard the saying, the right place at the right time?  That's two legs of a three legged stool.  The other leg is the important one, the right place at the right time with the right people, there is no right place or right time if the right people are not there and every stop I made they were there.  Like my college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], I've been asked, you know, "Give me a time in your life that you enjoyed the most?"  Everybody expects you to say when I was playing pro basketball you know and, man my college career, man.
Story_ID: 485427
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna go back to high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --before we get you in college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  But now so you played some of the black schools from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you all win your conference in high school?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We--Maggie L. Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies, Richmond, Virginia] had a stranglehold on, on the championship in basketball in the State of Virginia.  My senior year we had a good team and we had a shot at 'em, we had a shot at 'em.  They're a bigger school but we sincerely believed that our first five was better than theirs, and we make it to the state finals, a school called Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University] down in Petersburg [Virginia].  Now this is also a story that tell you the kind of guy we played for.  We found out that one of the officials assigned to the championship game is a senior student who's a licensed referee at Virginia State, who just happened to be a graduate four years ago from Maggie L. Walker, so now you know you get a little nervous, stupidly, we go to the coach [Louis Randolph Johnson], Oliver Ellis, the guy's name I gave you, we said, "Coach, we have a concern."  Said what is your concern?  I said, "Do you know Mr. Battle [ph.], one of the referees assigned to this game tonight, is a recent graduate of Maggie L. Walker High School, four years as recent."  I said, "You know in a basketball game there's a lot of calls that can go either way," and I said, "I just feel like if there's a call that can go either way you know, they wear green and white and we wear blue and white, it's gonna go to the favorite green."  My coach, you have to know this guy to appreciate this, he sat up, he said, now here's a buzz phrase, "Let me get this straight."  Now you're dead in the water right there.  You done man, oh God man what have we done, you know.  He said, "Now you want me to go ask another referee and impugn this man's reputation and the ball hadn't even been thrown up yet?"  And we just--we limped out, you know you felt terrible man, and sure enough we played a tremendous game, man.  They beat us by two in overtime, and that guy that we wanted, you know, not to referee the game, that was the best my whole career, college and anything, that was the best refereed game on his part that I've ever seen, so.
Story_ID: 485431
Speaker 1: Okay, so the game you were describing the last reel, was that the--was that your senior year [at Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For the state championship you know and it's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And now what--I want to ask you, most people don't like to get into some of these details, but I'm gonna ask you some of the details anyway.  I know you remember all the guys on your basketball team.
Speaker 2: Oh, no question.
Speaker 1: So tell us something about the guys, what position they played and what happened to them?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Were you the center?  Were you the tallest person?
Speaker 2: I was the tallest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't play center.  We had another guy about 6'4", Horace Burton.  Horace was a killer man, I mean when you came down through that center, boy, you better have a ticket or something man.  Our starting five we had a boy named Red Jackson [William "Red" Jackson], tremendous athlete, man, he was my catcher when I was pitching, he was my catcher man and he's a tremendous athlete.
Speaker 1: Was he guard?
Speaker 2: He was a guard.  We had Oliver Ellis, I mean he's all everything.  Myself, a guy named George Carroll, and another guy named Sherman McGuire.  George is gone, Sherman is gone.  I see Horace you know every now if I go to Alexandria [Virginia] for any reason you know I get to talk to Horace.  Horace has done well.  He's, he worked for--he's an executive for a construction firm in the area but that's about it.
Story_ID: 485432
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what happened to Oliver Ellis?
Speaker 2: Oliver Ellis, cancer took him.  And I was amazed, I mean if there's one guy that I've ever known, he was my best friend in high school.  If it's one guy that I thought was infallible man it was him you know.  But it's so--this goes to tell you, you know, but this guy, one of the cockiest guys you ever meet in your whole life.  In fact I had a young lady say to me in school, said, "Why are you friends with him?"  I said, "Well why shouldn't I be?"  He's arrogant and all that.  I said, well, I said, "Let me share this with you."  I didn't have to compete with him because I was getting a lot notoriety of my own as much as you can get being a black kid in '42 [1942] between you know '42 [1942] and '46 [1946].  I said, "Let me tell you what, I said this guy will tell you Monday through Friday, he would tell you how good he is.  And then every Friday when we played, he shows you."  I don't have a problem with that.  I said, "You know, I don't think I would handle it that way because we're two different people."  Because my folks [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd] taught me and the folks that I played for, they taught me that the more success you have, the more humble you ought to be.  And they also taught me, like you know, folks who have given a lot--I was given a lot of talent, I was given a lot, you know.  People nurturing, and a lot is expected of you.  I mean you got to provide some leadership for the other kids.  I mean you can't be a star athlete in a school like Parker-Gray [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] and be a horse's patoot, you couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: Now did he have a similar, did he--I mean did he--I take it he had the same kind of support group behind him as you had behind you?
Speaker 2: Yeah you know his dad passed early.  He had a mother and grandmother and that's truly you know the support system man.  You got two women to support you, you know, but this guy was just--you know this guy was so good that you had to catch yourself not being a fan while you're on the floor playing 'cause you wanted to stand aside and just watch him.  He's a tremendous basketball player, but football, man this guy, he's unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Now did he go on to play college ball or pro ball?
Speaker 2: He went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and we had originally planned to go to college together.  My mother wanted me to go to Howard but Howard was considered, by myself and people like me it was--Howard was the only black school that had all the schools, they had law school, dental school, medical school, pharmacy, architecture, they had it all.  So it was kind of a society school.  It's a place where all those families with lovely daughters, and they wanted them to marry professional guys so they sent all these girls to Howard.  I said, "Howard, man you know it's just," from Alexandria [Virginia] to Howard it would have been a quantum leap for me you know.  So anyway, we parted.  So I went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] and his first year at Howard I said, you know, I used to call him Ace.  I said, "How is Ace doing?"  He said he's running with the second unit.  I said, "Well who's running with the first unit, God, right?" (Laughter) Wasn't but Jesus Christ must be playing halfback for Howard you know, but they--and these were guys that he I mean that he had humiliated for years because most of them went to the Washington, D.C. schools, they hated him man.  I'm not saying that's why he was running second string, but I said, "Look man," I said, I told him, "I'm gonna talk to you this summer."
Story_ID: 485433
Speaker 1: And I told Coach Cardwell [Mark Cardwell], my college coach, I said, "Look, you know, he's [Oliver Ellis] available."  His eyes lit up like twenty-watt bulbs.  Transferred to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], sat out a year and the rest was history man, he was All-American at the school, fabulous player.  He came out of the--he went to work for the city government in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  He was a funny guy too.  He had a recreational program that he used to run it at Uline Arena [Washington Coliseum, Washington, D.C.] that's where we used to play as pros you know, and one of the guys that worked for him was sitting up in the stands asleep, sound asleep man, head back, snoring, working.  So the little kid came up, "Mr. Ellis, Johnny's [ph.] up there sleeping."  He said, "Now don't wake him up," he said, "'cause as long as he's sleeping, he's got a job.  But the minute--so he'd better be Rip Van Winkle."  But the minute he wakes up he's gone, you know.  But we had some good times together you know it's--and it's true I mean you know it's, most of the folks in the high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] man they were on his case.  But I wouldn't--I had no reason to be jealous of the guy because I was doing all right myself.
Story_ID: 485434
Speaker 1: I suppose your coach had some influence on you going to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] asked me, "Where you going to school?"  And I had scholarships to most of the black schools [HBCUs] along the eastern seaboard.  Like you had Lincoln Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], you had Delaware State [State College for Colored Students; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware], then you had Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], then you had three schools in Virginia and then on down to North Carolina.  I could have picked, you know, any black school I wanted to go to, particularly on the eastern seaboard.
Speaker 1: Now were they looking at you as primarily a basketball player, football player or baseball player?
Speaker 2: Mostly basketball.  That was my best sport.
Speaker 1: Give us a sense of what was the status of basketball in those days in terms of a spectator sport at the school level and otherwise?
Speaker 2: Well it, you know, it was entertainment.  You know in the small black schools over here, where else they gonna see basketball played?
Speaker 1: Did they have the same kind of status as baseball or football in those days?
Speaker 2: Football was the status sport, but in our school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] because of the absence of a lot of numbers, we fared better in basketball and baseball.  See 'cause in baseball if you got one good pitcher in high school, you know, and we had one good one.  I--well that's what they told me I was good you know, but football it takes--you can't--like in basketball you can have one real good kid can come to your program and you can turn your program around.  But one guy, one guy can't turn around football.  You can have the best quarterback in the world and you know we talk about this all the time, I say, man, the pro football team starts and ends with the offensive line.  Man, you can have Jesus Christ back there passing, he can't pass on his back.  So that's why we were representative in football but we were not as good in football as we were in basketball and baseball because it took too many people and too many pieces to get where you wanted to go.
Speaker 1: So basketball is kind of like an equalizer you know.  As we speak they're playing the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it's always like the Cinderella story of a small school that beats a--
Speaker 2: That's right, you, you, you got a shot at 'em because it's--well like you take Texas, University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], they got this kid Kevin Durant, this kid, he's the player of the year.  What is he, a freshmen?  And you know, and that's when the ills of big time college coaching now, when you get a kid like him, you better win with him immediately because he's not gonna be around.  Like Greg Oden, the big kid from--he's not gonna be around.  So now you better seize the moment because you know, next basketball season he'll be doing it for somebody else at another level, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you went to West Virginia State, what was your--had you chosen a major?
Speaker 2: Nah, well you don't choose a major until your junior year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations, did you think beyond sports?
Speaker 2: But my mother--let me back you up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know because you asked me this question, how'd I get to West Virginia State.  My mother had asked me, you know, where you going?  And I said, "I don't know."  And the next question is, "Well what does Coach Johnson [Louis Randolph Johnson] say?"  Now if Coach Johnson said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] is going to messed up U," that's where I was going.  They called me--they had, my parents had implicit faith in the fact that they thought that our teachers had our welfare at heart, and they were right on all counts.  So now here you are, and see how lucky I was, I think I shared that with you earlier, my college coach [Mark Cardwell] and my high school coach were classmates at my school and they played for my biology professor who was a hall of fame coach.  This guy, their coach is in the State of West Virginia athletic hall of fame.  Smartest man, man this guy, Professor Hammond [ph.], old guy, you know, doesn't wear khakis.  President sent for him one time, and, he's not properly attired, you know, he said, "Man, you take me away from my students to tell me that?"  But he was a great teacher.  Came to every game, he'd sit there and watch you know and he might ask you a question every now and then but mainly he wanted to know how you doing in school.
Speaker 1: Now what's his full name?  Coach is Hammond but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hammond, H-A-M--
Speaker 1: Hammond.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A.P., that's in A.P. Hammond [ph.], doctor personified, I mean this guy, biology professor man, I mean he's, he's off the charts as far as knowledge.
Story_ID: 485435
Speaker 1: You know college was, it was really interesting.  It--you think about this time period.  I finished high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia] in 1946 'cause I started college in '46 [1946] and World War II [WWII] had just ended in late '45 [1945] right?  So there at a lot of schools, a lot of guys are coming back to school after they served in the [U.S.] Army.  So I played with, I had three or four guys you know I was the youngest guy on the team but there were guys, 24, 25 and I mean that's a grown man, you know, you played with them, you played against some you know.  But fortunately for me, you know, the CIAA, that's the conference we played in, is now called the Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association but then was Colored [Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association], and the competition was fierce Larry [Larry Crowe] because most of the good black talent along the eastern seaboard, starting at Connecticut, you know New York, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I mean, these were basketball meccas.  And most of, most of that black talent found its way into CIAA schools.  Schools like Lincoln, Lincoln University in Pennsylvania.  Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was loaded.  Man, you go down to play Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] they had all these guys from New York, so fortunately for me this is the place where and I'll put it this way, my competitive juices erupted, thank goodness because if they didn't you know you couldn't survive.  So I you know I was a four year starter.  Our first year, we--our first year we probably started four freshmen, at least three, and I think we played twenty-one games that year because folks didn't like to come out.  We--West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] is out of the way so folks didn't want to come play you.  We played twenty-one games that year and I think we were like 17-4, which was phenomenal for the kind of squad we had with all these young guys, and then in my sophomore year everybody blossomed.  We were like 33-0, the '47-'48 [1947-1948] season, we were the only undefeated college team in the country.
Story_ID: 485436
Speaker 1: Now did you get--you didn't get that kind of recognition did you in the national press I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No he--you know our bible we had a couple of, three bibles you know, the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and all the top black papers, you know, kind of covered you.  I think like the Baltimore Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], most of our coverage because of our location.  The paper closest to us was the Pittsburgh Courier.  I mean you could--if you worked for the Courier and we were playing a big game at home, I mean, you could drive there in just a few hours from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  But the guys from the Baltimore Afro-American, man that's a long haul.  So what they usually did to cover us, they waited until we came, you know, came east and to play like say to play Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or to play Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University] in Baltimore [Maryland] so then they could cover you.  But we got a lot of ink from the Pittsburgh Courier.  We were mythical champions, national champions two years and we had guys made, you know, All-American and all-conference in CIAA [Colored Intercollegiate Athletic Association; Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association].  And you know somebody asked me, of all the awards you have which one do you treasure the most?  I said, "Well we're not, I mean the Hall of Fame is, you just take that, you put it aside."  I mean you can't compare anything to going into the Basketball Hall of Fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts].  I said, "But for a sheer award, the one that I appreciate the most at the fifty-year mark was CIAA."  They did some picking, they picked, so that's five decades right, fifty years?  So what they did, they picked an all-decade team for each decade and I was fortunate enough to make that.  And then they picked one player for each decade who's a player of that decade.  From '46 [1946] to '55 [1955] was my decade, and they must have run out of people to pick so they picked me, and to be thought of as a player of the year during that decade from '46 [1946] to '50 [1950] that's a real honor.  Because man I tell you, there's some people during that stretch, I mean they could flat out play.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the others that played?
Speaker 2: I had a teammate would have had a shot at it, a boy named Bob Wilson, was a great player.  You had a guy at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] named Lanky Banks [Leroy "Lanky" Banks], tremendous player.  You had a guy out of A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] named Ed Martin, God rest his soul, we were good friends.  He passed recently.  You had a guy, I think, had a guy from Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], tremendous players man they--that was a real honor based on the competition because every game we played was like a tournament game.
Story_ID: 485437
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now, I know you like probably don't like to talk about yourself that much, but what was your game like?  What position did you play and what were your strengths?
Speaker 2: I had good legs.
Speaker 1: So you could run?
Speaker 2: Yeah I ran the floor well you know for a guy my size, and you know it's a lot of folks marvel at that during that time because guys my size weren't that swift.
Speaker 1: Right, well just put in perspective, those days, guys 6'7", 6'7" played center (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know for a lot of teams even going into the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Jerry Lucas was an All-American center--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --6'7".
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Paul Hogue, 6'6"--
Speaker 2: Yeah 6'6".
Speaker 1: --guys like that.
Speaker 2: Well I never played center, I was a forward [at West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  My college coach [Mark Cardwell] was ahead of his time, you know, in four years we never played a zone defense.  I mean we got after people all the time you know and it's like the guy at--what's the guy's name at Arkansas [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas] and he--
Speaker 1: Yeah I know who--
Speaker 2: --we call it forty minutes of hell where we chased people, you know.  We played a figure eight offense which means that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it Nolan Richardson?
Speaker 2: Nolan Richardson was the coach.
Speaker 1: He's the Arkansas coach that we're referring to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was a good rebounder.  That's how we beat--we had some pretty good sized guys.  That's how we beat people man, you know we just wore 'em down.
Speaker 1: Were you the tallest on the team?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  We used to go--you know during that time motels were not available to you.  Consequently when we--say we went into North Carolina to play North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], they would put us up and feed us.  I'm sure we had to pay them for the food but they housed us you know, usually in the gym someplace or a dormitory that's not full you know.  But that was very rewarding because you got to know and be friends with some of your adversaries.  Like when I got to a tournament now, just came back, March 3rd, and I still see a couple of guys, a lot of guys died off and a lot guys incapacitated, many on walkers and wheelchairs and stuff you know.  And I feel kind of blessed because I am--I never had any serious injuries playing and I spent one night in the hospital once.  Never been hardly sick in my life so I, when I say I've been blessed like I told you before, when I say I've been blessed you can take it to the bank, and it comes to pass when you go someplace where you see guys that you played with and against, and you know my age, so you know there's a lot of guys man that we came along the same time, but I guess you handle things differently.  I guess the blessing I got, you know, playing in a small town like Alexandria [Virginia] man, you didn't think about smoking a cigarette or somebody found out you'd taken a drink so at this stage in my life it's a blessing to have clean lungs and your brain's not saturated, and I don't say that as you know to denigrate anybody but it--stuff happens.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's better to have not (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's no question.  And I can feel it.
Story_ID: 485438
Speaker 1: Now did you have a special training regimen, I mean to get yourself to be able to run like that?
Speaker 2: No, you just you know I mean you try to stay in some kind of shape 'cause I learned a long time ago, man, it's hard to get back into shape, and I tell these guys who are playing now, I say, "Man, don't get out of shape."  'Cause training camp is not to get you in shape, training camp is to fine tune you.  But you go into one of these training camps now out of shape, they eat you alive, man.  Because these guys lift weights and play two on two.  They're always playing.
Speaker 1: Now you all didn't lift weights in those days did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --for basketball?
Speaker 2: Well you know, so many different thoughts then about lifting weights, man you lift weights, you shorten your muscles up and you look like a gorilla when you're walking, you know.  What my coach [Mark Cardwell] used to do, we had three or four guys who played basketball were football players.  And once that season was over he'd make them go to the pool, and that swimming, kind of, all those muscles that were all tight you know for football, it kind of stretches them out a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as far as weight rooms and all that, you couldn't afford it.  But then too, a lot of the bigger schools during that stretch, they didn't have weight rooms.  I mean once they started hiring--once they started hiring legitimate trainers, I don't mean some guy that can put a band aid on you, you know, I'm talking about guys who have studied to be a trainer.  That's, that's when that trend kind of took off for the better.
Speaker 1: So if you're in school if you got--if somebody did get hurt, what was--I mean you didn't have a trainer?
Speaker 2: We had a team doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know we--when you're winning you have a lot of boosters.  I mean man they love to take care of you man you know and we had a couple three doctors who would practice right in Charleston [West Virginia] and they were our team physicians.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh we had good care.
Speaker 1: West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] is near Charleston?
Speaker 2: Yeah about ten miles.
Speaker 1: In Institute?
Speaker 2: Institute, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, funny thing about it, it's ten miles now but during my time in school where nobody had cars and stuff, it's like a thousand miles away.  And if you got on the bus, you know even buses man they make a thousand stops.  So we were kind of isolated, and we had tremendous campus activities and I mean nobody was hurting for a lack of things to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there was something going on all the time?
Speaker 2: All the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how big a school was West Virginia State in terms of the student population?
Speaker 2: Right now, when I was there we probably had a thousand people.
Speaker 1: That's not bad (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's not a bad size but you know it's, we had a thousand people and we were busting at the seams right, but it was a great place.  I you know it--I'd do it all over again--
Story_ID: 485439
Speaker 1: Now when you were in I guess the latter part of high school [Parker-Gray School, Alexandria, Virginia] as you were going to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], that's--isn't '46 [1946] the year that Jackie Robinson entered the?
Speaker 2: No Jackie Robinson, he made it to the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] in '47 [1947] I think.  No, he played one year in Montreal [Canada]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --which was--the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] had their top farm team, the AAA team in Montreal [Montreal Royals].
Speaker 1: I think they announced he was gonna do it in '46 [1946], he played farm ball and '47 [1947] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think he finally got to the Major Leagues--
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [sic.].
Speaker 1: --forty-eight [1948], right.
Speaker 2: Well you know--
Speaker 1: So how did you feel about that then, did you think that was coming for basketball too, or did you pay attention to pro basketball?
Speaker 2: No, very little.  I paid a little attention.  Let's put it this way, when I was in Alexandria [Virginia], in high school, there's a guy who owned all the theaters, the black theaters in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], his name was Lichtman [Abe Lichtman], and they had a league where they played every Sunday, and the Washington band was made up of guys who played for the New York Rens and if you, if you like basketball and they're close to you, you're eight miles away, you gotta go see them man.  There's a team, the New York Renaissance, literally played themselves out of business.  They were that good.
Story_ID: 485440
Speaker 1: New York Renaissance, so tell us about them.
Speaker 2: Well like I said earlier, that's a team that literally played themselves out of business.  They were so good wouldn't nobody play them.  You know they had--first of all they were a black team.  And I think what happened was one year somebody got together with somebody and they had a professional tournament in Chicago [Illinois], and the Rens beat the Harlem Globetrotters in the finals, and but it was amazing that there was only two black teams in the tournament and they end up in the finals you know.  That scared people to death, they couldn't have that you know, it's like that Joe Louis thing, you know, the white hope and all that, you know, but they--so they had to go and forage for themselves so they, they kind of farmed themselves out.  They played for the Bears [Washington Bears] and a team called the Dayton Mets and you know they kind of moved around you know, but it was a Sunday league so they didn't make a lot of money.
Speaker 1: Dayton Mets, I never heard of them.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton] played for the Dayton Mets.
Speaker 1: Yeah now he was a member of the New York Rens, right, early on?
Speaker 2: No, Sweets didn't play for the Rens [sic.].
Speaker 1: He played for the Trot--
Speaker 2: He played for the Trotters.
Speaker 1: --Trotters okay.  Harlem Globetrotters were from Chicago.
Speaker 2: That's right, but Harlem stuck you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So these teams basically were not in a league or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were barnstormers.  I mean there was no league during that time because the Rens played in like what the early '30s [1930s] or the late '30s [1930s] or early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: For those who watch this who have no idea, they can't conceive of this, in those days you could put together a team and then you tried to put together a schedule where you play other professional teams in other cities or whoever they can get together and play you in those cities?
Speaker 2: That's right.  You know like they would barnstorm, they might come into a town where there's some pretty good bas- local basketball talent, you know you gonna lose, but you know people wanna see 'em play.  You know when, when you got Pop Gates [William "Pop" Gates] and Charlie Isles and Sonny Woods [Robert "Sonny" Wood] and Johnny Isaacs [John Isaacs], it's unbelievable man.  I can recall one year they came to Charleston [West Virginia], and they Charleston had a huge auditorium with a huge stage, they played on the stage that's unbelievable man I mean.
Speaker 1: On a stage?
Speaker 2: On a stage.
Speaker 1: A regular auditorium stage?
Speaker 2: Auditorium stage, it was big enough, it was huge.  But it's not big enough to play you know, but when you're an exhibition basketball team you know it really doesn't matter you know but during those times you know there were regular arenas, you know, they wouldn't allow them to play.  I mean you had that Jim Crow thing to deal with.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia], I didn't ask this but you all had a gym, or did you have a gym, where you actually could play?
Speaker 2: No, we, we had an undersized auditorium where we played at because that was the only large space that we had.  So it's--was really funny we played in that bandbox and we would go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and play other schools, and they always had a decent sized gym but it didn't present any kind of a problem for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're talking about the time when you weren't guaranteed to actually be in a gym if you were playing you know--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --it could be a makeshift.
Speaker 2: Well you know most of the--that was your facility, ours was truly makeshift.  Some of the smallest schools in Virginia, like Walker-Grant [Walker-Grant High School; Walker-Grant Middle School], is a school in Fredericksburg [Virginia] and they played in a place where they had to heat the gym up with coal stoves man.  I said, "Coach [Mark Cardwell], you got to peel me off one of these stoves," you know, but--and it's crazy man, and when they finally came out with the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on man, it's separate but equal.  You know that's when it got ridiculous for me.  When they insulted my intelligence, it got ridiculous because you know--I mean I can stand in my school and look over at George Washington High School [Alexandria, Virginia], they play a night game, man, it looks like Broadway over there man.  Beautiful uniforms, buses they travel in and they couldn't beat the Little Sisters of the Poor.  And I told somebody, I said, "You know what man, we made a terrible mistake."  They said, "What was that?"  "Well we had the wrong school colors."  Why is that?  I said, "Well George Washington gets new uniforms every year, and if we had the same color they had," we were blue and white and they were blue and gold.  I said, "We should be blue and gold because the uniforms that they give up are five times better than all this patch work we got."  But that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the way it was, you know.  But it served us because we had to be driven.  I mean to excel man, I mean you had to really be driven.
Story_ID: 485441
Speaker 1: Now you went through four years at West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], now did you eventually--what major did you eventually choose?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What major did you eventually choose in college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in PE [physical education] because my goal was to finish college, get a job teaching at a high school and coach, that was my goal--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was doable because most of the times, like in most cities, girls became a teacher or nurse.  Boys became a teacher and/or a coach, that's the way it was, that's the only thing available to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where--did you have any favorite teachers at West Virginia State?
Speaker 2: I had my speech teacher.  And you know you have a favorite teacher, they don't know it, you know, Dr. Belcher [Fannin S. Belcher], I mean this guy was a class act man you know he's--you know the speech teacher I mean he's--when you have to come to his class with a tie on you know how he's dressed, man, he was, how that saying goes, he was a picture of sartorial splendor.  He was sharp every day.  But public speaking was a very, very important class because today you know folks that fall to pieces they got to stand before somebody and speak.  But Dr. B. was cool.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any theater or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well you know they used to call me a clown sometimes (laughter).  No, no I--
Speaker 1: Well you're kind of dramatic, I thought you might have you know and speech often leads to theatre you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing too.
Speaker 2: Well we had so many talented people on that campus man in that area man you know.  Man, you go to make a fool out of yourself, man they be laughing you out of the gym (laughter).  But it's a, it--I tell you man it was as wholesome as a place could be.  I mean it just plus we were a little spoiled.  When I say spoiled, we weren't spoiled--we never, we didn't have a training table, we're 33-0 man.  You know it's time to go dinner you just line up with the regular folks.  And I kind of liked that you know it's--we had one day a week where we would wear one of our three championship sweaters, and the you know student body man they looked forward to seeing us because they didn't see us together a lot you know aside from playing because everybody had different classes, you went your separate ways you know, but this was a wholesome place.  I--my coach [Mark Cardwell]--of course my attitude was if this school that he's sending me to, his school, if his school can make me half the man that he is, it's a perfect fit.  It was a perfect fit for me man and I wouldn't give up that experience for nothing on this earth man.  And it's--you have to have been there to really appreciate it.  You know, when you walk across the campus if I saw you ten times in one day, I spoke to you ten times, whereas some people, I saw you a half hour ago you know.  But this place man, it's, and if you ever talked to anybody from West Virginia State, you ask, what kind of place was it?  And they will ponder for a second and say, it's a special place.  It's a special place man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--that's another lucky or blessed situation.
Speaker 2: Oh no question.  I mean this is a special place you know.  Man ain't nothing like being loved man.  Like I told some guys the other day, I said, you know there's a--Nat King Cole's, one of his signature songs is 'Nature Boy,' and there's a passage in there man that covers a whole lot of bases and he says, "The greatest thing you'll ever learn is to love and be loved in return."  That epitomizes my school to the letter.  I mean they loved you, man.  I mean they truly, truly loved you.  I mean they--you were gonna be protected you know wasn't no problem man.
Story_ID: 485442
Speaker 1: On another level though, if you're like a star basketball player, tallest guy on the team [at West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], did you attract a lot of female attention?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Come on now man, we don't have to go there, do we, right?  You'll get me killed man.  No.  Well you know the younger girls because I was, I was the baby on this team, you know, and but the mature girls no, I was too young for them, man, you know.  Consequently a lot of freshmen girls, like when I was a sophomore the freshmen girls, "Oh there's Moon [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd]," you know that kind of stuff you know.  Man you enjoyed it but that you know, you couldn't take that too seriously because there's a situation where for three years, my last three years in college, our student body never saw us lose a game.  So that--you know we entertained them man.  I mean here we are sitting, we're sitting, isolated.  When you say the basketball team is playing man, it was a rush.  And we try not to let 'em down.  In fact we didn't let 'em down.  We played--we had a tremendous four years man.  In the four--in my four years there we won--we had a visitation title and you had a tournament title.  We won the visitation title three years, won the tournament two years so that's you know, in a four year span you win three titles in four years man I mean you--I mean that's a stretch, and then you win two tournaments, and the one you lost, you're in the finals.  I mean we didn't get beat the first game.  I mean you know, a good team caught us and beat us in the finals.  But you know, my senior year, and I say this, our team was--people were afraid of us but we were not as good as we were our sophomore year.  But reputation wise, and we had enough talent to get by but it wasn't nothing like that other year you know.  But our students man, they revered you man, and plus they appreciated the fact that we got treated like normal people as it related to eating in a dining hall.  I mean, you had to go stand in line.  I mean you stand in line and wait just like everybody else.
Speaker 1: So you were mixed in with the population, everybody knew you?
Speaker 2: No question.  Everybody knew you.  I mean you were accessible.  I mean it ain't like some guy they got on a pedestal someplace.  They got you on a pedestal but it's down here where they can touch you.  So and I thought we handled it fairly well.  I mean none of us wore it on our sleeves.  I mean we were happy to be there, and we're here for you and you know you walk in a campus, I mean you walk across the campus, everyone, "Hey Moon, how you doing," you know.  And you just stop and talk to folks.  But it was a very, very unique experience, that school.
Story_ID: 485443
Speaker 1: --So you're a senior [at West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] and you're preparing yourself to become a teacher and were you aware you were even going--somebody was thinking about drafting you?
Speaker 2: No, it--the thought never entered my mind because I mean how can you be thinking about going to a place where there was no predecessor?  I'm walking across the campus, and one of my little classmates, a little girl, she said, "Moon [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd], I heard your name on the radio."  I said, "I hope it wasn't the police radio you know."  She said some team, she said, "Some team in Washington [D.C.] called the Washington Capitols drafted you to play for them."  I hadn't heard a thing.  Now they have been in touch with my coach [Mark Cardwell] though so they know that's how it was.  They negotiated for me through my coach but I had no concern with it because he had my welfare at heart.  Then he called me down to the office, and once they announced it on the radio, he called me there in the office, said, "Look you know, they want you in Washington next week," and boom, boom, boom.  So, you know, went to Washington.  Another young guy from North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] named Hal Hunter [Harold Hunter] was drafted and he's a hell of a player.  I think Hal got a bad break because he was a guard.  See these were the times in basketball you had the same problem with backcourt people that football had with quarterbacks you know.  That's the cerebral position you know you can't--you ain't got no black guy back there playing, you're not that smart.  But here's a guy, and I still believe this bottom of my heart man, if--first of all no team in 1950 was gonna have two blacks on the team.  You know, you're lucky to get one.  So and here I am you know it's common knowledge man you know it's easy to make a team, it's much easier to make a team when what you do best is what they need.  And they always need rebounders and folks who could defend, and folks who were coachable and unselfish.  There's always a place for you, particularly if you're a big guy.  The guards, you know, just about all the other players that came in from jump street were frontcourt people.  People who they knew could do the dirty work.  When I say dirty work, I don't mean there's--and you heard this saying that a winning basketball team has to have somebody who's willing to do the dirty work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some parts of the country we call it a mule.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's right you you gotta have one you know.  You gotta have a guy that he's gonna rebound for you, he's gonna run down the floor, he gonna set up picks for you and he's never a scoring option.  I mean he's got to scrounge his eight, ten points a game while he's doing all the things that you need to help you win.
Story_ID: 485444
Speaker 1: And that's why I tell guys, young coaches, I say, "Look man," I said, "if you don't get your dirty work done properly, you're not gonna win, so what you need to do is, you get the people who you expect to do the dirty work, let them touch the ball early, let 'em get a couple of shots."  Now if they make one, they can smell, they can smell a good day.  They gonna kill somebody for you.  But don't just keep ignoring them.  After a while the guys says I'm not important to this team.  And he might be the most important guy to that team but he doesn't see it because the most valuable thing in a basketball game is the basketball.  If I don't touch it, I don't count.  I mean I don't believe that but I'm sure there's some people that feel that way.  It's kind of like the movie--did you see the movie 'All the King's Men'?
Speaker 2: I don't, I didn't, but I'm familiar with it.
Speaker 1: Well you got to see it because it--I try to take whenever I see a movie, I try to take something from it, and when Sean Penn who was playing, I forget the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huey Long character [Willie Stark].
Speaker 1: --yeah the Huey Long character, well he told his constituents who were his true constituents because they were poor folks, he said, "If you don't vote, you don't count."  You know, and like in basketball you know sometimes guys say, if I don't get to touch the ball every now and then, I don't count, I don't count.
Speaker 2: Yeah they call it today rewarding the big man first.
Speaker 1: No question.
Speaker 2: You got a big guy down there, you give him the ball first.
Speaker 1: Man you, you get him in the right frame of mind to do the work that needs to be done for us to win.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because if the guys who are supposed to be rebounding don't rebound, you know, and basketball is a simple game.  You can't score without the ball so somebody has to get it for you you know.  It's--and if the ball don't go in the hole, you don't look good.  You can do all the phases of the basketball fantastically well on a given night, you can rebound, you can run, you can defend but you can't win a game one to nothing in basketball.  You got to score some points man.  And it comes out to a point where some teams will have the luxury of affording the guy that doesn't have to score.  But a lot of teams man they cannot afford to have a guy playing 35, 36, 37 minutes and don't score any points.  I mean he becomes a burden, and you can't defend that good that you can't--that you don't have to score any points.  That's the way the game is played, but all day again you come back there and you're right, you reward the guy.  I've seen guys, I've seen guys, little guys, they steal the ball up front and there's a big guy trailing them, give it to him.  Man, you know let him jam one and let him posture you know, but that's--you have to think like that you know.  Like I've seen guys like in the pros man, they run down there, they know the guy's behind them, they run down, they dribble down, throw it up against the backboard and this dude man he comes out of nowhere you know like a moon person, and he feels good about himself.  Everyone has to feel that they are an intricate part of a team.
Speaker 2: Now there's a culture to basketball is what you're describing, you're describing a basketball culture?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You can see if you see the opposite happening on television or the game, you know that that team is probably not gonna win any way.  Big guy's not rewarded he runs down the court and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well like, I watch wide receivers during football season.  They're open.  But the guy might be running for his life back there, he can't see you, and then you get in the end zone and pout openly you know before millions of viewers like you being denied.  Man you can't, you can't do that man.  You don't want to embarrass your teammate.  And that's why you know I appreciate the guys man who throw a bad pass and when they're coming back they go all it's my fault.  You know but some guys man, you know I played--I played with a guy, this guy was good, I think I coached the guy.  He's a guard.  He comes on a fast break and you're on a wing, when he led you to pass, he led you one step too far, which does what?  It disturbs your rhythm.  So once you catch it, all you can do is pass it back to him, right?  (Laughter) And guys do that, hey, I don't know about now, but you know the guys did those kinds of things.  All you do is you lead the guy one step too far where he's running now he got to put on a burst of speed and lunge to get the ball.  Yeah ain't nothing he can do with it but get it back to you and you going down and get the layup.  And this guy (laughter)--it's different.
Story_ID: 485445
Speaker 1: Let's get back to the draft, now you--there's two black draftees--
Speaker 2: In our training camp.
Speaker 1: --but the guard [Harold Hunter] doesn't make it cause he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No he didn't make the cut.  You know, they cut him early.
Speaker 1: I guess would be a--do you suspect it would be a challenge to have a black player in those early days scoring a lot of points on a team?
Speaker 2: Probably.  I'm sure it would have been, you know, it, you know, people say, "How was training camp?"  I said, "Training camp was for me was the defining moment."  I mean, you think about this Larry [Larry Crowe], you've been treated inferiorly all your life and even though most of the adults you came by they, they always reassured you about your worth, but even still there was a white fountain and the colored fountain, and the white waiting room at the train station, and the cars you know and then you got that like--take the train for example, you hear the saying about the front of the train and the back of the bus.  I asked some young kids out in Tennessee Tech [Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville, Tennessee] the other day.  I said, "You know what that means?"  No.  Black kids.  I said during my time and back in the day, trains were fueled with coal and the cars are not air conditioned, so you can choose your poison.  You can leave the window closed and suffocate, or you can open it up and the soot from the train will choke you to death.  As a consequence, where do you think they sat?  Them last cars.  So when the soot got back to them it was all broken up and it's gone, it's in the atmosphere.  Now the bus, most of the buses, were diesel.  Where's the motor?  In the back of the bus.  So and from a diesel you got what fumes?  So inhaled it?  The folks who sit under the sign that said for colored.  You know it's a very delicate balance how you handle these kinds of things, and I've had young kids say to me, "I wouldn't have sat back there."  I said, "Well, let me tell you what man."  It's easy for you to say that but the urge to survive.  I said see we were taught survival tactics because we needed them.  You obviously don't need survival tactics, you might need 'em but you don't have them.  I said, you know, "If you sat on the back of the bus nobody bothered you.  But you sat too far up near the front you gonna get hassled," and you know, and they treat guys differently than they treat ladies.  So I say, hey, you know you did what you had to do to survive man.  I mean for example there's a few towns like Baltimore [Maryland], St. Louis [Missouri], Fort Wayne [Indiana], and Annapolis [Maryland], they're four tough cities and you never knew whether they were gonna serve you or not so you had to walk in and ask to be seated.  One day, young man named Bobby Hopkins [Bob Hopkins], man, from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], leading scorer in the nation, Bobby Hopkins, one player, he and I walk into an oriental restaurant and the guy politely told us he didn't serve colored.  I said, "Well we on the same page, cause I don't eat 'em."  (Laughter) But you still got to go though you know.  And you know that's the other thing, I mean yeah you know, you're an American supposedly and here's a guy from a foreign country comes over who can refuse to serve you?  And that's make--and that's anger you have to control.
Story_ID: 485446
Speaker 1: Now I have to ask this question that occurred to me as I was coming in here.  Were you given any kind of orientation by management about how they expected you to comport yourself as the first black draftee on the team [Washington Capitols] or anything like that?  Did they say, well there's gonna be some trouble but you have to just kind of, you know?
Speaker 2: Not one iota.  You know they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not the kind of Branch Rickey talk--
Speaker 2: --nobody no, see, see you know that's one of the reasons why like, like interviewers have said to me, "Well, why do you take umbrage to being compared to Jackie Robinson?"  I said, "Man, you do the man a disservice."  I said, you know, like we said earlier, we're dealing with a different kind of person.  Like most of the guys who played pro basketball were college guys.  Most of the guys who played pro baseball then never saw a college.  Most of them didn't finish high school.  As a consequence, they made life kind of rough for him, you know, and plus he was like an island.  He out there all by himself, and the family, his teammates don't wanna play with him, his adversaries try to hurt him, they wanna bean him and spike him.  The fans just vilify him, throwing black cats on the field and all that kind of stuff you know.  And for a guy to play in that kind of atmosphere, I mean not just play, that's got to perform, this guy makes--he plays well enough in that kind of arena to make the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] on the first blush.  That's utterly amazing man and I pay tribute to him man, you know, this guy.  Here's a guy had fire in his belly man.  And they told him you can't fight back.  Nah, I had a few heroes man, he's one of them.  Paul Robeson.  This guy sacrificed it all man for his integrity.  I mean they wouldn't let him--he couldn't even work, you know.  Joe, Joe Louis, Joe struck a blow for us. Joe Louis was the only guy during my time back in the day who could legitimately get paid for beating up white folks.  So every time he knocked one out, we were all knocking this dude out, you know.  But let me tell you, I got a name for you.  You write it down.  Her name was Ruby Bridges.  See this picture right here?  It might bring back some memories.  This little girl was six years old in New Orleans [Louisiana], in the 9th Ward, she integrated a public school.  She was the only black student in the school.  So every day, every day the Lord sends there were four armed marshals had to take her to school and bring her home, and only one teacher embraced her.  This teacher and this little girl sat in the classroom side by side teaching and learning for a whole year.  For recess this little girl could not go outside and play, so the teacher had to figure out some activities for her that they could do inside the classroom.  Six years old, man.  I mean, what kind of threat does a six year old present to you?  I know the threat, you know, it's the six year old coming, next it's gonna be a eight year old and a ten year old you know.  Then they start getting concerned.
Speaker 1: I'm sure there was some adversity in training camp that you had to deal with--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --even though the guys had been to college and all that.
Speaker 2: Well I tell you what the adversity for me was, like I said earlier, you know you've been treated inferior all your life, and even with all the reassuring about your self-worth, it creeps in.  It almost has to.  If anybody say it doesn't, you know, they're lying to themselves.
Story_ID: 485447
Speaker 1: So man here I am in this pro training camp, you got guys, we got the player of the year, from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], guy named Dick Schnittker, player of the year.
Speaker 2: Dick, what's his last name?
Speaker 1: Schnittker.
Speaker 2: Schnittker.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's a German name S-C-H-I-T-T-N-E-R [sic.], something like that, and you got Bill Sharman who's All-American from Southern California [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].  You got a guy from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], you got a guy from NC State [North Carolina State College of Agriculture and Engineering; North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina], you got a guy from Wyoming [University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming], you got a guy from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], from Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] and here I am.  And you know in the first couple of days you're really awestruck just being in the same locker room with these guys.  And a couple of days go by and the third day goes by, and you find yourself being less awe struck.  And then at the end of the week, you realize, you know, you were here because you belong.  And for me or for a young black kid, that was a true defining moment.  I mean for a guy who's lived in segregation all his life to realize that he's equal to these guys, like my saying is, "It gets no better than that."  So when I've been asked what was the most important thing about pro basketball, basketball for you, you got to get there first.  The most important thing for me was going to training camp and me making this team.  That's the defining moment.  So that's the most important part of my pro career was getting there because I had no predecessor.  So Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton] and Chuck Cooper and I became the predecessors.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now you all were drafted at the same time right?
Speaker 1: Well Sweets wasn't drafted.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sweets was purchased, his contract was purchase by the New York Knicks from the Harlem Globetrotters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Chuck Cooper, I defer to Chuck a lot.  I tell you why.  Given the racial climate in Washington, D.C. in 1950, if the Boston Celtics did not take Chuck Cooper on the second, they took him on a second round you know that's a monumental occasion.  That almost assures you, you gonna make it.  I do not believe that if the Celts had not picked Chuck Cooper in front of me, that the Washington Capitols were not gonna step up.  You know I don't have any documentation or anything to support that notion but I have one thing, they were in no hurry to get to me.  Chuck Cooper was taken on the second round.  They took me on the ninth round, the ninth round, and when they pick in the ninth round it was like a dartboard with names on it.  You just throw the dart up there, and the name you hit that's who you draft.  And I probably have to guess that I might be the only number nine draft choice to make an NBA [National Basketball Association] team.
Speaker 2: Yeah, number nine is way down (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh man, that--
Speaker 2: So they kind of buried that choice.
Speaker 1: --you off the chart.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know.
Story_ID: 485448
Speaker 1: From what I know about it, the Washington [D.C.] teams, the Senators [Washington Senators] was the last, I think the last major league team to have a black player [sic.].  I mean they weren't anxious to have them.
Speaker 2: Well the Redskins [Washington Redskins], I mean they had two owners.  Let me tell you, Calvin Griffith owned the Senators and what's that guy's name that owned the Redskins, oh geez, I can't remember his name but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who you talking about.
Speaker 2: --but they weren't real high on--George Marshall [George Preston Marshall] was his name.  They weren't very high on having black athletes, and the funny thing about it, man you had a whole bunch of black folks living in D.C.  You get a player, man you can make a lot more money but that's not--obviously that wasn't important.
Speaker 1: D.C. was very much a southern city.
Speaker 2: Oh man, D.C. was the cradle you know; it's the cradle of segregation man.  It's--and I got to tell a story, my first home game, you know how they introduce the visiting team and then you introduce the home team and there's two white guys sitting directly behind my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] and father [Theodore Lloyd] and mostly behind my mother, and when they introduced me, one guy say to the other guy without any regard for my parents, "Do you think this nigger can play any basketball?"  And my mother, who is, you know she was an expert in conflict resolution.  Oh the girl was good.  She turned around, looked this guy right in his face, man.  And said, "Trust me, the nigger can play."  So after the game, we discussed it, and like I said my mother was a pretty person.  She said, "First of all, never dignify ignorance," but she said, "I just felt an urge I had to address that."  I said 'cause here's a guy that's obviously stupid.  Because in 1950 there were no tokens.  In 1950 if there was a black guy on the floor or the field, that's one thing you knew about him, he could play.  Otherwise he wouldn't be there.  They're not gonna take a black guy to put on the bench.  That's bad publicity.  So when they took a black guy, there's one thing you knew about him, at least you knew this much, you knew that they thought he could play.  It was up to him to show that he could.  And so I launched my career, you know, and two weeks later I was gone, I was gone to the [U.S.] Army, but that whole situation defined me.
Speaker 1: Now did you start?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you one of the starting five?
Speaker 2: I was one of the starters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And like my wife [Charlita Lloyd] says to me, you know my wife is a saint of voice.  She said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] do you realize," I told her, I said, "You know when I was playing, when I first started, there were only eight teams, and each team had ten players."  She said, "Do you realize man you were in a profession where there were only eighty jobs, and here you are a little black kid from Virginia, one of them is yours."  And I never thought about it that way before you know that's, I mean that's monumental man.  But it's--it was crazy times.
Story_ID: 485449
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were drafted by the--it's the Korean War, right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that started up?
Speaker 2: But my coach, I had a coach, man, named Horace "Bones" McKinney, legendary figure.  I mean Bones is what legends were made of, man, believe me.  Bones, Bones was a wild man.  We went to Fort Wayne [Indiana] to play, the Van Orman Hotel [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  They let me sleep in a hotel, but they told me I couldn't eat downstairs, they didn't want--obviously didn't want anybody to see me in the dining room, so I ordered room service and before the service came, there was a knock on the door, I thought it was room service.  I opened the door, it's Bones, my coach.  And he told me, he said-- see here's how you run across people who kind of restore your faith in human nature sometimes.  I mean here's a guy that knocks on my door and says, "You're not gonna eat by yourself tonight."  And I told him, I said, "Bones look man, I can handle this."  You know I said, "Look you, you can't change this," I said, "but do understand man you know like when you become a standup guy in a situation where it's not fashionable, where if you didn't come up here to see me, you'd never been criticized for it.  So do know it's appreciated."  And I said, "Man you go on back downstairs with the rest of your team and enjoy yourself, man."  I said, "I'm gonna be all right."  But the gesture, you know, it weighed heavy on you man, you know.  I can recall some years later, we were living here and we had decided to go to Raleigh, North Carolina to visit one of my wife's [Charlita Lloyd] high school buddies who was married to a doctor down there, and I knew Bones was living in Hickory, North Carolina, and you go right--when you're on 40 West, 40 East [Interstate 40] rather, you go right through Hickory, Asheville [North Carolina] and Hickory you know.  And I told my wife, I said, "Look, you know, Bones lives here."  I said, "Now we don't have time to stop to visit because he'll never let you get out of here." I said, "But I'll be remiss if I didn't call him."  Called his home, his wife answered the phone.  I says, "Ms. McKinney?"  She said, "Yes."  I said, "This is Earl Lloyd [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd]," I said, "one of Bones' players with the Caps [Washington Capitols]."  She said, "Boy I know who you are, you were his favorite."  I said, "Well I wish he had told me, you know."  But anyhow she said, "He's at his office, here's his phone number, call him and God bless you," 'cause of that Bible Belt thing.  Now meanwhile Bones has gone--he's an ordained minister and this guy was a two-fisted drinker and fire breathing, you know.  So I called Bones.  He recognized my voice right away.  You know, I got one of those voices like Andy Devine, right.  I can't make no prank telephone calls 'cause everybody know my voice man.  So I said, "Bones, how you doing?"  He said, "Earl how you doing man," you know.  We had--we talked a couple minutes.  I said, "Well we're passing through but we got to get on the road, you know."  I said, "Well I have to say this to you man," you know, I said, "it really, really pleases me that you're an ordained minister."  He said, "Well why is that?"  I said, "Man there's hope for us all."  (Laughter) If you can become a minister man, I feel good about that one.  There's hope for me boy, I tell you man, but we laughed about that.  Great guy, you know, fantastic person man.  If I had one regret about pro basketball it's that I got drafted into the [U.S.] Army and I didn't get a chance to play for him 'cause I would have played my heart out for him man.  I mean, I'd have left it on the floor for him.  I wouldn't bring nothing back for the locker room playing for him.  And I had that much respect for him, you know.
Story_ID: 485450
Speaker 1: So how long did you serve in the [U.S.] Army, and where did they send you?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I spent six months in Fort Bragg, North Carolina and eighteen months at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Did you--so you became a sergeant from what I read right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah I--you know in the Fourth Army [Fourth U.S. Army] area they didn't have post teams.  They had group teams like you wanna have three battalions and a group and then you could choose--pick guys from those groups you know.  Well we had eight guys.  Now we had ten guys who were ex-college players because 1950, man, they--most of the guys who finished college didn't have any babies, weren't married, you were gone.  So the Army was loaded with college players and when you went to play somebody man you, I mean you wasn't playing on just a regular Army team man, you playing somebody who'd played at some different levels.  But Fort Sill was kind of good to us, we had a good basketball team and we won the Fourth Army title for the first time Fort Sill ever won anything.  So we became little darlings right.  Them generals liked to brag about they--about who's winning, who's losing, so but Oklahoma was--it's not a place where the civilized folks wanted to settle at that time.
Speaker 1: I've heard lots of stories about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a terrible place man, it was a terrible place.  I--
Speaker 1: Did you have one particular story you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well you know like when you got on the trains, got on the train in Oklahoma, you know they had a separate car for you and they even pulled the shade on you so the white folks couldn't see you.  Man, that's bad man, that's ooh, you know Oklahoma was just a terrible place.  And I vowed when I left Oklahoma, when I left Fort Sill, I said, "I will never set foot in this state again," and I scouted for the Pistons [Detroit Pistons] for six years.  Now you know when you're scouting pro talent man, you're all over the place.  Whenever I had to scout somebody in Oklahoma, they had to be on the road.  When they played Texas or somebody I'd go.  I did not have an affinity for Oklahoma.  And you know you on the post with your uniform on and the--you get on the post bus, not the post bus, but you get on the city bus, you can sit anywhere you wanted to as long as the bus was on the post, but the minute that bus left the front gate, they stopped the bus and told you, "You gotta move back," and you got on a U.S. Army uniform, meant nothing.  But again, it's like Matt [Matthew Hickey] and I were talking while you were--you have to manage, and we talked about this earlier about you have to manage your anger because if you don't it's gonna, it's not gonna allow you--whatever tasks you have at hand, you can't do it if you let anger overtake you.  And if you let anger overtake you man, you lose something, and that's when you--all that survival training you had goes by the boards 'cause you might do something crazy.  So you had to be on your Ps and Qs all the time.
Story_ID: 485451
Speaker 1: Well when you came out of the service, did you go back to the Capitols [Washington Capitols]?
Speaker 2: No, they--I always say they, you know, they were shocked losing me so they, while I was in the [U.S.] Army, they folded.  They became defunct.
Speaker 1: So the team just folded.
Speaker 2: Yeah they folded and you know they couldn't stand the loss.  That's my, that's my private joke.  But what happened in that case, they had what they call a supplemental draft, and they draft in the order just the regular draft you know.  The team with the worst record gets first pick.  Nobody picked me 'cause I was an unknown quality.  And I was a black unknown quality.  But as luck would have it you know again I was blessed, Freddy Scolari [Fred Scolari].  We used to call him fat Freddy, little fat dude man out of University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California], could shoot the lights out.  He told management up there, he said, "Look you know, there's a kid down there that you can get him for a song 'cause don't nobody know how good he is.  He's only played seven games so then that's, you can't get a fix on a guy in seven games."  He said, "But I'm telling you," he said, "he is gonna play in this league [National Basketball Association] and if I were you, man you can get him for a song it'll cost you hardly anything to get him."  They got me for bus fare probably and so they picked me.  And I sat out a year and a half to do in the [U.S.] Army, so when I got out of the Army you know I flew east, went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and changed my clothes and went right to Syracuse [New York].  And the rest is kind of history, you know, my first game in Syracuse again you get back to--it helps that what, what you do best is what the team needs the most and every pro team needs rebounders who can defend, who's unselfish, who's coachable and who you know is a decent human being.  He's not gonna be any problems for you.  So then Syracuse [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] had me for six years and it--my first game in Syracuse, I came off the bench, end of about the first quarter and got in the game, and in the game I had something like fifteen, sixteen rebounds, so that will solidify you right?  You're not gonna cut a guy that you know could rebound like that, so and you know, I was a pretty good defender.  'Cause I, 'cause being a good defender is all this.  Ain't nothing but heart.  If you don't have the heart for it, you can't defend.  Now you got the best footwork, you can have it all, but if you can't do it from here man, you got a problem.  So I had no problem with that, you know, and I've been coaching all my life man, you do whatever it takes for a team to win, that's what you do.  You know I had to sacrifice some things just to be able to what I do.  But you know--there's an old saying you know, to get something you gotta give up something, sometimes, most of time.  But Syracuse was a good fit for me, small town, and that restrictive covenant thing it follows you.  I'm here--you're in Syracuse man, you're in central New York, you would think that you could live where you wanted to live.  But it wasn't that way.  Every black person I knew including me lived in the 15th Ward [Syracuse, New York], I mean that was the hamlet and inadvertently man it was meat and potatoes for me man.  I mean it was a place where that was my friendly port in the storm, 15th Ward, 'cause you know once they got to know me you know--'cause usually people at that time when you a black dude, you were the only guy playing, and you know they think you're gonna be withdrawn, you think you're something different.  And they found out I was just a regular guy who the Lord gave some talent and put me with folks that nurtured it and here I am, you know?  'Cause my attitude is, hey, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was the most important man on this earth, right?  A bullet took him out of here.  And before his body was cold, they had, they flew a plane to pick LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and swore him in.  So you know expendability, man, is always there you know so and I never thought I was special.  But and then people found that out in the ward, you know, so wasn't nobody gonna hurt me, I could leave my car parked anywhere and you know just--.
Story_ID: 485452
Speaker 1: Things are different now in pro sports.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Black athletes often live far away from the black community--
Speaker 2: Very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the community doesn't see them anymore.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what high visibility will do to you now.  You know it--and then guys, you know, they feel like you know like the guys that say, man I'm not, you know, I'm not a role model, and I understand it what they're saying because--and I always said that if you can't find a role model under your own roof, you got a problem.  And I--man, I had enough role models man I could have started an--I could have started an agency, counting my parents [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd and Theodore Lloyd] and my teachers, my coaches right down the line man you know and people in the neighborhood who cared about you, you know it's--
Speaker 1: So who was on the Syracuse [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] team and how did you all do?
Speaker 2: You mean how we do--
Speaker 1: Yeah in the league [National Basketball Association] and who was on your squad with you?
Speaker 2: Oh we played, we had a good team.  We had one main player.  We had one big name player, Dolph Schayes, but we had a supporting cast to him man that was second to none really.  We won the world's championship in 1954, '55 [1955] and it's--the thing that amazes me is that other folks were amazed at us winning.  But man, we had attitude, you know, our attitude was before we left the locker room every night to play, and defensively, we would say, you know, eighty or under, we gonna win and we held a lot of folks under eighty points so we won a lot of ballgames but what they don't understand is, it's very important, it's really, really important to know your role.  But knowing is not enough.  You got to accept your role.  My job, rebound, run the floor, and I had to guard the top scorer on every team.  And you were in for it man, look, I got a lot of rest 'cause man you chasing George Yardley and Paul Arizin and Elgin Baylor, man that's enough to run you crazy.  But somebody had to do it, and on my team, I was better equipped to do it than most of the other guys.  I mean first of all you're not gonna play Dolph, who was our top scorer, on their top scorer, you're wasting him, you know.  So I--it was a challenge to me.
Story_ID: 485453
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all won the NBA [National Basketball Association] championship in '54 [1954] or '55 [1955] you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-four, fifty-five [1954-1955] season.
Speaker 1: Fifty-four, fifty-five [1954-1955] season, okay.
Speaker 2: But you know the season prior to that was really interesting.  We had ten people.  We had one guy Billy Gabor who's an outstanding player from Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] tore his leg up so he was out for the year and we had three guys: George King got a broken wrist, Dolph [Dolph Schayes] had a broken wrist, and I had (unclear) a broken finger, and we played the Minneapolis Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers], we were in the finals with them.
Speaker 1: Was that when they had George Mikan--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: George Mikan, Jim Pollard, big guy, forget his name but he's from one of those Minnesota schools, I forget his name, Vern Mikkelsen, big dude man you know and they had fleet guards.  They had a hell of a team.  We carried them to seven games man with six healthy guys and three guys banged up.  I mean, we took 'em seven games.  We eventually lost, they just wore us down.  But I still--that season did more for me, I don't say more for me but did a lot for me as relates to us winning the next year.  Because man, I mean it was--it got down to raw courage and I, you know, I'm sure you heard this saying man of all the characteristics that you want in a person, if they don't have courage, the rest of them don't count.  I don't care, I don't care what kind of--I mean you can be the nicest guy in the world and this, that and respectable and reliable, but if you don't have some courage, courage is what allows you to practice the other characteristics you have.  Man we had some courageous people man.  That's--I think that's what fueled us.  Man, we had a lot of courage man 'cause we were small, a small town.  The townspeople were stockholders, but we just--and they, I mean they fought I mean we had--our fans were unbelievable man.  They used to choke referees and all that kind of stuff man (laughter).  It was crazy, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was crazy.
Speaker 1: So how long did you play for the Nationals [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers]?
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so that takes us to what '58 [1958] I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah in 1958.
Story_ID: 485454
Speaker 1: Okay, and well, what happened then?
Speaker 2: I got traded to Detroit Pistons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well what really happened, I asked for a trade 'cause I--you know when you--we, the year prior to that we drafted a kid from out of Grambling, Grambling College [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] named Bobby Hopkins [Bob Hopkins].  He led the nation in the scoring.  Boy, this guy, I'm telling you this guy was gonna be one of the all-time greats in this league [National Basketball Association] but during the off season he hurt his knee, which neutered him 'cause you know he lost his speed, he lost his spring and his whole game was running and leaping.  But before he got hurt, you know, I was the guy that got him ready to take my job.  I mean he was green as corn man and I just took him through all the paces, what I do, where to go, when I had to go you know.  But I knew that once he's ready, and I knew he was ready, my playing time was gonna be cut totally almost.  So I had a couple, I thought I had a couple more years left I could play so I asked to be traded.  And Paul Seymour was the coach down there.  He went to the league meetings and came back, said, you know, "You got two choices, you got Minneapolis [Minneapolis Lakers; Los Angeles Lakers] or you have Detroit."  And I thought about Minneapolis [Minnesota], I thought about all that--whoo hoo--
Speaker 1: There were about maybe three black people there then.
Speaker 2: Yeah and plus man it's cold.  Man there's all that snow and you know we used to go to Minneapolis on the train like from Chicago [Illinois], and once you hit Minnesota you're sitting there on this train and saw these ice fishermen out there.  Man, them people must be crazy man, ice fishing.  I don't wanna even go fishing when it's warm.  But they'd be out there man with them little huts and they're sitting there, but I chose Detroit, and I made a tremendous choice man because Detroit [Michigan] was one of the first places that I had ever been where black folks were doing things.  I mean really, they were on the city council and we end up with a black mayor [Coleman Young] for almost twenty years and it's just I mean your growth it was like in leaps and bounds you know, it's--your whole outlook changed because before that you know I had never been any place where a black person was in charge of anything meaningful.  You know, I mean you go to a town man that had the most black homeowners than any city in the United States.  I mean Detroit was it for me man.  I mean, if you take--I loved college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], but once you became you know just like a regular citizen with some age on you, you know it's everything looks different.  Now you know, you're married, you got a couple kids and all that stuff man, it's I mean you need to know that once your playing days are over there's something for you somewhere.
Speaker 1: So Detroit was like a mecca for black people?
Speaker 2: Well, it's no question, it's no question (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Motown was starting, getting ready to start up, auto industry--
Speaker 2: Detroit for me, I liken Detroit to when that butterfly comes out of that cocoon, I mean that's the amazing thing to a butterfly turns into--a worm turns into a butterfly you know.  But you know it's just like I came out of a cocoon man, and there's this whole different life for you, you know.  I mean it's--you can really be what you wanna be.
Story_ID: 485455
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you like the team, how did you fit into the team?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a good fit.  I mean you know if, if you're happy, I mean this is--here's a place I picked to come.  If you're happy you know, it's--and there were guys that--I had a couple of teammates that were from Syracuse [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] and Dick McGuire was there, the guy who played with the Knicks [New York Knicks] you know, who's--and I'll tell you a story about him, a standup guy you know, and I played two more years and then I retired in '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Is that where Dave DeBusschere was playing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was Dave Bing being played when you got--no he hadn't--
Speaker 2: No, Dave played for me--when I became head coach, Dave played for me.  You know, no Dave wasn't there then.  Dave didn't start, Dave was a rookie in 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I scouted him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who else was on the team then?
Speaker 2: Well we had a guy, Walter Dukes.  Walter was--played for the Globies [Harlem Globetrotters], was All-American at Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey], and a big guy named Phil Jordon from Utah.  Or California, I think Phil was from.  We had George Yardley.  I was glad, I was glad to be playing with George instead of trying to chase him.  Shellie McMillon played with us.  We drafted Shellie.  We drafted another guy out of Bradley [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois], a boy named Barney Cable.  Barney Cable was a hell of a player man.  But Barney was, I mean, you know he wasn't really into it.  I mean, this guy was 6'9" man, about 225 [pounds].  He could run and shoot but he just, he's a guy that didn't care if he--if he stopped playing tomorrow, he wouldn't care you know.  And it was not an uncaring attitude, he just--there are guys like that, it's not that important to them you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The money and the notoriety, you know, he'd just as soon be out hunting, but it took its toll on him and he didn't last that long you know.  But Detroit [Detroit Pistons] was a great place, and we had a tremendous owner.  Here's a guy, Fred Zollner, was the owner.  In '60 [1960] we drafted a kid named Bailey Howell out of Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi], a tremendous player.  Man I--so you know it's getting close to time to go, so now I got Bailey ready, and Bailey was my assignment, well not my assignment but I just took it upon myself, he's gonna play for you, you wanna be ready you know.  So Dick said to me, Dick McGuire is now the coach.  He said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd], I need an assistant coach."  I said--he said, you know, "It's your job if you want it."  Now think about this now.  We are ten years removed from the first player playing.  And here's a guy, here's a white dude out of New York [New York] who has offered me the assistant coach's job.  When I say offer, I mean he was telling me it's yours.  So I say to Dick, you know your ego, every now and then you know you sometimes you have to be ready to hang up your ego.  At thirty-two I said nah, I can play a couple more years maybe you know.  But then I start thinking, you know, well this is a hell of a opportunity.  But still I said, let me go through training camp and exhibition season and I'll let you know.  So luckily for me, the second, about the second or third game, we played the Philadelphia Warriors [Golden State Warriors] and Wilt [Wilt Chamberlain] was a rookie.  I saw Wilt for the first time, then I saw him play, I said, "Oh it's time to go home."  He did me a favor man.  Wilt for me--here I am with a hand wringing, and you know worried about this decision, man he took all that and made it a no brainer.  I saw him and I said, "Man you got an assistant coach, man."  But, and then I guess let's see for eight years I was assistant coach and head scout for the Pistons.
Speaker 1: That's through 1968 or--
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] right.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960] to '68 [1968] 'cause I retired in '60 [1960] and I spent eight years with the organization.  But, and we were doing well man.  When Dick was coaching because Dick you know between he and I, we'd get together man we had plans and stuff, you know, and the guys played well for Dick because he was a likable guy, he was a player's coach, no question.  But you know he had a couple of kids and his wife you know she's back in New York with the kids, and she wanted him to come back and work for the Knicks and be at home.  So he, he quit.  That's when I, that's--things started going poorly man because when he left, everything changed.
Story_ID: 485456
Speaker 1: Now is that when Dave DeBusschere took--became--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the player-coach [for the Detroit Pistons]?
Speaker 2: Player-coach, man.  You know, I told my--now I told my general manager I said, "Look man," I said--now I talked, I told Dave first.  I said, "Dave you don't wanna do this man."  I said, "Now you're one of my best players.  Now we can't afford to burden you, man, with this coaching thing because we need you as a player but this thing is gonna burden you some man, I mean you gonna be split right down the middle."  And then I told the general manager, I said, look, man now they wanna think that I'm upset because I didn't get the job, I said no, I said, "I recommended a Syracuse [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] teammate, they wouldn't take him."  I said, "This is not gonna work."  I said--I told him what to do.  I'm gonna bust my hump because I like Dave.  I said, "I'm gonna try to help him make this thing work, but with him being in charge it's not gonna work man because you can't divide, we need him, we need every ounce he has as a player and you can't split that down the middle."
Speaker 1: Now DeBusschere was a hard playing--
Speaker 2: Oh he's tough--
Speaker 1: --fellow, he's, you know (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) man he's a tough guy but that's too much for him.  Plus he's just learning his trade.  He's twenty-four years old.  They tried it, man.  It was disastrous.  It was disastrous.  Then we started bringing in coaches.  You know, when you--any time if you see an organization, any kind of organization that's constantly losing you don't have to look no further than the front office to see where the problems are.  I mean, you know we hire ex-sports announcers to be our general manager.  It's a losing proposition, you know.  But I tell you man, and then they start--sometimes folk feel threatened when new coaches come in and they start trading people who are visible.  We traded away a lot of talent, man.  We traded Bailey Howell, Don Ohl, we traded Ray Scott, it's unbelievable.  And we look up, you know you--every year you're looking up from the cellar, it's something man.
Speaker 1: So, so you kind of disappointed.  When you left was it because of you were disappointed in how the team was--
Speaker 2: No when I left it was time you know.  I--you know I had given basketball all I had at that time except then I went to Chrysler Corporation [FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] and then van Breda Kolff [Butch van Breda Kolff] came in, did a good job.  But he got fed up, you know, he left.  So they--now they're looking for a coach so they--and I'm sitting out there at Chrysler Corporation and they asked me did I want to coach the team.  And of course you gonna, you know, that's been your profession all these years you wanna try it, you know.  But I found out real quick man that a long career in professional coaching wasn't, wasn't in the cards for me 'cause you know, to be successful in that arena, you know, everything has to be in place.
Story_ID: 485457
Speaker 1: I'll give you an example, when I was scouting, I was the only scout we had [for the Detroit Pistons], and the season used to end like in April then, and if you might remember the draft was the latter part of April, and they--we'd sit down, the owner [Fred Zollner], the general manager, Dick [Dick McGuire] and myself, we'd sit down, and Dick was there then, you know, and they'd say to me, "Well who would you take?"  No one ever--I guess the best job I ever had scouting because you know nobody bothered you, you made your own schedule.  All they wanted to know was, when it was time to evaluate players, you better know something about these folk.  And what I usually did was, you wanna make sure of all the preseason All-American picks, you got to see these guys because you can't take a guy on the first round that can't play.  Some guy with a lot of notoriety and he's this, he's that, you know all you wanna know is--say you look at these guys, say he's a forward, you ask yourself, is this guy better than our number nine player?  So you cannot pick a guy who cannot play.  So they asked me, they said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd], who would you take?"  This is the first year where they asked me this.  I said, "I'd take Willis Reed," and the year we drafted Willis Reed was an Olympic year.  He had a tremendous year in college, but when they had the Olympic trials, they had it at St. John's [St. John's University, Queens, New York], I'll never forget this, the worst game this kid ever played in his whole life and my coach [Charles Wolf] is sitting beside me.  And he says to me, "Is this the guy you want me to take?"  I said, "This is the guy I'm hanging my butt out there for."  I said, "Take him."  But you have to understand that the scout does not do the picking, all you do is evaluate and recommend.  They passed him up.  Now we took a player, we took a guy who could play.  We took Joe Caldwell out of Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember him.
Speaker 1: --Joe was a player, but we needed a center.  The only center we had was a kid named Reggie Harding, ex-high school kid who--every weekend you're afraid to open up a newspaper.  So you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joe Caldwell was good but he wasn't Willis, Willis Reed is in the Hall of Fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts], you know.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying, I mean we could--I mean Joe would have helped us but he's not gonna lead you any place.  I mean he could lead you if you got the other, other pieces in place.  We passed up on him.  Now we come back again, next year, next couple years, who would you take?  I said, "I'd take Earl Monroe."  And they immediately start giving me all the reasons why we ought to not take him.  I said, "Man I'm the only person in this organization that's seen this man play."  Now, and I understand, see they're PR [public relations] conscious.  Here's a guy, Jimmy Walker, Jimmy Walker is a player man, Jimmy could play.  But I said, all right, all I'm telling you is now--and admittedly Jimmy played for Providence [Providence College, Providence, Rhode Island].  They won the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] that year.  He had fifty points in the finals, so when you scored fifty points in the NIT finals in New York [New York], man I mean you're on top of the basketball world.  I say, I said, "Look I saw Jimmy play, he's a hell of a player," I said, "but I'm telling you who I would take."  "Well he plays with a small black school and the competition is not as keen."  I said, "Man, I said I'm telling you."  I said, "Listen to me for once."  I said, "I'm telling you this," I said, "not only can he play," I said, "man he has charisma exuding."  I said, "Man the people in Detroit [Michigan], he would have them eating out of his hands man."  I said, "Trust me."  They went the other way, you know.  And the two guys we passed up, when they picked the top fifty players in the league [National Basketball Association] ever, there they are.
Story_ID: 485458
Speaker 1: But I, you know, I was, you know--I'm always loyal.  I mean if you don't, if you think you can't be loyal to somebody you don't work for them.  And to show you the kind of guy I worked for, Mr. Zollner [Fred Zollner], when I took the head coach's job [for the Detroit Pistons], I said, "I need an assistant coach."  Now this is 1970, '71 [1971].  He says "Who do you want?"  I said, "I want Ray Scott."  Do you know in 1971 here's a pro team in the NBA [National Basketball Association] got two black coaches?  It's unheard of man.  But that's the kind of man I worked for.
Speaker 2: So he was you know well, he had his pluses and minuses.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but he was a decent person man.  You know and he called me in one day--when you go and the owners send for you, you know, I put on my Sunday meeting clothes, go down to the hotel, go to this suite, and I said, "Yes sir."  "Sit down Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd]," you know and I sat down, he sat down.  "We're thinking about drafting Reggie Harding."  Reggie Harding is a high school kid out of Eastern High School [Martin Luther King, Jr. Senior High School] in Detroit [Michigan].  And then he said, "What do you think about that?"  So I hedge a little bit because you know my attitude is, I don't wanna be the guy that's gonna deprive this guy of making a living, so they have to find out what his problems are.  But when a man sat me down and said, "Look I'll pay you for your opinion."  I sat straight up.  Now we--I said, "Look, I wouldn't touch him with a forty-foot pole."  He said, "Why wouldn't you touch him with a forty-foot pole?"  I said, "The kid is not real bright, and I'm being kind."  I'm not--you know I'm being real kind when I say that.  I say, "And he has hoodlum tendencies."  That's a bad combination for a professional athlete or for a professional organization.  But they took him anyhow.  And if you know anything about Reggie, you know I mean Reggie was a guy--and I used to tell his teammates, I'd say, "Look man when he talks about wanting to be one of them guys on the street that got folks working for him, he is not joking man, he's serious."  I say, "And he's the kind of guy if that happens for him he had more respect for a guy that hustles than a guy that works hard for his money."  So yeah so don't take it lightly when he tells you that 'cause he's serious man.  And he lives in the--you know we had a guy I can't call the guy's name because the guy was in illicit business, he's a basketball fan, season ticket holder, everything.  So he comes to me and says, "Why is he living in this hotel?"  Here's a hotel where all the number writers and the pimps have their girlfriends in this hotel, you know, he said, "Why is he living there?"  I said, "Well, only thing I can guess is that that's his comfort zone."  And Reggie had some potential.  He's a big 7' kid, man.  He could run, he could play, man, but he wanted--you know basketball was his avocation.  He aspired another vocation, which was detrimental to him.
Story_ID: 485459
Speaker 1: Did you have a hand in drafting Dave Bing or Bob Lanier?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, you know I felt good about that.  I scouted Dave, and it's funny, Dave is a funny story, not a funny story, but I scouted Dave, and at the time I scouted him, Cazzie Russell was the big man on campus at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  So here we go again.  Who would you take?  I said, I mentioned Dave Bing, and see Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] was not enjoying the notoriety at the time that they enjoy now.  But this kid--
Speaker 1: Not for basketball?
Speaker 2: --yeah basketball.  Football 'cause Jim Brown was the thing, and what's what's the boy that died from--
Speaker 1: Ernie Davis.
Speaker 2: Ernie Davis.  So I say, "All right, here's a guy I'd take."  "What?"  You know, Cazzie Russell, I said, "Man look, I love Cazzie man.  I mean hardworking guy, man," I said, "but for our purposes you know I'm not pitting one against the other, I'm saying for what we need from a backcourt man this guy fits the bill better, more speed, you know.  I think he's a better ball handler, great legs.  I mean this guy can flat out play."  So as luck would have it, we got a break.  We also got a break because had we gotten Cazzie, we'd have gotten a good player too.  The Knicks [New York Knicks] and the Pistons [Detroit Pistons] tied.  Their record was exactly the same, so they flipped the coin to see who gonna draft first, and we lost the coin flip.  Oh man, you know, and all the Michigan people man they were all--they were crying and moaning and bemoaning man.  So I told one of the writers, I said, "Look man," I said, you know, and I told some folks in the organization, I said, "It's gonna be all right."  I said, "We're gonna take a PR [public relations] hit, but you know the great common denominator in basketball is one thing, the basketball.  The basketball is not prejudiced, it does not know whose hands are gonna handle it, and when you toss the ball up, when you line up the scrimmage to play in practice or whatever, when you toss the ball up, the playing field is level."  That's--I mean even when I was in training camp you know back in the day in 1950 when the black and white thing was prevalent, but when they threw the ball up, the scrimmage, you know the playing field was leveled.  So now I mean you know it turned out we were lucky to get Dave.  I said, "We're lucky to get him."  Because if we had won the coin toss we were gonna take Cazzie.  I mean you wouldn't have been hurt having him, but this other kid, you know, he brought, I think he brought more tools to the table.
Story_ID: 485460
Speaker 1: I had asked you about Bob Lanier too.
Speaker 2: Yeah we scouted Bob and, if you recall in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] playoffs, you know Chris Ford who was a teammate, who was gonna be a teammate of his, fell on his knee and had to get an operation.  But you know we got a good report from the doctors about recovery.  You know it wasn't as bad as it seemed, but the problem was Bob was always heavy man, and he told me one time, I think Bob's dad [Robert Lanier, Sr.] had a lot of influence on him, you know.  And he had convinced Bob that he plays better heavy.  I said, man how?  You know just like I heard Chris Rock today talking about saying, what church you go to?  He said, "I go to the church of common sense."  I mean, common sense dictates that if you got a bad knee, the less weight you gonna put on it man, the better off you are.  I mean that's common sense 100, man.  That's remedial common sense, you know.  But finally we got him you know to a point where we said, "Hey man, you gonna jeopardize your career man and if you don't lose some weight," and you tell him with a straight face, and you tell the doctors who examine him man, you tell him, you let him know that his leg is in harm's way with all that pounding on it from with the weight you have.
Speaker 1: Now was that--was his draft another decision of management because it would seem like you would go after a more lively kind of a center, I mean.
Speaker 2: Well Bob, Bob was a--no you had to take Bob--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --man when you saw him shoot the basketball man, I mean a guy that big--
Speaker 1: He had nice touch, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and plus, and plus when he down deep man, he took up a whole lot of space.  But Bob was a good player, man.  Bob was a great player, and they did him a disservice man when they didn't put him in the top fifty players.  I couldn't imagine fifty people in that league [National Basketball Association] playing better than him.  It's hard to imagine, man.  But you know the politics are the thing and you know what team's gonna get the most people in.  Who would you say the teams were?
Speaker 1: You have New York [New York Knicks], Boston [Boston Celtics]--
Speaker 2: And L.A. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Los Angeles [Los Angeles Lakers], yeah.
Speaker 2: That's who gets the most people in.
Story_ID: 485461
Speaker 1: So you left after the '68 [1968] season--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at this time and went to--
Speaker 2: Chrysler Corporation [FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].
Speaker 1: --Chrysler Corporation, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  But I was at Chrysler for what--let me see '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970] about three or four years, and then I got the call to coach [for the Detroit Pistons].
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Disastrous.  In my first year, well no, no I had to finish the season, and that was kind of disastrous really.
Speaker 1: This is in the--what season is this?  Is the--
Speaker 2: This is '70-'71 [1970-1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I believe that's the year, maybe it was the next year.  Dave [Dave Bing] had got a detached retina and he was out for thirty-five games, man.  I said, now somebody's telling me something, you know.  When you lose him for thirty-five games, somebody better be telling you something.  But it's funny, you know I mean he couldn't touch a ball for thirty-five games.  So when he came back, his first game back I started him.  Sportswriter said to me, "Why would you start him?"  I said, "Man I've been waiting for him for thirty-five games, I mean how do you expect me to get him ready?"  And I said, "You get him ready by you starting him and you tell him you play as hard as you can as long as you can.  And I'm taking you out.  And when you're rested, you go back, you gonna do the same thing again."  After about five or six games of that, he's gonna be ready.  So you know, you might lose two of those five games or something but to get something you got to give up something.  You don't wanna lose with you using him sparingly because he's on the bench, you want him to play himself into shape.  And that's what he did, you know.  But we just, it was disastrous.  I mean it's and I tell myself, you know I don't make any excuses but it's, it was obviously not in the cards for me to have a long coaching career in the NBA [National Basketball Association], which might be you know I just let myself know that the Lord has some other plans for me.
Speaker 1: Now you were one of the--second or third black coach 'cause Bill Russell was--
Speaker 2: Bill Russell was first and I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First as player-coach of the Celtics [Boston Celtics].
Speaker 2: I was the first black bench coach, then you had Al Attles and then what's the boy's name, K.C. Jones, you know.  But it wasn't in the cards, you know, and it's--stuff happens.  And you know when you sign a pro contract, you also sign your termination papers, and when it's time, you know they just, they leave the date empty right.  So they get your termination papers and just put the date in it.
Speaker 1: So that's actually how they do it?  You sign (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that's a joke you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But it is in most pro cases you're hired to be fired, unless you got a situation like the guy at--guy who coaches the, not the Suns [Phoenix Suns] but--
Speaker 1: Utah Jazz?  Jerry [Jerry Sloan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Utah and yeah Jerry, and the guy who coaches the San Antonio Spurs--
Speaker 1: Popovich [Gregg Popovich].
Speaker 2: Yeah you know, and guys like Red Auerbach, and I mean guys you know it's, it's a little different now you now.
Speaker 1: Not even Phil Jackson could win and keep a job.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But it's--but those guys are favorable coaches though, you know they've done a good job for a lot of years you know, and I admire 'em man because I--you know your stomach man it tears you to pieces man, and I'm sure the coaches now it's a lot more than before because now you got all these guys making all this money, and you know, they--a lot more temptations available to 'em you know.
Story_ID: 485462
Speaker 1: Is it a lot tougher to coach than it is to play?
Speaker 2: Of course.  I mean when you're playing, all you--the only person you got to get ready is yourself.  When you're coaching, you got twelve different personalities you got to deal with and they're all looking at you.  You know like, like I had one guy that said to me, "Well Dave Bing is your pet."  I said, "That's true."  We all have pets.  I said, "But he's my pet for obvious reasons.  I mean he didn't ask me, he didn't ask to be my pet."  Yeah, he's you know, I wouldn't call him my pet but he's my favorite.  I said, "Now if you got a problem with that and you want to be one of my favorites, just emulate him."  I said, "The guy, you know I mean the guy is the first guy at practice every day, the last one to leave, works hard man look at his conditioning and look at yours."  I said, "Man, he looks like a race horse man ready, ready to rumble man.  You look like a Clydesdale you know," so that--unbeknownst to him he's my pet.  I would never tell him, you know, you're my favorite, I don't do that.  But any situation you have you know there's always, if you got more than ten, if you got more than two people working for you, there's a good chance one of those folks--you know you have people working for you where one guy makes a mistake, you say, "Well man, this just part of the fabric, you know, that people make mistakes."  You've got another guy make a mistake, he's gone.  And that's just life in the big city.  That's human nature really.  And like people say, right, I've had people tell me, well I treat all my children the same. I said nah I don't believe that.  They're not gonna allow you to do that.  You got one kid does everything you says to do, and you got another kid tells you, "Screw you."  Now, who you gonna treat the best?  You know, you, I mean people are totally different.  It's hard, like when you're coaching, well you know you got some guys that you got to stroke 'em but you don't--you stroke them privately.  I mean you can't be stroking one guy here, and then when another guy does the same thing and you gonna jump all over him you know.  But you know, it's, stimuli is different for different people.  Some guys, man you know you can kick 'em in the butt and they play harder for you.  And you get some guys you kick 'em in the butt man, they fold up and die on you.  So you have to know all these kinds of things and that's why coaching is much harder than playing, much, you know it's--being a player is not complex.  You know what you have to do to get yourself ready to play, but now you got to get twelve people ready to play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you coach [for the Detroit Pistons]?
Speaker 2: I coached a whole year.  I coached half of a season, and then my first seven games we lost, we lost five games in our first seven, and you know, and the owner's [Fred Zollner] smart, they know you understand that you need to--if that's the trend, you want to put a stop to it as quick as you possibly can.  And it's convenient to change coaches.  'Cause the current players you have are currently the best you can have, and you haven't even had a chance to even think about trading anybody.  So it's the ideal change and it happens all the time, you just fire the coach.
Speaker 1: Okay so you played up until you--you coached until 1972 I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Early in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like, it sounds a lot like what happened to Bill Cartwright in Chicago [Chicago Bulls], he came in and he coached at the tail end of another person's year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --and then the first part of next year, they're losing--
Speaker 2: He's gone.
Speaker 1: --he's gone.
Speaker 2: But it happens, you know, and getting fired coaching a professional team is not like getting fired from a regular job.  I mean a regular job when they fire you man, you've been messing up.  But, and I told my guys, I said man you know what, y'all gonna get me fired.  I don't know when, but it's in the wind, I can feel it you know.  Because you know I mean you been in, you been in this racket for ten, twelve years you know how it works.
Speaker 1: Now did you pay attention to sportswriters, you know?  What did they say, you know?
Speaker 2: Nah you know they you know most--I don't say most, but there's a lot of sportswriters man, if you painted Wilt Chamberlain gold and put him on a desk, they wouldn't recognize him as a basketball player.  So you can.  And I found out that I had a decent relationship with the press because I was honest with them.  If you are honest with them man, they're gonna say what's really happening, and that's what I expect from them you know.  But they don't, they don't stomp all over you man if you've been honest with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But man if you've been anything less than honest with them, they ought to stomp on you.
Story_ID: 485463
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you left the Pistons [Detroit Pistons] in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: No, you were saying the coach--the coaching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I went back to Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But now here you are, you're going to a major corporation.  Now you think about it now, I went back in '73 [1973], and there was something catastrophic in this country in '74 [1974] that put us on our heels.
Speaker 1: You're talking about the Watergate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The oil embargo.
Speaker 1: The oil, okay.
Speaker 2: And you're working for an automobile company and you're over budget.  So when it's time to cut back the over budget folks are the first to go.  So I just got caught up in a situation where you know, if it weren't for the oil embargo, I probably would have retired from Chrysler.
Speaker 1: What did they call it, gas crisis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --of '73 [1973], yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean in '74 [1974] man it really peaked, it was like ooh, man, they were laying folks off so fast in Detroit [Michigan] it was unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I had the best job, take a look at that piece I gave you, probably one of the best jobs I had in my whole life, I was a civilian deputy chief in the Detroit Police Department and I was in charge of the Police Athletic League, which was, I mean, there's a case where what was good about that job is that every day you went to work, you knew you were helping somebody.  That's a good feeling man.  It's a good feeling.  And like I say, it gets no better than that.  And not unlike my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd] you know, she had an affinity for young folks so if you ever need me to do anything for you just say for example you, you say, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] look, I got some kids up here in Chicago [Illinois], you know if I bring you up would you come up and see what you can do for them?"  You know, you got a good shot at getting a yes.  But old folks, man, if the lord can't help you, there ain't nothing I can do.  That's a terrible thing to say but it's true.  If you're set in your ways man, what can I do for you?  But young kids are still impressionable.
Speaker 1: Okay, so police athletically work with youth all over the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah, man, we had a tremendous program man.  We had good guys.  We had uniformed cops working who were handpicked, they were dedicated and you know sports were a very intricate part of their lives, and they understood it and understood what it needed.  What you need to do 'cause you know it's amazing how many times young folks, they'll call you names, crying for help.  But, it's incumbent upon you to be able to discern that this kid is not calling you a name, he's asking you for help.  If you can't do that, you shouldn't be around kids.  He called me a name.  Are you really crazy, it's a cry for help sometimes, you know.  And that's the only way they can get your attention, but you have to be able to understand, I mean you got to figure those kind of things out when you deal with young folks.
Speaker 1: Okay you seem to have a background that prepared you well for that job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know it's the one thing about young people, if you're honest with them and you display some kind of where you have a sense of being fair, you do all you--you do well with young folks.
Story_ID: 485464
Speaker 1: You worked for the Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District] too, Detroit [Michigan] board of education and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Young kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was an administrator in the program with the Job Training Partnership Act [Job Training Partnership Act of 1982], JTPA, and what we did, we took kids from--inner city kids, well they're all inner city kids because the system is in this city, but we gave 'em employability skills training.  And what we did, we had a cadre of people who identified.  Now we didn't find jobs for them.  We found openings and based on the training they got from us, they had to go out and sell themselves.  Heck of a job man.  That's kind of like the school thing.  You--every day that you went to work, you knew you were helping folks.  So we had a classroom situation where you taught them everything, you taught them how--like applications.  Like I used to ask a group--I'd walk in you know, and just, can I speak to your kids and ask them questions?  And I ask them, I said, you know, "Is an application, is that a tool for getting people in?  Or is it a tool for keeping people out?"  "No, it's a tool to get folks in."  I said nah, I said, "Let me ask you a question.  You got one job, you got one job available and you get a hundred applicants, how do you go about you know weeding people out?"  I said, "The first thing you do is you get every application, and anybody who couldn't follow instructions, you're dead in the water," and I said, "Think about this, what does every application you've ever seen, what does the first line read?"  They appeal to you to do something.  They say please print.  If you didn't print it, you dead.  I mean let me tell you, the first part of a job search is application.  You have flunked the first part up, the first line, they appeal to you.  Please sign first name, last name, middle initial, and you cursive, you gone.  Now, now you lost half--you lost fifty right there.  And the sad part about it is, the saddest part about that process is the drug test.  You know, a lot of kids are eligible to work but I said, man, and when I say drugs, I mean they're not, most of them are not taking hard drugs at this time.  I said, "Man marijuana, I don't care what you say about it, as long as people say it's against the law, don't fool with it."
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are lots of grown people in cities now that can't get a job because they can't pass that test.
Speaker 2: You can't pass, I mean you can't pass the test.  I said, "You might be the best person for the job, but you can't, you don't have a chance.  You don't have a shot at it because you can't pass the drug test."  And then you get the kids--remember during the stretch where a lot of college grads or engineers couldn't get jobs?  They said, "Man the college degree don't mean nothing." I said, "Well, let's look at this way," now I'm the common sense person, you know.  I said, "Supposing a job is posted and one of the prerequisites for the job is a college degree?  You might be the best person for the job, but you won't get an interview because of the prerequisites."  They you know--so obviously you know it's strange about college degrees man, I said--you can almost tell, you can look at folks and tell who has one and who doesn't, explain that to me?  I said, "Man you would be better off if you just walked around a college campus for four years.  You'd be better off for not being there."  You know, but they listen to you man.  You know when people tell me kids don't wanna work.  I said, "Man, we had kids on a daily basis."
Story_ID: 485465
Speaker 1: Like I had a kid--one kid, young man, handsome, that age, had earrings and stuff you know so I pulled him aside, I said, "John, you know, John," I said, now I said, "next week man you're going out to interview for this job."  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "You ready?"  He said, "I'm ready."  I said, "Let me help you get more ready."  I said, "Just practice a little bit this week, taking off your earrings, so you get kind of used to not wearing them because you do not want to wear those earrings to a job interview."  So he bristled.  He said to me, "You know man, do you know this tradition got started?"  I said, "I have a general idea how it started, but I also think you want to tell me."  African kings wore earrings.  Now you don't want to get in no war of words with him so I said, "Look, there's a multitude of differences between you and the African king.  But just for our argument's sake let's try, let's do one."  He said okay.  I said, "Is the African king job hunting?"  Now he got to laugh himself.  No.  I said, "Man, African king can wear earring on his buttocks and start a new trend."  I said, "He's the guy who decides who works and who doesn't work. He doesn't need a job."  I said, "Man, you got to impress somebody man," and I'm telling you this, I know, I work for a major corporation.  Major corporations do not put their best people in personnel.  The best people go where?  They go to manufacturing and sales.  That's the bread and butter of most companies.  So personnel people are angry all the time man so don't go in there, don't go in there because as far as you're concerned, that personnel guy is the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan].  If you don't get by him, that's as far as you gonna get.  I said, "So now go up," now our office was like two blocks from the General Motors building [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].  I said, "I want you to go up there and I want you to stand up there between 11:30 and 2:00.  Most of the people in that building would have gone to lunch and come back."  I said, "The men, tell me how they look?"  Had suits and ties.  I said, "What color were most of the suits?"  Blue.  "What color are most of the shirts?"  White.  "What color are most of the ties?"  Burgundy.   It's a uniform.
Speaker 2: That's unlike most of Detroit [Michigan], I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: How the brothers dress in Detroit.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying.  I say now if you want this job, if you really want it, when you go up there to interview, wear a blue blazer, some grey pants or either a blue suit, white shirt, burgundy tie and some wingtip shoes, and the job's gonna be yours.  How do you know that?  I said, "You're gonna be a mirror image."  That's how he's gonna be dressed.  If he sees you looking like him, he's thoroughly impressed, the job is yours.  But don't go up there man, you know, with your shirttail hanging out you know, pants hanging down.  Man no you know, if you want--if you don't want the job do that.  I said, "Now I get paid to help you man, that's why I'm here."  I said, "You go up there with no earrings, and you look like a nice young man, and what you do is, the company you gonna go to interview, you read up on 'em and you go to interview them.  That's impressive man.  I mean the fact that you took the time to find out what they do, who they do it for, how much they do it, they're impressed."  Man, but don't go in there talking about, duh, and the man shakes your hand, you're looking down at the floor.  Man, you look him in the eye, and give him a crisp handshake and tell him why he ought to hire you.  But they, they listen, you know.  Once they think you are being on the square with them, they listen to you.
Story_ID: 485466
Speaker 1: Did you retire from that job with the board, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I retired from that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Then you also--later on you worked for the last job you had I guess, or one of the last jobs was working for Bing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Dave Bing's--
Speaker 2: Well I retired and meanwhile Dave is, I mean he's doing so well man he went from two companies to five companies, five different companies (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had a steel company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, steel and auto parts, that kind of stuff you know.  And he called me, he said, "Man let's have lunch."  We had a good relationship.  I mean Dave is, to know him is to love this guy, man.
Speaker 1: Now you're getting too smart.  You still have two minutes now.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  He called me and said, "Let's have lunch," so in essence he told me, he said--look in Detroit [Michigan] people know Dave so well and so long, they think they can call his office and talk to him.  I said, "Man, Dave had the same kind of problems that the guy from General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] has."  So he had to have somebody to weed out his calls also.  So we sit down and he said, "What would it take to get you man?"  I said, well what--you know, I said, "Dave, look," I said, "I have implicit faith in you," I said, "I think that whatever you want me to do for you or you would take good care of me, I know that."  And I said, "I will ask for one thing."  I said, "Do me an automobile, just lease me a car and then you decide what you wanna pay me in addition to that."  And we cut a--you know I mean you know it's a love affair between he and I man.  You know he's gonna take care of me.
Story_ID: 485467
Speaker 1: We were talking about Dave Bing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, yeah, so what did you do for Dave Bing's?
Speaker 1: I coordinated his community relations and that's--I didn't even consider that a job man, it's just, you know, just to do something to help him is enough for me really.
Speaker 2: So did you like, coordinate special projects with the community, you know, that he--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well one of his pet projects was--his interest lies in middle schools because he thinks that's a crucial time for kids--which it is, you know.  Elementary school is just as because you lose, you lose kids, kids will go to an elementary school, it's time to go to middle school if they're not ready, you're gonna lose 'em in middle school.  So what we did, he said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] look, this is your program.  You handle the way you want to handle it."  And and my experience in the school is that when you go, when you--you don't pick a school, you pick a principal.  Because if the principal is not interested in it, it's never gonna work.  So I know all the principals, I said I'll go, I go to my man and do you know, we sit down and talk.  And I told him what we wanna do.  We want to identify fifty kids because you can't, you can't take a whole school, unless you're Bob Gates [sic.] or somebody, and get anything done, but you can identify fifty kids and you can do something with them.  So we identify fifty kids and I said, "We don't want all A students.  We want the whole spectrum."  And what we would do is, we did, we chose activities that the board no longer took, you know, they didn't do it any longer because money is--and to the day I don't understand, I can't understand when they have money problems how they cut out field trips.  That's amazing.
Story_ID: 485468
Speaker 1: So what we did, once a month, we had activities for them, and we used to take 'em on a field trip.  We took 'em to the UD [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] basketball game, we took 'em to Greenfield Village [Dearborn, Michigan], which is amazing.  So we started in January, so you had January, February, March, April, May and June, and in June that's the last activity.  We tell them, we say, look, dress like you're going to church, and we go into a five-star restaurant, and we take 'em right to the restaurant and of course what they would do is that many people, they would give us a private room, but they ordered from the menu and the whole ball of wax, and I used to tease 'em, I said, "You know what?"  I said, "Man I've been with y'all now for five months, boy y'all clean up real good."  I said, "Boy all y'all look a whole lot better when y'all wash your face and comb your hair."  And they laughed and then we had a lot of fun.  I enjoyed that more than they did.  I had a good time with that, you know 'cause you see some kids the first time you're out with them they're looking at you with a kind of jaundiced eye to see, can this guy be trusted?  Is he potentially one of us, you know, and by the time you do the third one, they totally relax around you man.  And we would take 'em places, and like if we went to a basketball game, we just--everybody got a five dollar bill to go get a hot dog and at the end of the year man, they were crying.  We wanna do this again next year.  I said, "Nah well, you know, we got to get fifty new people next year.  We can't, you know."  But some of the things I did for him, you know, we, like he gave turkeys and stuff for Christmas and Thanksgiving.  When he gave turkeys or hams you know if there was a lot left, then we would identify, I'd go up to the middle school, and ask them to identify--say we got twenty turkeys.  I said I need twenty families, give me twenty families.  I say we got a turkey, and we'll go to the store and get all the fixings, you know, for a Thanksgiving dinner and we delivered it to folks in the neighborhood.  Just knock on the door you know.  But he--the first thing we would have a reception for the families, the parents of the kids 'cause they need to know what you doing with the kids, you know.  And parents are very skeptical, some of them, depending on you know their status and all that kind of stuff you know.  So the lady asked me, said, "What are you getting out of this?  What is Dave Bing's company [Bing Group, Detroit, Michigan] getting out of this?"  I said, "Ma'am I tell you what, this is a guy that Detroit's [Detroit, Michigan] been very, very, very good to, and all he's trying to do is cast some bread back on the waters.  You know he wants--this town has helped him so he wants to help some kids."  I said, "It's not gonna," I said, "it's not gonna cost you a cent.  All we want from you, as I said, you'll get a letter from me personally letting you know what the activity is, what time it is, and all we want from you is to bring your kid to the school, and you know what time they gonna be back and you be there to pick 'em up.  That's all you got to do."  I said, "And we'll be kind to your kids.  That's all we want from you is just to be around to pick 'em up 'cause we don't wanna, you know we don't wanna drop a kid off at the school and nobody picks 'em up and somebody snatches them, you know, that's a problem.  So we expect you when that bus leaves, whatever the activity is, we give you ample time to be there to pick your kid up.  And we expect you to be there."  I mean that's part of the contract.  But that's some of the things we did.  You know it's--but working for this guy, man, working with Dave, you know it wasn't no work involved.  You know, it's just a love affair man, you know.
Story_ID: 485469
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  You know, that's a tough question.  That's a question that you might need to sleep on you know and I'll call you next week and tell you, but you know life has been so good to me man.  I can't--you know, even some of the things that didn't go the way you wanted to go, but at the end of the day, you know, something happens to offset that and I've always believed man that if there's such a thing as God and angels man, my whole lifetime a whole bunch of folks were missing theirs because I had a whole bunch of them.  So I might have used up one of yours or one of Matt's [Matthew Hickey] but it's just--let's put it this way, a young black kid born in Virginia, and I think I mentioned this earlier, you know in 1928 I mean your prospects were slim and none.  I mean for me man, a young black kid out of segregated Virginia man, to experience what I've experienced, is just, it's unbelievable man.  And that's why in my acceptance speech at the Hall of Fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts] man, I called it, I said, "You know I've had people say I had a good run, you know."  I said, "Man I had an incredible journey.  I really have.  You know every, every stop I've made there's been somebody there that genuinely cared about me."
Speaker 1: Now what year was it that you were inducted into the Hall of Fame?
Speaker 2: Two, oh, o' three [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it's--I give you an example.  Here I am and this is my community, when I come back from the Hall of Fame, without my knowledge my wife [Charlita Lloyd] is part of it, my friends are part of it, they had a parade for me man to go through the complex.  You know, they tricked me man, you know the limousine picked me up at the airport.  I said, "What is all this?"  Well you know, me being kind of dumb you know I'm kind of slow to catch on to what's going on.  But got to the complex where you turned off, where McDonald's was, there's two cop cars there waiting.  I don't get it yet.  One car pulls out in front of us, one's behind us.  No sirens or nothing, nothing blaring and then we got into the complex, you know, to the recreation center, there it was man, all these people there you know.  It was kind of heart wrenching man, you know.  'Cause that's something that if nobody did it, nobody would be criticized.  So it was touching, man.  You know it's like I say man, ain't nothing like--but if you never had nobody love you, you're hollow, man.
Story_ID: 485470
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well you know it's--we're kind of divided.  One of my hopes is that, you know, we tend to be mostly the have nots.  Some--you have to do something about that, you know.  Like last night, you know, I was talking about my career and you get caught up in the moment.  I said, "I watch Lou Dobbs every day, and one that's his number one mantra is assault on the middle class."  You ever watch CNN?  Every--he'll mention that once, at least once, the middle class, the middle class.  I said, "All I wanna know is who speaks for the poor folks in this country."  I say I, I get an answer.  You know the people who supposed to speak for me don't.  I said you know it's a sad commentary man because there's no question in my mind.  I've been abroad.  This is the greatest country in the world to live in if--don't be poor and don't be old and poor.  But can you imagine man, remember the episode where little old ladies were getting on buses going to Canada to buy affordable drugs and we threatened to arrest them.  That's unheard of, man.  I mean you know it's, and a country is judged, they're truly judged by how we treat our less fortunate, and anybody who lives in this country knows that we get bad marks in that area.  If you don't believe it just go back and watch the films about Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  I mean that, that's a sad day.
Story_ID: 485471
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think just being a decent human being.  I think that's, I think that's the way most people would like to be remembered.  Oh you know all the awards are nice, but if you're a horse's patoot, don't nobody care about you, awards and all.  Now I'd like to think that I've been a decent human being, you know.  I'll share this with you, it's about six, six or seven years ago Alexandria [Virginia] had a day for me, which is monumental, and my wife [Charlita Lloyd], like I said before, she's a saint of voice, she really is.  Now here is the situation.  The festivities, the festivities are gonna be at halftime of a basketball game at T.C. Williams [T.C. Williams High School, Alexandria, Virginia].  And if you remember, T.C. Williams is the school that the guy coached in in 'Remember the Titans.'  Well the word with me was that T.C. Williams was the superintendent of schools when I was in high school [Parker-Gray High School, Alexandria, Virginia], and he was much less than a standup guy as it came to race relations.  I mean race relations with him was non-existent.  So, I thought I had some misgivings about going to celebrate in his school.  Now like I said, my wife, the girl is sharp man, she said to me, "If that's how you--if you feel that strongly about it, don't go."  And then she said, however, now we know what that means right?  The first statement meant nothing.  The real deal is gonna come, right.  She said, "Well, you know if you feel that strongly about it, in soft major, don't go.  But do know if you don't go, you know you're gonna disappoint a lot of people."  She says, "A lot of folks in that town that love you, boy, and if you don't go and they know you been invited and you don't come, they'll be disappointed."  So I went, you know, and one of the nicest things that ever happened to me man.  My wife and I, we was standing out in the lobby of the gym, and a little kid came to me, he said, "Mr. Lloyd [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd], the high school game is getting ready to start, they want you and your wife in your seats."  We walked into that gym, it's packed.  I mean it's packed.  This side is kind of new Alexandria, maybe great-grandkids or some folks I went to school with or something you know.  This side over here, and I looked at 'em man, there's a side and I always joke about this, I say these people here I got to treat 'em real nice 'cause they know some things about me that I don't want them to be sharing with folks.  But man, we walked in and they gave us about a two minute standing ovation.  That's a lot, that's a lot of applause.  And it just grabbed you right by the throat man, I just I mean it reduced me to tears you know 'cause I'm a slob anyhow.  Next day a young lady from Channel 8 came to interview me and she said, "You know, you don't talk a lot about yourself."  I said, "Well you know my attitude is if it's important, folks have to know about it without me telling them, right.  If they don't know about it, it's not that important."  I said, "If Sidney Poitier walks in here, they'd know who he was and how important he is."  She said, "Well of all the things that you've enjoyed in this life as it relates to rewards and plan," said, "you know, tell me the one that you appreciate the most."  And I ask, I said, "Were you at the thing last night?"  She said no.  I said, "Let me tell you what happened."  And I told her about the applause and all that stuff.  I said, "Now I know these people, and they know me.  And what they were telling me in their own way, you know, with all that applause, they're telling me that maybe, just maybe, that he has become the person that we expected him to be."  Not wanted him to be, but expected.  And that's--and I can truthfully say on that one, my favorite saying it truly gets no better than that.  When people have known you all your life and they accord you that kind of respect, it's priceless.
Story_ID: 485472
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now.  Do you have any children?  We know you're married.
Speaker 2: Three sons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kenny [Kenneth Lloyd], Kevin [Kevin Lloyd] and David [David Lloyd].  Two living in Atlanta [Georgia], one lives in Houston [Texas].  You know and they--and my wife told me today as we were filling this thing out, she said, "Boy, you got some old children."  (Laughter) I said, "Nah, they're brothers.  I got three baby brothers now."  I don't have no forty-six year old son man, nah, nah we can't do that, you know.
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet your wife?  I mean how did you meet?
Speaker 2: Well, this is my second wife, and we lived in Detroit [Michigan].  She was married to a guy and I was married to a lady, and we both were in the throes of a divorce and you know I used to see her once a year.  We used to go to a picnic, not but in common, like my wife and I would go and she and her husband would go you know and we used to talk.  I mean, I was running the PAL [Police Athletic League] program and she had a young kid, I was keeping abreast of what's going on you know, and I'm a very respectful person, you know.  I mean look at her.  She a nice looking woman you know but she don't belong to you and you just don't get out of line with people.  But then I found out she was getting a divorce and she found out I was getting one and it's amazing how things happen.  I was doing a thing for ARA Food Services [Aramark Corporation] and they sent me down to the black educators.  You know the black educators have a convention every year, and it was in Miami, Florida.  She had a girlfriend who's a teacher who wanted to go, and Charl's [Charlita Lloyd] a teacher, and Charl said, "Nah I don't wanna go."  And this girl begged her to come, and that's when you know I saw her and she saw me and we were both available.  And I told her, I said, it's really funny you know I said, she said, well you know it's--when certain things happen call me.  I said, "I'll call you," you know.  And you know, I got my apartment and got it all together, it was kind of neat and stuff you know.  So then I said--now I almost broke my finger man trying to dial, but we, you know it's amazing man we've been honeymooning for twenty-nine years.  I mean we are truly that woman in there man, we're kindred spirits.  I mean she knows what I'm thinking half the time so I have to be cool, you know.  But we're good friends and which I think you have to be you know to sustain a marriage, you can't just do it you know on love alone.  But now that's of all the blessings I've had, she tops the list man.  I mean that's the--she's an amazing woman.  Don't get me started, you know I'll be burning up all your tapes.  Very talented, sensitive.  When you meet someone you know 'em, but I'm married to a person man, it's the best person I've ever met in my whole life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Man, for use of a better phrase, it don't get no better than that.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: And I'm serious about that man, and that's--that's the way she feels you know.  We're kindred spirits and we have a lot of things in common and most of all we respect each other.  You know, like she's a voracious reader, you know, when she reads I just get out of her way and we don't talk.  We don't have any conversation until she decides to put her book down.  And she knows I'm a jazz buff.  You know I wanna play my organ music and all that kind of jazz organs and stuff.  When I'm in here playing, she doesn't bother me.  That's respect.  I mean we all--even though you in the same house, you still need some space sometimes.  And I give her all the space she needs 'cause she--whatever she--whatever good happens to her man, she is truly deserving 'cause she's--boy I tell you the Lord truly sent her down here boy, she's an angel.
Story_ID: 485473
Speaker 1: You know, we just got back, not just got back, the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] has a tournament every year as you know, I think you wrote that down, and we go every year, and I played, now last year was the sixty-second annual tournament.  I played in the second annual, and I've seen this thing evolve.  I mean it--at the end of the day when we go to leave you know and I see what's transpiring it reduces me to tears.  I mean I don't blubber, but you know, you know how you choke up and you got to fight 'em back, you know, but when I played, we played in a place called Turner's Arena [Washington, D.C.].  This is the same place where the Lichtman Bears [Washington Bears] used to play.  And it's a fight arena man, it's--and everybody was allowed to smoke at that time.  You go in for the halftime you come back out, you can't even see hardly, and your eyes are burning smoke.  And now man this, this thing is a true extravaganza.  I mean it's--ESPN broadcasts the final game, and it's just, I mean it's just class, it just exudes class man and for me to see what this thing has evolved to is just utterly amazing.  I mean it's truly amazing man.  And I know the guy who's the commissioner, a guy named Leon Kerry man, and you know the kind of success they enjoy and somebody had to have a vision.  This guy had a vision, but now there's probably a guy that you might want to interview.
Speaker 2: Leon Kerry?
Speaker 1: Leon Kerry.  His name is, you spell it K-E-R-R-Y, and his office is there in Hampton, Virginia.  I don't have the phone number handy, but you can find him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You just, you just call, call Hampton and ask for the CIAA offices and just tell them that you interviewed me and and that I recommended him as a visionary, not a visionary but you, the visionary is the one that I informed you about that Bill Cosby project.  But he's a history maker.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You just tell Leon, you say look man I just interviewed Earl Lloyd [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] and--and he strongly suggested that you were a history maker and we should interview you.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, thank you Mr. Lloyd.
Speaker 1: Oh man, it's my pleasure man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 485474
Speaker 1: My wife [Charlita Lloyd] and myself, that's 2006.
Speaker 2: Who do we have here?
Speaker 1: That's my wife, and I, same year, 2006, she just got a different hairdo and she's toned down her dress a little.
Speaker 2: Toned down?
Speaker 1: That's myself and my youngest son in the middle, and my middle son on the left, Kevin [Kevin Lloyd].  That's Kevin, David [David Lloyd] and myself.
Speaker 2: That's my induction in the Hall of Fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts].  This is me and my three sons at the Hall of Fame, that's 2003.
Speaker 1: That's super woman.  This is my mother [Daisy Mitchell Lloyd].  This picture is probably taken about 1984, about four years before she passed.
Speaker 2: That's around, 1956, Syracuse Nat [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] uniform.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's 1958.  That's Earl Lloyd [HistoryMaker Earl Francis Lloyd] in Nat uniform, Syracuse Nats.
Speaker 1: That's me, 2006.  I was posing for an article.
Speaker 2: That's 1959, Syracuse--that's Detroit Pistons.
Speaker 1: That's myself and Michael Jordan at the All-Star Game [NBA All-Star Game] in 2000.
Speaker 2: That's Syracuse Nats, 1956.
Speaker 1: Now, could you tell us about that one?
Speaker 2: That's when I was in the [U.S.] Army, stationed at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  This is our battalion team, the 522nd Infantry Battalion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Curtis [Lloyd Curtis] went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], I went to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  This boy, oh geez, he went to Alabama State [Alabama State College for Negroes; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and this is a boy named Vern Allen [Vernon Allen] and was a principal in Detroit [Michigan], he went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Cartrell Jones [ph.] is his name.  This guy's name is Lloyd Curtis, he's a cop in New York.  These two guys are principals in Detroit.  It's funny, we in our--we were separated together in the Army, we all ended up within three blocks from other in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Really?  Huh.  Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Small world.
Story_ID: 485475
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: That's my college basketball team in 1948. That year we were the only undefeated team in all of basketball, all collegiate basketball, undefeated.
Speaker 1: What about number twenty-two again?
Speaker 2: Nah, just making fun.
Speaker 1: Say that again (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Number twenty-two in the program but number one in a lot of the hearts.
Speaker 1: Color commentary (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay that's, that's you see it's 2003, this award they gave me for getting inducted in the Hall of Fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts].  The picture is me signing my first contract with the Syracuse--with the Washington Capitols.  And on the picture you have Will--you got Will Robinson, the little guy, you got Bob Lanier, myself and Dave Bing, two of my players that I coached.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, on this cover, you'll see myself, number eleven, and you see the two other guys, we were the three black guys that came into the league [National Basketball Association] in 1950.  The guy in the middle, the Celtic [Boston Celtics] guy, is Chuck Cooper, and the guy on the bottom is Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a bubble gum card of me probably about 1957 in the Syracuse Nats [Syracuse Nationals; Philadelphia 76ers] uniform.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's college graduation, 1950--
Speaker 1: From West Virginia State?
Speaker 2: From West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah that's my, that's me and my high school coach.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Louis Randolph Johnson.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: Oh geez.
Speaker 2: Looks like the '70s [1970s], but I--
Speaker 1: Yeah I think it was, about '76 [1976]. We're at an affair.
