Story_ID: 208967
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Avis LaVelle.  A-V-I-S and that's V like Victor, L-A uppercase V E-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 3/5/54 [March 5, 1954].  Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you have a middle name, or?
Speaker 2: Actually, LaVelle is my middle name.  My birth name was Sampson, S-A-M as in Mary, P as in Paul S-O-N.  My married name is Hoes, H-O-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I began to go by the name of Avis LaVelle because I was, at first, in broadcasting.  I was a radio disc hockey.  And, the alliteration of Avis Sampson, saying your name ten or fifteen times an hour was just too much.  So, Avis LaVelle is easier.  It flowed better and it also allowed me to be entirely anonymous because nobody could ever find me in the phonebook (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, that makes sense.  Do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your occupation?  Just briefly.
Speaker 2: I'm a consultant; communications consultant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you served in a variety of, I guess, government positions and so forth, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of those, you were assistant head of the school board, like at one time?
Speaker 2: I was vice president--
Speaker 1: Vice president of the school.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Of the Chicago School Reform Board [of Trustees] for about five years.  I was on the board for seven years altogether.  I served in the Daley administration as Mayor Daley's first press secretary; Richard M. Daley, as a part of his new administration.  I worked in the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration as an assistant secretary for public affairs under Donna Shalala.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first Clinton administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August the 11th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Are you checking my sanity (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No.  Actually, it's a historical slating.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Actually, to have you say where we are--
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --authenticates that we're actually here, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or, at least you think we're here at least, you know (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I think we are.  This is earth, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, that's why we ask that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 208968
Speaker 1: We always start with five lightweight questions, before we go into depth and they're People magazine-ish type questions.  They just require a brief answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chinese food.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Orange chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas holidays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 208969
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Adolph Sampson] side of the family.  But, I'm gonna start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mai M-A-I, Evelyn Hicks, E-V-E-L-Y-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born 11/17/30 [November 17, 1930].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, I think its Hickman, Kentucky or Fulton, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know a lot more about their side of the family than I do about my dad's side of the family.  My grandfather [Silas Hicks] and my grandmother [Eary Rodgers Hicks] and I--my mother and father lived in a house together.  So, I grew up, my early years, I spent with my grandparents in a house--large house, together in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community.
Story_ID: 208970
Speaker 1: And, my cousins, many of whom are here [Chicago, Illinois], had actually done a lot of genealogy.  And, what we had discovered is that my [maternal] grandfather's [Silas Hicks] father, which would've been my great-grandfather, was a part of a family that had about eight or nine boys in it.  And, and, they were in Mississippi.  They were in either Greenwood [Mississippi] or Meridian [Mississippi], and one of those boys got in trouble with the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and had to leave.  He moved to--I think they were in Greenwood and he moved to Meridian.  Which at that time because people did not have cars, even though it wasn't so very far away, it was far enough where they really were not able to keep contact very frequently.  Some of the brothers may have gone to see that brother who was run off, maybe only once or twice.  He went to Meridian, married a girl who was mulatto.  She was the daughter of the plantation owner that--and a daughter that he had had by a slave.  She was not a slave.  They were set up--
Speaker 2: Now, this is back in slavery?
Speaker 1: Post-slavery.
Speaker 2: Post, post-slavery.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, you're talking about my mother's [Mai Hicks Patton] father's father.
Speaker 2: So, what year are we talking?  In the 1870s there or '80s [1880s]?
Speaker 1: Somewhere in there.  Somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My mother was very young.  The very young daughter of very old parents.  Because her next youngest, or her next oldest sibling, was seventeen years older.  She was a very unplanned baby.  So, her parents were very much older than she was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother's oldest brother was about twenty-five years older than her.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, we're talking about maybe the 1890s, turn of the century, I guess, then from this.  I'm just trying to figure out the date.
Speaker 1: The age?  Well if my mother was born in '30 [1930] and her parents were probably in their forties when she was born.  And, you're talking about their parents, so, you--I think you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, maybe so.
Speaker 1: Earlier than that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe so--
Speaker 1: You know, maybe about 1860, 1870, somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: Well, eighteen--
Speaker 1: And, I--
Speaker 2: --eighteen seventy [1870] then should be about right, 'cause the Klan, you know, started in 1868 [sic. winter 1865-1866], I think that's--so, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Somewhere in there.  So, that man, young man--family name was Hicks.  That branch of the Hicks went off to Meridian, married a mulatto girl, was setup to be the store for the all the coloreds by the father, the white father.  And, they did very well.  They had ten kids.  Those kids we, the Hicks', lost contact with essentially.  We don't know very much about them.  That's kind of where the trail went cold until a lot of years later.  A lot of years later when a cousin of mine, the one who had an interest in genealogy, his brother owned a couple of buildings here in Chicago [Illinois] and was collecting rent.  And, she had my uncle, my mother's oldest brother with her, with him collecting rent.  He went to the door of one of his tenants, who was an older woman, and she gasped and she said, "My God, you look just like my father."  And, they're both--their family name was Hicks, 'cause this is my mother's brother.  They talked to her a little bit and it turned out that her father's family name was Hicks.  They had come out of Mississippi, and we believe they were a part of this lost branch.  But, she moved.  So, we were not able to nail that piece down.  My cousin who was doing the genealogy went back to talk to her, and you know, got a little bit more information from her.  But, she was gone by the time that we got a chance to really do anything, you know, get anything concrete.  And, so, we weren't able to really find out who was who and what was what.  But, we're pretty sure that that was a piece of the puzzle.  But in any event, that's what we know about them.  They came, the rest of the family stayed in Mississippi, and then migrated to Kentucky; Hickman, Kentucky; stayed in Kentucky a long time--
Story_ID: 208971
Speaker 1: And then my mother's [Mai Hicks Patton] people came to Chicago [Illinois] sometime in the '40s [1940s], 1940s; moved to the South Side on 48th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue]; stayed there a long, long time.  More members of the family came up here and then in 1954 they moved to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  My mother, who was the youngest child and her husband [Adolph Sampson], and my grandparents [Silas Hicks and Eary Rodgers Hicks] bought a house together in Englewood, on 63rd [Street] and Morgan [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Now, they were pioneers in those days, 'cause Englewood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --was, historically all-white community basically, yeah.
Speaker 1: My family was the second black family on that block.  It was rapid though.  You know, that was the era of panic peddling so the turnover was rapid.  By the time I went--I was two weeks old when they moved there.  Before I went to kindergarten, there were almost no white families in that whole community.  In my kindergarten class there was one white child.  So, the turnover was that fast.  'Cause, you know, you're not talking about one block.  You're talking about an entire community changing from black--white to black almost in the span of, less than a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were a lot of multi-family dwellings too.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's a lot of people to have to get up and move.
Speaker 1: I think it was--it led to the devastation of Englewood in truth because those homes were sold, many of them without escrow funds.  Those homes were sold to people who had no idea how to have a home, and maintain a home or any of that.  That, of course, that really wasn't a concern of the people who were selling.  You know, so, homes that were sold without escrow, taxes didn't go into escrow.  They didn't know they had to pay taxes, you know.  So, many homes were lost.  It was just a devastating thing for Englewood.  And, Englewood is still reeling from a lot of that.
Speaker 2: That's right, it was a premier community in Chicago--
Speaker 1: It was beautiful.
Speaker 2: The first Chicago community to have street lights, I found out at one point.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  But, I know that we had a thriving shopping center with three movie theatres including a--there's a movie theater there called the Southtown [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] that was supposed to be one of the most beautiful movie theaters in the City of Chicago.  I, of course, don't remember it because it had become a Carr's Discount Store [sic. Carr's Department Store, Chicago, Illinois] by the time I came along.  But, this theater had a fountain in the center of the theatre with swans that swam in it.  It was beautiful, gilded fixtures inside and all of that.  And, you could see when, when you go into Carr's, 'cause you know, essentially Carr's just came in and plunked this--these racks and things down in the mist of what had been this large open theater area.  So, you could go to the walls of this discount store and really take a look and see how beautiful that facility once was.  You could tell it had been a theater.  It just, you know, its day had passed.  And, in fact, I ran into somebody maybe seven or eight, ten years ago who, a young African American man, who had a vision of reopening this facility as a theater.  It obviously didn't happened.  There's an Aldi's there now.  But, you know, it was a beautiful structure.  But, it had a theater, a Southtown Theatre there that was like the place where--a destination theatre.  There was the Englewood [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], the Empress [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], and the Kim [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  So, it actually had four theaters in that shopping area.  One on East 63rd Street, and two on Halsted [Avenue].  There was a Sears [Roebuck and Co.] there and a Wieboldt's Department Store; thriving shopping center, thriving shopping center.  But, it really was choked off in a short period of time by all the panic peddling and by the rapid change in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember the 63rd Street--as it go--as you get off the "L" [elevated train], there 63rd, all the shops underneath and, you know, on the sides and really--it still was at least busy in the '70s [1970s].  But, it's, you know, kinda changed up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --completely from--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The whole--well, the nature of what was begin sold there changed so much.  It used to be a destination shopping center where you could go and get everything that you needed for your home and your family and, you know, everything, appliances, and shoes, and clothes, and everything.  You know, it was big Kresge's on the corner, what'd it?  You know, before Kmart, before Kresge's became Kmart--nobody even knows what Kmart stands for, do they (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Naw, they don't.  They (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, it was Kresge's, S. S. Kresge's.  So, you know, all of that was there on 63rd and Morgan and, 63rd and Halsted and it was a thriving community.  A Walgreens that had a cafeteria inside, you know.  It's just very different than the kind of shopping experience you have now.
Story_ID: 208972
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about your mother [Mai Hicks Patton]?  What kind of personality does she have and what was she like and what'd she-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother died--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in December of 2000.  She was the most influential person in my whole life, because my mother was a scholar.  She was not a formerly educated scholar.  But, I don't think I know anybody who was as smart as my mother.  And, my mother immersed herself in living history.  So, she by de facto became an historian because she read--my entire life as long as I knew her, my mother read everything.  And, she read the newspapers.  Not one, but multiple newspapers from cover to cover every day.  So, there was not anything that she couldn't converse with you about; international affairs, sports, entertainment, pop culture.  You know, and if you read the newspaper every single day, for years, and year, and years, image the vast body of knowledge that you command.  And, the historical perspective you have on things.  So, my mother was a disciple of the written word.  You know, she read every day.  She--we are all readers in my family because some of my earliest memories with my mother are going to the Kelly Branch Library [Chicago Public Library, Chicago, Illinois] on 62nd [Street] and Normal [Boulevard].  You know, we'd walk over there, that's when they used to have the reading programs for elementary school kids.  We got our library cards early, like five years old.  Each of us had our own library card and we'd take our little field trips over there.  During the summer, we'd read as many books as we could and get the stickers, you know, so we'd participate in their summer competitions.  And, my family didn't have any money.  So, we weren't going places for summer vacation.  So, our summer vacations were, vacations that we took vicariously through our reading.  You know, we read a lot every summer and we read through the school year of course, but, you know, it's the way that we got away.  We didn't escape.  We didn't spend much time getting in the car and going down south as a lot of folks did, you know.  My mother, by virtue of the fact her mother [Eary Rodgers Hicks] and father [Silas Hicks] were here, you know, that's usually who you go down south to see, is you mother and father.  Or, what would be my grandparents, but they were here.  I was fortunate enough to grow up them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, the Kelly Branch is a library that has a--you have the sense that it was something greater at one point when you go in it now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, I've been there for different things, but it's, it's--
Speaker 2: It's a great library.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, you know, it was my home library even though it wasn't that close to my house.  You know, I grew up on Morgan [Avenue] and the library was on 62nd and Normal.  So, it was a good little walk but it was a nice summer walk.
Story_ID: 208973
Speaker 1: Did you mother [Mai Hicks Patton] talk about growing up in--now she grew up in Kentucky or in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: A lot of my mother's awareness was really in Chicago [Illinois].  They came to Chicago when she was sorta young.  She came to an age of awareness in Chicago, living on--in--on Calumet [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Forty-eighth [48th Street] and Calumet (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, so--so, she, she pictured herself more as a Chicagoan than any other place.  'Cause when she was at home, she was small.  It was a farm.  My grandfather [Silas Hicks] was the schoolroom--schoolhouse--he ran the one room schoolhouse.  So, you know, it was almost like being home schooled in a, in a sense.  But, there wasn't a whole lot of interaction with a lot of other people.  And, her siblings were so much older than she was that it was like being an only child.  So, she came to an age of awareness in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Is Hickman, Kentucky, like in western Kentucky or where?  Is it near southern Illinois, or is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's near southern Illinois.  You know, it's--once you cross over from Cairo [Illinois], it's not a lot further to Hickman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, so western Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  I was curious.  So, did she talk about going to school and her experiences when she was, you know, growing up at all?
Speaker 2: You know, she didn't talk about it a lot and when my mother died, I was dismayed to discover that I couldn't find where she had gone to elementary school.  She was born really during the [Great] Depression in 1930.  And, so, by the time--and I guess her parents had gotten rather old by the time she got to be, you know, in the later years of high school.  So, she dropped out of high school and started to work.  And, she married my father [Adolph Sampson] when--on her seventeenth birthday.  So, she was really very young taking on the role of an adult.  And, she went back as an adult and got her GED [General Educational Development].  Which was no problem, because she was very, very smart anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Her father, you said was a teacher, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My dad was older than my mom.  My dad first saw my mother jumping rope on the sidewalk (laughter).  You know, but, he was a young man, you know, like, he wasn't like thirty being a letch watching an eleven year old jumping rope or anything like that.  He was about, maybe six or seven years older than her and he just was in the neighborhood.  He grew up in the neighborhood.  Or, came to adult life in the neighborhood because he--my dad has an interesting life story that brought him to Chicago as a young person because he was not really a part of his family unit.
Story_ID: 208974
Speaker 1: Now let's get his [LaVelle's father] full name.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Adolph A-D-O-L-P-H, Eugene, Sampson S-A-M as in Mary, P as in Paul S-O-N.  And, his birthday was January 27th.  I don't know, I think it was around 1924.
Speaker 1: You can tell he was born prior to World War II [WWII] with Adolph (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Adolph, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause hardly anybody has that name anymore, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My dad was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.  And, he was born to a man named Willie Sampson.  And, I don't know his mother's name.  His mother really was not a part of his life.  His mother was--my dad was very light skinned.  His mother was much lighter than that; light enough to pass for white, and she did.  She eventually ran away and left them.  She ran off with a white guy and left my father and his sister, Louise [Sampson].  My father's only memory of his mother really is that when she was working as a ticket taker at the white theater, he and Louise was very young.  But, they went to the theater to see her and she told them, "You little nigger kids get away from here."  So, that kinda stuck with him, obviously.  And, when she ran off, his father eventually abandoned the kids too.  And, there were not really any orphanages in the town that were taking in black kids.  So, the sister who was older, an aunt or a relative here, I don't know if it was cous--older cousin or an aunt in Chicago [Illinois] sent for Louise.  But, nobody sent for my father.  So, my father was taken in by a man who was the local moonshiner who had a son of his own.  And, my father just fell in with the moonshiner.  And, my father died of alcoholism.  But, I could kinda understand because at seven when he was following the moonshiners around, he was drinking the drags from the steels.  He started drinking at seven years old.  And, he was--went on the moonshine runs with this guy until he got to be about sixteen or seventeen.  He said that the man was not--I mean, he was fed.  He had some clothes to wear.  But, it wasn't a family that he was in, you know, the man was not warm.  The family was not warm to him.  So, by the time he got to be about fifteen or sixteen, he hoboed his way up to Chicago on a train.  So, when he got here, he was filthy and hungry.  And, he went to find his sister Louise, who was doing very well, living with this relative.  And, Louise had family members, no friends.  Her girlfriends were there and when he came to the door, he was filthy and hungry and she was embarrassed when he came to the door.  And, so, her friends asked her, "Who is that bum?"  And, she said, "I don't know, it's just somebody who came to get something to eat."  So, you know, I've--I--my heart always hurt for my dad.  It was such a hard, hard story.  And, my father really wasn't much of a family guy.  You know, my mother [Mai Hicks Patton], my mother stood by my father through all of his drinking and all of his gambling.  And, you know, he'd--he's the kind of guy who would disappear and call you a couple days later and say, "Hey, I'm in Las Vegas [Nevada]."  You know, and my mother always felt like, if it were not for the fact that he had this family, these kids and her, that he probably would have just drifted off into the deep end and maybe been a skid row bum or something.  So, you know, he didn't really know how to have family, but he didn't come up in a family either.  So, I, I think I was more forgiving of his shortcomings.  You know, it made it a very hard life sometimes for a kid.  'Cause he would gamble his money away.  You know, he would, he was a drinker.  He had a personality that we never knew which dad was gonna show up until he--however he closed the door was an indication of who it was gonna be.  He could be so wonderful and so charming and we could have a happy family life.  If he closed the door it was the good Adolph.  If he slammed the door, it was the bad Adolph and everybody just scattered 'cause you knew it was gonna be a tough night in the house.  You know, and he really, he didn't know how to have a family.  But, he didn't grow up knowing how to have a family.  Now, that's not to say that that's an excuse because there are plenty of people who grow up without families who, because it's their deepest desire to be good dads and good husband, they figure out how to do it.  But, I think my father had a lot of demons to deal with.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Probably, you know, most people that don't have a tougher time than we--I don't think there's a lot that actually overcome that, you know.  There's some that we can point to but not, not a lot.
Speaker 2: It's hard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's rough.
Speaker 2: It's hard.  And, you know, the kind of rejections that he told me about are things that I think would cut you very deeply.  You know, give you some real issues to wrestle with.  And, so, you know, it was--my mother was our rock.  She was the stability in our house.  You know, my--it was another blessing to be there with my grandparents [Eary Rodgers Hicks and Silas Hicks] because my mother worked.  She had to work.  'Cause my dad might spend all of his money.
Story_ID: 208975
Speaker 1: What did he [LaVelle's father, Adolph Sampson] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My dad worked at American Can Company.  He was a sheet metal worker.
Speaker 1: Seventy-sixth [76th Street] and right there at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, he worked at the one that was right on 62nd [Street] and Western [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-second and Western.  And, my dad was really a smart guy but he had formal education either.  He could do everything when he wasn't in his cups, as my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] used to call it.  I mean, he could do electrical work.  He could do plumbing, you know, carpentry, all of that stuff.  He trained the guy that became his boss at the sheet metal plant, you know, at the can company.
Speaker 1: This is an old story as they (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  You know, he probably would have been able to be very successful had he had some formal education.  And, had he not drunk so much, you know.  He had a real drinking problem, and he did not believe that it was going to kill him.  He did live longer than his doctor predicted.  And, I, I think it's the classic story of outliving your doctor (laughter).  But, you know, ultimately it did catch up with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you household consisted of your grandparents [Silas Hicks and Mai Rodgers Hicks], your mother and father.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do.  I am the second eldest of three girls and a boy.  And, the boy is the youngest.  So, I have an older sister, I have a younger sister, and a young brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us their names?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Leslie Regina Sampson Mills.  My younger sister is Rita Lourese Sampson Peete, P-E-E-T-E.  And my brother is Tracy Aaron Sampson.
Story_ID: 208976
Speaker 1: What's your first childhood memory?  Or, do you have one that you can--
Speaker 2: My first memory.  Well, I, you know, my best memory is not maybe my first memory.  Is that, you know, I just, I don't have a general, a specific memory.  I have a general sense of being well loved and cared for.  My grandfather [Silas Hicks] was very loving grandparent.  And, he used to take me to the grocery store with him all the time.  I love to grocery shop right now.  And, I think it's because it brings back fond memories of my grandfather.  You know, so, I'd go to the grocery store with my grandfather, and he went just about every day.  And, whatever in that store I wanted, he'd buy for me (laughter) you know.  And, sometimes it was junk, but sometimes it was food, you know, if I wanted, decided I wanted something special for lunch, he would do that.  And, I remember my grandfather, my grandfather had really big hands.  So, you, you could only hold one finger, you know.  And, so, I remember walking to the A&P [Food Store] with my grandfather and his shopping cart holding his hand, holding his finger.  So, that's one of my earliest memories I guess.
Speaker 1: Now, he was the teacher, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was the teacher down in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, was he basically retired up here [Chicago, Illinois] or what did he, what did he do?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  He was--my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] was born so late in life to my grandparents.  She was seventeen years younger than her next oldest sibling.  And, they really did not expect to have any more kids.  So, by the time she got to be an adult, you know, my mother was in her twenties, mid-twenties when she had us.  So, they were up there already.  You know, by the time I got to be four or five years old, they were substantially older.
Story_ID: 208977
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and the smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I spent an enormous amount of time in Ogden Park [Chicago, Illinois] on 66th [Street] and Racine [Avenue].  I learned to swim in Ogden Park and I swam every summer, almost every day in the summer at Ogden Park.  I ran track in the park.  I did my--I was Girl Scout in that park, you know.  So, that's a big part of what I did growing up, is whatever was going on in that park.  There were, we'd swim all day.  And, then you'd walk home, it seemed like when you were walking home--it's really just three or four blocks, but it seemed like it was miles 'cause you'd be just exhausted and hungry.  If we had money, we'd stop at a--there used to be a little store, I think on 66th and May [Street].  And, you'd stop in that store and maybe get some potato chips or something to eat and drink on the way home.  But, for the most part, we'd just go home hungry and ashy (laughter), from being in the pool all day.  Growing up in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community with all those stores up there, you know.  I worked in the stores.  I worked in Wieboldt's [Department Store] when I was a high school kid [at Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].  When I was in seventh or eighth grade, I went to--I lived in the same house but they kept changing the school boundaries.  So, I went to school with so many different kids.  Which was good because I, I know a lot of people now from having gone to school with them.  And, so, I went to [Perkins] Bass [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], [Joshua D.] Kershaw [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], [George] Gershwin [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and [Juliette G.] Lowe Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois], and then Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] all living in the same house.  But, when I went to Lowe, I--we used to go up to 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Avenue] to [S.S.] Kresge's [Department Store] to have pizza for lunch.  You know, pizza was about thirty cents a slice then.  I'm dating myself, I know.  But, you know, it wasn't that far to walk in a lunch hour.  You could walk up there and come back.  It was a busy street.  Morgan [Avenue] was a busy street.  There used to be a bus.  A blue bus that ran from 63rd and Halsted to Palos, I believe.  So, that was the bus that you could take, I think it cost about ten cents to go to Evergreen Plaza [Evergreen Park, Illinois].  Get on that bus; it stopped right at the corner of my block.  'Cause it went from 63rd and Halsted, down 63rd Street, down Morgan to 87th, down 87th Street to Western [Avenue], and down Western to Evergreen Plaza.  Now, it went beyond that.  But, I never went further than Evergreen Plaza.  But, you know, it was a street that had a lot of commerce.  We grew up counting cars because if you couldn't go anywhere and weren't going anywhere, you could sit on your front porch and count the different cars.  And, each of us would claim a different make, you know (laughter) so, I think, I'm always being conscious of the cars.  And, you know, you'd count how many Buicks went by.  And, one of us would take Buicks, another would take Chevys [Chevrolet], somebody else would take a Ford, or a Chrysler, you know.  So, you did things like that.  I remember--because I knew all these kids in all these different neighborhoods from going to the different schools, I remember, as I got a little older, like seventh and eighth grade, going to visit the kids in other neighborhoods and having to be back home before the street lights came on.  And, I was always caught, you know, the street lights would start to flicker and I'd be several blocks from home.  I'd have to start running.  I ran track (laughter), in high school and in eighth grade.  And, I always had to run home because the street lights would start flickering before I was close enough.  You know, and I'd just make it back to my block in time; I had to be home.
Story_ID: 208978
Speaker 1: Now, did you live in a house or was it a two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We lived in a house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We lived in a hou--it was a house.  A very large house.  And there was no formal division between the areas where my grandparents [Eary Rodgers Hicks and Silas Hicks] occupied and my family occupied.  You know, at one point, we kinda always were--my family was always upstairs.  And, upstairs there was actually a separate kitchen, and living room, and bathrooms, and bedrooms and all of that stuff.  But, it, it wasn't formally divided and so, you could always go downstairs to be where grandma and grandpa were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was a big frame house or was it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Brick?
Speaker 2: It was a big brick house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a house.  My dad still lives in that house.  Actually, it's my stepfather who lives in the house now.  My stepfather, I've known all of my live.  Because he was once married to my mother's [Mai Hicks Patton], my mother's first cousin was married to my current--this is convoluted.  My mother's first cousin was married to my current stepfather's sister.  So, he always been in my orbit.  You know, my mother's first cousin was al--was a very good friend to the family.  And, John [D. Patton], that's my stepfather, was always around.  He used to be a neighbor.  He used to live down the street.  So, I grew up around him.  He's in part of my earliest memories 'cause he was also a friend of my birth father's [Adolph Sampson].  He, you know, they were friends.  He didn't drink like my dad drunk.  His wife drank.  His first wife drank.  She died.  She died before my dad.  And, then my dad died.  And, then my mother and father, the man I call my father now, they got together after both of their spouses died from alcohol-related illnesses.
Story_ID: 208979
Speaker 1: Now, when did your father [Adolph Sampson] die?  Or, how old were you when your father died?
Speaker 2: I was about twenty-four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you grew up, you know, with him in the household.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was not easy.  I was, I think I was my father's favorite child.  I was most like him in a lot of ways, very adventuresome.  To be honest, I think I never thought the rules applied to me, you know.  So, I was always in the position of asking for forgiveness not permission.  I wasn't really doing terrible things or anything like that.  But, I always felt like I outta be able to go and do and visit and, you know.  It was just cumbersome to have to ask somebody all that time could you go and do something.  So, I just did it.  And, I think that that made me more like him.  But, it was hard because he was hard on my siblings.  My youngest sister [Rita Sampson Peete] was just a little sweetheart and, you know, he had a very soft spot for her.  But, my oldest sister [Leslie Sampson Mills], he was very hard on and he always said she was the most like his sister who was a very argumentative person.  My Aunt Louise, I never knew.  Because Aunt Louise was, he said my Aunt Louise always had to have the last word.  And, the last word killed her.  Because she was arguing with her husband while she was feeding her two young children.  It was a lap baby and an infant.  And, she had an argument with her husband.  She had the last word, he killed her as she sat there.  So, you know, and I guess my dad and his sister had reconciled by this time.  So, that was another trauma in his life.  But, he always felt like my sister was most like Aunt Louise; had to have the last word, and he was very authoritarian.  He felt like he had to have the last word.  And, and when he drank, he was quarrelsome anyway.  You know, so, they were like oil and water, they clashed.  It was horrible.  It was horrible.  And, he was very hard on my brother [Tracy Sampson] who was--my brother is a, a very gentle soul.  You know, my father wanted a boy's boy.  And, he didn't get a boy's boy with my brother Tracy.  Tracy is an artist at heart, you know.  He would always--he like to draw, and to read, and to paint, and he was quiet.  And, he wasn't interested in playing football and, you know, wrestling and all those sorts of things.  And, that was horrible to my father, you know.  So, he was very hard.  He picked on him a lot he--from when he was a little boy, and my sister was very protective of him.  So, she would stand in the breach between my dad and my brother, and it made for war in the household.  It was just horrible sometimes when--that is why when he drank, we'd just scattered, you know.  We just wouldn't le--we, we--'cause we were very close.  We are very close still.  And, so, we would maybe be watching television or playing games or whatever.  But, if he came in and slammed that door, we'd head for the hills.  You know, we'd go to our rooms, we'd go someplace where we knew we didn't have to encounter daddy.  And, it made growing up very difficult.  So, dad was challenging, at best.  And, it was so nice--he was never the husband that I felt like my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] deserved.  And, when I got to be in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], I always felt like, "God mommy, why don't you leave him?  He's not good to you."  And, she would tell me, you know, "Your dad is, at heart, a good person.  He just has a lot of issues and a lot of problems.  And, I feel like if we left him, if I left him and took you all, your dad would just fall off the edge of the earth."  So, you know, they, they were no longer living as husband and wife.  We all lived in the same house.  He had a separate room, you know, and he'd stumble in, and it be his place to stumble in and sober up and that sort of thing.  But, she wouldn't leave him.  She wouldn't leave him.  She said, you know, "He is at rock bottom a good friend to me."  And, she was a good friend to him, you know.  She was--she probably kept him alive a lot longer than he would've been.  And, she taught me some important lessons about me, being--you know, my own life as it applied to that because, I told you Morgan [Street, Chicago, Illinois] was a very busy street.  And, one Saturday morning I came outside, you know, there's people walking up and down to street on their way to 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street], cars driving back and forth on the way to the shopping center [Evergreen Plaza, Evergreen Park, Illinois].  And, there's my dad, drunk, sprawled, face down in the lawn next door.  And, you know, there's all these people we know walking up and down the street, and I'm so embarrassed.  And, I go and I say to mommy, "I'm so embarrassed, mommy."  And, she said, "Honey, you don't be embarrassed for him.  That's a grown man.  He has to be embarrassed for himself.  You get embarrassed by the things that you do.  And, if you hold your head up--because you haven't done anything wrong."  You know, so, it just helped me put it in perspective.
Story_ID: 208980
Speaker 1: Did you all have a church that you went to or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I grew up in Christ Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois] on 64th [Street] and Sangamon [Street].  The church is still there.  Although it was been through a number of mutations and incarnations, you know.  It is, it is no longer called Christ Methodist.  I think it's called Christ United Methodist.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They combined about three or four Methodist congregations there and came up with this, it was kind of a convoluted system of who was gonna be the pastor.  And, it caused a lot of people to leave.  I left before that.  But, when I was growing up, my pastor there was [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R.] Porter.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.  He came back and became the pastor again, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was there a long time.  And, then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We've interviewed Reverend Porter.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then they had Jacques [ph.], I can't remember his last name.  And, he was a good guy too.  But, that was doing the period of time when they started just forcing these congregations to merge, and merge, and merge.  And, so, you could be there and that was your church and you had a church, had a church leader that you had some kind of empathy with.  And, then next thing you know, you got somebody else, you're in somebody else's congregation, like it or not.
Speaker 1: I know that John Porter is an activist kind of minister so, how did you--I mean, what did you--where you very involved with the church at all?  Or, your family involved in it?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a kid, you know.  I learned a lot from Reverend Porter.  I strayed from that church when I went away to college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  And, when I came back, it didn't do for me what I needed.  You know, I began to look around for a different church and it took me a while to find another church.  I wound up at Apostolic Church of God [Chicago, Illinois] with [HistoryMaker] Bishop [Arthur] Brazier.  I've been there about twenty years.  But, Reverend Porter became more and more activist as he went along.  He didn't start out that way.
Story_ID: 208981
Speaker 1: Now, did your family like music?  Was there a lot of music played in the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  My family--there was always music.  I was the kid you wind up, give 'em a quarter and they'll dance all day for you.  (Laughter) so, you know, I grew up listening to music, and we grew up with card parties and things like that.  You know, my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] loved to play cards and so they'd have their friends come over and play cards, and they'd play music, and the kids would dance.  And, in--on--in his good moments, you know, my parents would, take us on picnics.  You know, we'd go to picnics out at, it wasn't Dan Ryan Woods [Chicago, Illinois], it's a forest preserve out on 112th [Street] or 117th [Street] and Halsted [Street], somewhere out there.   And, you know, they'd take music and it'd be an outing on--like an all-day outing.  But, my mother and father loved music.  And, I grew up listening to it--
Story_ID: 208982
Speaker 1: My first job in broadcasting was as a disc jockey.  And, I was in--this was before they had programming, programmed music where you play the same music every two and a half hours.  And, so, in this era of broadcasting, you're in a room filled with records and you play what you, as a disc jockey, like.  And, I was twenty-one years old, the music that was in that room--the only music that I could identify was music that I had grown up listening to with my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] playing it.  So, I'm twenty-one and that my whole show consist of Duke Ellington, and Ella Fitzgerald, and Tony Bennett, and Arthur Prysock and all these songs that I'd grown up listening to them.  Some of that music was older than me.  But, you know, I knew it all because I had listened to it from infancy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's an unusual kind of a--well, it's not unusual to be exposed to that kind of music, but to be--to have a, to have a job where you can play it (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful thing.  And, that was real music.  And, you know, to have a job where your job is to listen to music and empathize with your listening audience about how wonder that music is.  So, as a twenty-one year old person, you know, and the music had orchestration.  You know, it wasn't can music.  It wasn't the same stanza that repeated over and over again.  That was beautiful, beautiful music.  And, it was a pleasure to have that job.  And, it was an education, you know, because I got to--I learned a lot more about the artists.  You know, I listened, really listened to the songs, you know.  When you're growing up, a lot of the things that you hear and see and do are like scenery in a play.  You know, it's a backdrop to your life.  But, when it's your job to listen to that music, you really listen to it.  And, it was a blessing.
Speaker 2: What was the station again?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: It was WTAX [WTAX-AM] in Springfield, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, and that was during the funk era.  You know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In '75 [1975], I guess.
Speaker 1: My first job at WTAX was around '78 [1978] or '79 [1979].  I'd been out of school a little bit.  And, I had not been able to get a broadcasting job.  My first year or two out of school [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (U of I), Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I worked at the University of Chicago, Office of Special Programs [Office of Special Programs-College Prep (OSP-CP), University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] with [HistoryMaker] Larry Hawkins.  And, I had worked for him through college teaching persuasive speech and, you know, different things like that.  And, so, I came back to teach for him.  And, I did that for a couple years but, I was--I had majored in broadcasting and I wanted to try broadcasting.  So, I had a boyfriend that was moving to Dayton, Ohio.  I went with him to Dayton.  Because I thought it was a small town and I--certainly when I came back from U of I and I came back to Chicago [Illinois], I didn't get a job in broadcasting.  Because they said, you know, "This is too big a market for you to start in.  You need to go to a small town."  So, I thought Dayton, Ohio would be a perfect small town to start in.  I went with my boyfriend to Dayton.  I made the rounds of all the stations and everyone there told me, "You don't come to a big city like Dayton to start in broadcasting," (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I don't get a job in broadcasting in Dayton, Ohio.  I wound up working for NCR Corporation.  And, I'd be at NCR for maybe a year, year and a half.  And, a friend of mine who had gone home to Springfield, Illinois after school, she was a broadcasting major also.  By that time, she'd been at her job two and a half, almost three years.  And, she learned everything she felt like she could learn in that small market.  And, her boss said to her, "Well, don't you know somebody else who could replace you?"  You know, they were looking for some diversity.  And, so, she called me and asked me was I interesting in working in Springfield.  And, I told her, "Yes."  So, her boss drove from Springfield to--we met somewhere in the middle.  I drove from Dayton to wherever that was in the middle, I can't even remember.  And, he interviewed me and hired me on the spot, and I moved to Springfield, Illinois to start my broadcasting career.
Story_ID: 208983
Speaker 1: Now, I want to take you back to grade school (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I hopped over something, huh (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We didn't cover grade school.  But this is good 'cause we know we'd gone through some of this history.  But, what--you went to several grade schools in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I started at Perkins Bass [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] on 65th [Street] and May [Street].
Speaker 1: Perkins Bass, B-A-S--
Speaker 2: B-A-S-S.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --S.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a great school.  You know, they were--at that time, it was really a great school.  I had two kindergarten teachers, Ms. LaVelle [ph.], and Ms. Didell [ph.] (laughter).  How can I remember their names?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I know why (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  First teacher and their names were very similar.  Ms. LaVelle used to call me [HistoryMaker] Avis [LaVelle].  And, I was such a shy kid then that I never corrected her.  I never corrected her the whole school year.  She called me Avis.  But, it was a great little school experience, and it was close enough to--I used to walk home for lunch.  My sister and I used to split a can of Campbell's soup. I used to love tomato soup.  She used to love mushroom soup.  I didn't like mushroom.  She didn't like tomato.  Now, she likes tomato.  I like mushroom, and I (laughter)--you can't give me tomato soup.  But, those are some of my earliest memories of walking back and forth to school having lunch at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what were interested in when you were a little kid in school?  I mean, what, what were your favorite subjects in?
Speaker 2: I love to read.  I was always mathematically challenged.  I look back on math and realized, I fell behind when we went to long division.  And, I did not have an instructor who really comprehended that I wasn't with them.  And, you know, if you don't have the building blocks, you can't go on.  So, I struggled with math all the way up until college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  You know, I always took it.  But it was a struggle.  And, after my freshman year of college, I didn't take any more math until I worked on my M.B.A.  You know, I had a horrible time.  And, I thought, "I must chose a profession in letters 'cause numbers will never do."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did you go to school?  You were there until when at Perkins Bass?
Speaker 2: I think I was there until about maybe fourth grade, third or fourth grade.  And, then they--I went to--they changed the boundaries and I went to [Joshua D.] Kershaw [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was Kershaw actually further away than Perkins Bass?
Speaker 2: No.  About the same distance.  It was on Lowe [Avenue], 65th and Lowe.  And, I lived on 63rd and Morgan [Street].  So, it was about the same distance.  I went to Kershaw 'til the middle of my sixth grade year.  And, in the middle of my sixth grade year, they changed the boundaries again, and it sent me to George Gershwin [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  Gershwin has another name now [sic.], but George Gershwin was at 62nd and Racine [Avenue].  And, so, for like four months, three or four months, I went over there.  And, then at that time, they had upper grade centers.  So, you, you didn't graduate from sixth grade but, you transferred from sixth grade into an upper grade center.  And, I went to Juliette G. Lowe [Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], which I think is now Harold Washington [sic.].  It's on sixty--East 67th Street just before you get to Halsted [Street].  Something like maybe, I don't know, nine, 837 West 67th Street [Chicago, Illinois] or something like that.  I went that for seventh and eighth grade, graduated from eighth grade at Lowe.  And, made a conscious decision to go to Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I tested well, and I could have gone to [Robert] Lindblom [Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  But, I--they had a great program at Englewood where I got the chance to take--it was like, called a core program.  There were thirty of us that had every single class together from the first day of freshman year to the last day of senior year.  And, it was a splendid advanced placement education that really put me above my contemporaries when I went to college.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: The people who were in that program do very well.  They did very well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that time, Lindblom would've been considered one of the best schools in the city.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was.  But, I wanted to go to college and it, you know, in a--I had a struggle forethought.  'Cause I felt like, if I went to college over here in this environment, where they had tested all these kids, my chances of maybe getting superior grades and getting a scholarship would be less than if I'd gone into this environment at Englewood where I knew I would be able to excel.  And, I was the third person in my class.  I wasn't the valedictorian or the salutatorian.  I had a lot of fun (laughter), but, so, I was the third person in my class and I did very well.  I had a very well-rounded high school life.  And, I learned an incredible amount of things.  I had some of the most wonderful teachers I've ever had.
Story_ID: 208984
Speaker 1: Who were they?  Is there a particular teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teachers?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That stands out?
Speaker 2: Fraulein Miller [ph.], was my English teacher, two or three times.
Speaker 1: Fraulein?
Speaker 2: Fraulein.
Speaker 1: Now, was that a black teacher, or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was wonderful, wonderful English teacher; really helped me love literature and understand.  She was the one that made the greatest impression on me.  There was also a, I don't remember this man's first name.  His name was Mr. Wilson [ph.].  He was--we did research papers for Fraulein Miller starting in my freshman year, complete with bibliographies and footnotes and all of that stuff.  No, Mr. Jones [ph.], that was his name.  By the time we got to our sophomore year with Mr. Jones, he was a rigorous task master and he'd give your stuff back to you with all these red marks for periods and commas out of place.  But, he also was about substance.  He wasn't just about the punctuation.  But, because of how rigorous Mrs. Miller and Mr. Jones were on this class, when I got to college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I could write a term paper in my sleep.  I really know--knew how to do this.  And, I was with kids who had not really learned how to do this at all.  You know, it wasn't just African American kids, I was with a lot of kids from all over the state and all over the nation who did not have the skills, the writing skills.  And, didn't, and certainly didn't know how to document what they wrote.  So, I--that's when I realized how well educated I had been by Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And, when I was--served time on the [Chicago] Board of Education, my commitment to those kids was to try to make sure that everybody got the caliber of education that those thirty kids got in that school.  Because, we were cherry picked.  You know, we were all high achievers and we got an excellent education at Englewood.  But, everybody else who was there didn't.  You know, it was ranked thirty-ninth of the thirty-nine high schools in the city at the time that I went.  But, for those kids, that core group of thirty or forty kids, those people have achieved a lot.  They've achieved a lot.  I still bump into some of those tea--people.  And, I'm very impressed by who they are and the things that they've done.  And, I wish everybody had been able to be as well-educated.
Story_ID: 208985
Speaker 1: You got involved into African dance in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, tell us about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a cheerleader.  And, a swim leader in gym.  I've always been a very athletic person.  And, the Urban Progress Center [Chicago, Illinois], you remember the era of the Urban Progress Centers, here in Chicago [Illinois] were, they were neighborhood centers where there were lots of things going on to get neighborhood residents involved.  And, I think they were funded with block grants from the federal government as I look back on it.  So, each Urban Progress Center had activities for kids in it.  And, my Urban Progress Center from my neighborhood [Englewood, Chicago, Illinois] was at 64th [Street] and May [Street], between May and Peoria [Street]; huge building.  So large, in fact that they could do physical activity in there.  And, so, that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Darlene Blackburn.  I went around there to see what was going on.  Darlene Blackburn was there teaching African dance.  Having always been an athletic person, it appealed to me.  And, so, I started dancing with Darlene, training under her.  At the time that I started there, a young man named Alyo Tolbert was also starting with her.
Speaker 1: Was he named Clem then, or was he Alyo?
Speaker 2: I think he was Clem.
Speaker 1: Clem Tolbert, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think he was Clem Tolbert, you know.  'Cause he became Alyo somewhere during that process and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, Darlene--now this would be nineteen--would this be 1970 yet, or, or?
Speaker 2: It was around '69 [1969] 'cause I danced with her in--I graduated high school in '71 [1971].  In the summer of '70 [1970], I had to make a choice between going to Africa to dance with her at FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] or being captain of the cheerleaders (laughter) at Englewood.  Because if I was going to Africa to dance with her then I had to go during the summer and not--and give up, you know, training with my squad (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is before FESTAC, this is when she went to Nigeria, I think before Fes- FESTAC was '77 [1977] so she was a--
Speaker 2: Well, she went to FESTAC again.
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't have two, they had a--
Speaker 2: Well, it was called FESTAC, I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Was it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was called FESTAC, and this was in--we started talking about this in the summer, in the spring of '70 [1970].  And, I had to make a decision that summer and of course, in the small minded way of a sixteen or seventeen year old person, being captain of the cheerleaders and being at home loomed a lot larger than going to Africa and dancing with a dance troop.  So, I made my choice not to go.  But, it was a great experience to be with her because they were authentic African dances.  It was heritage that we being imparted on me.  You know, I was learning a lot about Africa and about what the various tribes did.  Dance being such a part of my life as a person who always loved to dance.
Story_ID: 208986
Speaker 1: Now, this was an era.  Now, you were in school during an era when people stopped calling themselves Negroes and for some reason, and it wasn't announced.  It was never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't formal yet.
Speaker 1: --a formal announcement.  Where people, black people, started calling themselves black, instead of Negro, around '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], in that period.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I can remember.
Speaker 1: And, news commentators started referring to us as black.
Speaker 2: All it was, it really was a change in awareness.  It was a cultural shift that--I remember it was very difficult.  My father [Adolph Sampson] being from the South, and being light, a light complexioned person, really had a hair thing.  I had long hair in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And, in truth, I wasn't into hair because I was always athletic.  So, I would--I swam, I ran, I was a gym leader all week so I had my hair up, pulled back some sort of way, all week.  The only time I ever wore it down was Friday, I'd come home and wash it.  Wash all the chlorine out.  And, I would, I would press it and curl it over the weekend.  And, then Monday morning at eight o'clock, I was back in the pool.  So, I was never really into hair.  And, I wanted an afro.  You know, and then, we were talking about the era of the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis afro.  I wanted an afro.  And, my father thought that was the most horrible hairstyle in the world.  And, I remember we had a clash of ideology over this.  And, when I first started talking about this, it was not something that he was gonna let me do at all.  And, I guess, toward the end of my sophomore year, I must have worn him down.  So, I did eventually get my hair cut and get an afro.  I looked like a dandelion, you know, I had a great big full head of hair; a very big afro.  But, I, you know, I can remember the clash of ideologies that came about at that time when people were really questioning why, we as young African Americans, or young black people as we called ourselves, would wanna go around looking like that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of why?  Other than the fact that other people were doing it?  Did you, did you think about--?
Speaker 2: Well, I did, because I had started to dance.  You know, I had a greater connection to Africa then I had ever thought I would have because I was dancing with [HistoryMaker] Darlene Blackburn.  You know, and I was meeting people from Africa.  I was meeting people who were much deeper into nationalism than I might ever have been, you know.  I was a kid.  I was young, you know.  I was about fifteen when I, fourteen, fifteen when I met Darlene.  And, the other people who were in the movement and who were a part of the [Darlene Blackburn] Dance Troupe and all of that stuff, they were people who were in their late teens and early twenties, as was Darlene.  And, we used to have our rehearsals during the week after we moved down to the Urban Progress Center [Chicago, Illinois], we rehearsed down at Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] on 39th [Street] and Drexel [Boulevard].  And, [HistoryMaker] Phil Cohran would be down there, and Earth, Wind & Fire was down there at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  The pre-Earth, Wind and Fire.  Right.
Speaker 2: The pre-Earth, Wind and Fire, they'd--we'd all be rehearsing down there and we'd be sharing space with the Black Gangster Disciples (laughter), by the way.  'Cause, you know, they really controlled the theatre but they did--they--
Speaker 1: That was the, the P. Stone--I mean, the Blackstone--
Speaker 2: P.--
Speaker 1: Rangers.
Speaker 2: The Blackstone Rangers then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: They controlled the theater.  But, they allowed us to rehearse there.  You know, so, I had a far greater awareness of my little place on earth and where I was.  And, we'd do dances.  Once of the dances that I loved the most, it was dance that I was a feature dancer on with Darlene, was called From African to America [ph.].  And, there was a sister named Marciea [ph.] who was a splendid dancer.  In fact, she went on to be a dancer in New York [New York].  And, Marciea would do the African dance.  And, there was, there was an African dance that was like, like president for every dance that was in pop culture for African people here in America.  And, you know, as you know, if you come from here, every James Brown records had a dance to go with it.  And, in, so, all these James Brown records, you know, that were coming up, that were out during my midst, all these dances that were affiliated with them had some sort of precedent in authentic African dance.  And, we'd do this, this combination, you know, where she would do the African dance and I would do the pop culture American, Afro American dance.  But, you could clearly see that, it's like there was nothing new under the sun that we just kept reinventing ourselves over, and over, and over again.  So, I had more awareness of who I was and the grander scheme of things than I would've had if I had not been a part of that dance troupe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that really made an impact on you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 208987
Speaker 1: Is there anything else before we get you out of [Englewood] High School [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was a scholar.  I actually had time to be a scholar in high school.  I was a class officer.  I think I was the senior class president.  I was part of the National Honors Society.  I graduated third in my class.  I really enjoyed school.  I loved school.  You know, even now, I love school.
Speaker 1: You must have been pretty popular as a cheerleader.
Speaker 2: Cheerleader, swim leader, gym leader.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I ran for Miss Englewood, didn't win.  It was very instructive though because it was one of those instances that helped me grow personally.  Because, I, I did not realize there were people who would not like you because you are successful and because you are popular or, you know, for any of those things.  Naively, I think, I thought that if you hadn't done anything wrong to anybody there wouldn't be any reason for them not to like you.  And, that Miss Englewood experience taught me that there were a lot of people who didn't like me for reasons that I could never put my finger on and certainly for no reason--nothing that I had ever done to them.  So, I discovered even that there were people in my class as swim leaders, and gym leaders, and you know, people--I was cheerleader and they were majorettes and they didn't like me for a host of reason.  And, those sorts of things put calluses on your butt, as my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] used to say.  But, you need calluses as an adult.  You need to understand that everybody's not gonna love you, honey.  They just not.  So, you need to just keep on moving and do what you need to do and do your best and be a Christian about it.  You know, you don't have to be hateful to the people that are hateful to you.  But, just keep moving.  And, that was a real growth experience for me because I was very wounded by the fact that there were people that I knew who had been in my classes every single day, who I had been very nice to, who I found out didn't like me.  And, they used this opportunity, this Miss Englewood opportunity as an opportunity to express that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who won the contest?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Her name was Brenda [ph.].  I don't even remember her last name.  But, I remember that she was, she was smart, and she, she knew how to politic.  You know, I thought that being a good person and being successful and being well-liked would be sufficient.  And, Brenda was, she bought votes, you know, she bought--she spent a lot of money on candy and gum and that kind of stuff, you know.  And, she campaigned.  It was a lesson in politics at a very early age.  She really, really, really, she really, really, really wanted it.  She really, really, really drove the issue hard, you know, in terms of reaching out to people and securing their support, concretely by giving them things.
Speaker 1: But, was she in that group of thirty that you all, that you were in?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, but, you still, I mean, essentially, you had a lot of success in high school, and very popular.
Speaker 2: Oh, I did.  I had a great high school career.  And, you know, I would not do anything any differently, in truth, that I did because I got, I got to experience everything as a person who was actively engaged in student life.  You know, I was a scholar.  I did study very hard.  I didn't study as hard as the girls who were number one and number two, but I had more fun than they did (laughter).  So, you know, it was a great time in high school.  I enjoyed every single minute of it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to travel anywhere in high school?  On a trip (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Or, any high school trips?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't go anywhere.  And, you know, we didn't--we never took a trip to Washington [D.C.] or anything like that.  I think we might have gone to Springfield [Illinois] but that was about it.
Story_ID: 208988
Speaker 1: I was asking because, your career has been--you've been, I mean, to do what you do, you have to exhibit a lot of knowledge of the world and, you know, you seem to really know what's happening.  Was most of that really gleaned from, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Books.
Speaker 1: --reading and--
Speaker 2: I read.  And, I grew up reading the newspaper.  You know, my mo--I told you my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] was a student of the written word.  And, we had, we took several newspapers every day.  And, in fact, there was a wonderful program when I was maybe in third or fourth grade.  Sometimes you--I don't know if they do it now, but the [Chicago] Sun-Times used to have a school based instruction program.  Where they would send newspapers into the schools with a teacher's guide, every single day.  So, you're in third grade and you're reading the newspaper.  And, you are talking about current events and issues and things like that.  And, it, it inculcates in you, in most people I think, the desire to be newspaper reader and to stay plugged into current event.  Current events were very important in my household.  Even though my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] were not formally educated.  My folks paid attention.
Speaker 1: Now, was television a big part of growing up, or movies, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I loved to be outside.  You know, I watched television like everybody.  And, at one point I think I could even tell you what was on at a certain time a day.  But, there were not, there were not a lot of shows that I felt like I just had to be at home to see.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a favorite, or?  Probably not, I guess, if you, you know.
Speaker 2: No.  You know, right.  You think about it, there wasn't anything that leaps out.  You know, Sunday evenings, I think everybody was at home on Sunday evening.  We try to have a family meal.  We'd watch 'Lost in Space,' and 'Mister Ed' (laughter), you know, those are the things that kind of stick in my mind.  But, it wasn't like there was a--and with three, 'My Three Sons' was on, on Sunday evening.  You know, Sunday evening was kind of family night.  '[The] Ed Sullivan [Show]'; everybody watched Ed Sullivan, 'cause Ed Sullivan was kind of the king of pop culture, if you will.  You know, everybody who was anybody in the pop culture world was on 'The Ed Sullivan Show.'  I loved 'American Bandstand,' I do know that.  'Cause I loved to dance with the, the kids when they danced.  So, I guess, that was one of my favorites, 'American Bandstand.'
Speaker 1: Was 'Soul Train' on in Chicago [Illinois] then?
Speaker 2: 'Soul Train' came later.  I actually remember the fi- you, you were not here 'cause we talked about this earlier.  But, the forerunner to 'Soul Train' was 'The Big Bill Hill Show.'  This was when VHF [Very High Frequency], UHF [Ultra High Frequency] television just started.  So, Channel 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois] was, you probably could buy air time for fifty cents an hour.  It was so new.  And, there was a guy, he was on the radio on one of these little Podunk stations, his name was Big Bill Hill.  He was terrible.  But, he was a smart man.  He was very smart man.  He started the first African American television dance show.  He only had one camera, you know, so it was single camera production.  The kids were, you know, they certainly weren't all sophisticated looking like the 'Soul Train' kids or anything like that.  And, they'd get there and they dance right in front of the camera, you know.  But, it was like the forerunning of the Soul Train Line.  And, he had--it was his idea that Don Cornelius took, and improved upon tremendously, you know.  He had added a whole lot of production value.  Don Cornelius, as you know, was a disc jockey on WVON [WVON AM, Chicago, Illinois].  Was he on W--I think he was on WVON.  He was on one of the earlier African American stations.  But, he was a very enterprising guy.  And, so, he took it and polished it up.  And, made 'Soul Train.'  And, then eventually--'cause 'Soul Train' was on Channel 26 here.  And, eventually, he decided that it only really had a future if he could get it out to California.  And, so, he took it from Channel 26 to California.
Story_ID: 208989
Speaker 1: Now, why did--you went to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign (U of I), Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you decide on what college to attend?
Speaker 2: I really could've gone anywhere.  'Cause I had stellar grades and I had all that kind of high school experiences [at Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] that would enable you to go anywhere.  But, I did not have a broad perspective on the world.  You know, as a kid who really hadn't gone any place.  My sister [Leslie Sampson Mills], my oldest sister had gone down to U of I.  I'd gone down there to visit her.  She was part of Project 500 in Walter Washington land.  And, so, I went to visit her at U of I.  They were having a grand time down there.  I was a beautiful campus.  It was close enough away, but far enough away.  It appealed to me.  And, they were still aggressively recruiting African American students.  So, I decided to go down there.  I also knew I could get scholarship aid, you know, be in my home state that the tuition wouldn't be that expensive.  It was a good school.  But, I, you--I wasn't gonna get parental support.  I had to borrow money to go to school.  'Cause I didn't have--my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] couldn't afford to send me to school.  So, I was always sort of looking at what I could afford to do for myself.  And, I did not really have a perspective.  And, counseling was poor, at the high school, you know.  So, there was nobody telling me when I was a junior that I should be applying to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], or Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], or any of those schools.  They just weren't saying those things to me.  In fact, that--nobody was really counseling anybody at Englewood on anything to do.  Even though we were in the core group, we still had--you had to rely on the counselors at the school.  And, the counselors were overwhelmed and the majority of kids were not kids how were going to school.  So, much of what you had to do, you know, applying for schools, you had to do on your own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, how did you like the campus?
Speaker 2: I had a grand time.  I loved it.  It was a beautiful school.  A great experience for me.  I liked being that close.  I liked being that far.  I met wonderful people, formed lifelong friendships.  I was very well educated down there.
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: Radio and television broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Okay.  Right.  Was that a, was that a, well--
Speaker 2: Out the box decision?  No, it wasn't.  I went--I was so physical in high school that my first choice was to be a physical education instructor.  So, I spent my freshman year as a PE [physical education] major.  I played all day long; all these different sports.  Many of which I had never played in high school; field hockey, and the like.  You know, and of course, you have to--do you have the physiology of motion and all that sort of stuff.  But, I spent my whole first year as a PE major.  And, somewhere in the process, and I wish I could say it was some inspired thought on my own, but it wasn't.  I knew that I did not, I decided I did not want to be shut up in the gym all day with kids and away from the body of the faculty and the other people in the school.  So, I began to look at some other things to do.  And, I had a boyfriend who was a year ahead of me.  So, as I was going into my sophomore year, he was going into his junior year and he had chosen radio and television broadcasting.  And, in my completely naive way of looking at the work at that time, I thought, "Now, wouldn't that be nice.  We'll get married, and we'll be in the same field, and we could go to work together every day (laughter)."  So, I decided I would major in broadcasting.  And, ironically enough, he didn't get a job in broadcasting, I did (laughter).  But, it was--I spent my sophomore year doing my general election requirements and it's a curriculum that you go into as a junior.
Story_ID: 208990
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers, or where there any teachers there that were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: --were mentors to you in any way?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  That is probably one of the things that I learned most about college.  You me--you know, it's great if you have a mentor and some folks will mentor you.  But, it is a big school.  It is a big school.  And, so, you have more contact probably with teaching assistants than you do with professors to a large degree.  And, you have to come down there motivated to get what you need on your own.  And, if, if you don't have a peer mentor or some young person who's just recently gone through it, like maybe, an advisory on your floor, or you get in a sorority or fraternity and you meet somebody who is able to help you, you may miss some of the more vital interactions and opportunities.  Because as I look back on it, I might not have had to go to Dayton, Ohio to get into broadcasting and not get into broadcasting in Dayton.  If I had taken better advantage of the opportunities to participate in every activity that was happening on that campus that would have enhanced my skills as a broadcasting major.  I mean, I had a work study job at the television station but, every work study opportunity--I had to work through school, but every work study opportunity should have been something related to broadcasting.  And, every internship that was possible, I should have been doing that.  And, I didn't do that, and, you know, that's my own fault.  I wasn't as aware as I should have been of what I should have been doing and how those experiences could have enhanced my opportunities when I came out.  So, when I came out, I didn't have nearly as much experience in broadcasting or radio and television as I could have.  And, those are the things that would have differentiated me in the market place.  Coming back to a place like Chicago [Illinois], I still might have been able to get a low level job here.  Or, get some other type of paid internship here, if I had had what I needed.  Or, certainly when I went to a big place like Dayton, Ohio (laughter), I would have been able to get an opportunity, but I didn't.  You know, I had to start, dig down to square one and start when I got the opportunity.  And, that's how I wound up starting in Springfield [Illinois].
Story_ID: 208991
Speaker 1: Dayton [Ohio] had WDAO [WDAO-FM, Dayton, Ohio], which was one of the pioneer FM, what do they call, like urban contemporary stations.
Speaker 2: I went there.  I went to where, to the television station where Phil Donahue started.  I went to where Erma Bombeck had her broadcasting career at its infancy.  You know, I went to every radio station and to every television station.  But, and they all said to me, you know, "This is entirely too big a market for you to start here."  That was the first things they'd say to me.  And, then in the second breath they'd ask me, "Well do you know so and so?  He or she works in Chicago [Illinois] at a television station or a radio station."  And, it started me to thinking, "We'll that's why I don't have a job there."  (Laughter) You got all these people from Dayton working there.  But, you know, it was good to start in Springfield [Illinois].  Springfield was a grand place to start actually because I got a bushel basket of hands on experience during a wide variety of things at a really good station, well-managed, well-maintained, wonderful ownership, you know, family owned radio station.  I never would have had that experience if I had started someplace else.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you know why they hired you?  I mean, you know, I mean, on the surface, I mean, you have a very pleasant voice.  I mean, you have a very pleasant voice for radio.  Was that one of the reasons that they hired you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Although, I did not even have a tape at the time they hired me.  But, they were very conscientious folks.  Shelby Halverson [ph.] was the station owner.  Very conscious businessman in Springfield; very committed to causes like the Urban League and things like that.  And, had a real commitment to making sure that the community was represented.  They were looking for someone from the African American community to be on the air there.  They were looking for a young person.  You know, it didn't pay very much money.  But, it was a great opportunity for somebody like me who was really still fresh out of school and had not had a chance to get a job in her major at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long were there?
Speaker 2: Not more than a couple years.  Not more than a couple years.  Misfortunate brought me back home.  But, you know, I happened to look at misfortunate as sometimes a kick in the pants will kick you in the right directions.  Because my house was burglarized while I was down there.  I was home for a weekend.  I lived around the corner from the local high school.  And, I don't know how long my house stayed opened but, by the time I got back on Monday morning, there were nothing there.  And, everything that I owned, you know, I had two pairs of jeans, a dress, and couple shirts, and a pair of shoes with me.  Everything else was gone.  So, you know, I mean, everything, all my mementos, you know, from high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].  My music collection.  I had this fabulous music collection 'cause I had bought records since I was a kid.  You know, so all, I had all these anthologies and, you know, greatest hits from The Miracles and The Temptations and this.  All that stuff was gone.  And, that's another one of those life experiences that help you grow.
Story_ID: 208992
Speaker 1: You know, it was a horrible, horrible feeling to walk into your house and have--at twenty-four years old, and be reduced to whatever you have in your hand.  And, I took one look around, I screamed as loud as I could.  One long, it was like a primal scream, and then I closed the door and I went out, and I just started to deal with it.  You know, I knew I had to go home.  I went to the station [WTAX-AM, Springfield, Illinois].  I told them, "I can't stay down here, 'cause I don't even have anything to stay with."  I did--I only made two hundred dollars a week.  It was just enough money to live on.  They wanted to advance me money.  But, if you advance me money, I can't even pay it back.  'Cause I, you know, I just make enough money to live on.  I don't even have anything to wear to go to work except for these two pairs of jeans, and this dress.  So, I had--I was taken down to square one, and I had to go home [Chicago, Illinois].  But, when you lose all of your material possessions, it really makes you--it boils you down to the very essences of who you are in life.  You know, who am I without my clothes?  You know, the things that I feel like I can put on and look like me.  Who am I, without all my possessions, my creature comforts; the things that make me feel wonderful, you know, to listen to, to play with, to be with?  Who am I, without everything that roots me materially to this spot?  So, that was a tremendous growth experience for me.  It is not one that I recommend to anybody but, you know, I believe what does kill you, makes you stronger.  And, I actually lost all my material possession two or three times like that.  I've experienced two or three break-ins over--none lately but, you know, two or three times in my twenties and thirties.  I lost everything like that, or a huge chunks of things, and those things grow you a lot.  They grow you a lot.
Story_ID: 208993
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Avis, A-V like Victor I-S, LaVelle, L-A-V like Victor E-L-L-E.  And, it's an upper case V.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 11, 2005.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 208994
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, this is a continuation of an interview we started some time ago.  And, I think, we left you in high school, I think, or at high school graduation or close to it, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, so, we wanna pick up there and move forward.
Speaker 2: Sure.  I was--I went to the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana [Illinois] after I graduated from Englewood High School in Chicago [Illinois].  I grew up in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community; went to my local public school, went to the University of Illinois, which is a public university in Champaign-Urbana; was a broadcast major, broadcast radio and television.  But, that wasn't my first choice of a major.  I very first things I majored in was physical education because I loved being a physical person.  But, it seemed to me after a couple years that it didn't have enough simulation.  You know, it didn't have enough contact with outside world.  I was very interested in the media.  So, I majored in radio and television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, is there--did you chose the University of Illinois because of its radio/television program or how--
Speaker 2: I did not.  I chose the University of Illinois because my sister, my oldest sister [Leslie Sampson Mills] had gone to school there.  Because I could get a Illinois state scholarship to be able to go to an in-state school.  And, I didn't really have a perspective on choices of college.  I didn't have great counseling as a high school student.  You know, when I look back over what my choices really were, I didn't fully maximize my choices.  'Cause I graduated third out of my class and I was a student athlete.  So, I did a lot of extracurricular activity and all that; National Honor Society, you know, class officer, and the whole nine yards.  And, I probably could have gone to an Ivy League school if I had applied to an Ivy League school.  And, I'm sure I would've been accepted and I probably would have gotten a decent financial aid package.  But, I wasn't really counseled in my--in my family, I'm first generation college.  So, I couldn't look to my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] to give me that kind of counseling and guidance.  So, if you don't get it from--at home, and you don't get it at school, then you just basically don't get it.  But, I did see other kids going to school, and my older sister had gone to the University of Illinois under Project 500.  Which was the project that was aimed specifically at bringing minority students to the University of Illinois campus.  So, my sister is three years older than I.  So, when I neared my--when I was in my junior year in high school, she was a sophomore in college.  And, I went to visit her, I thought it was a great school, and you know, going to college seemed like a grand idea.  So, that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: So, you graduated from high school in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], okay.  Okay, so, now in--now you sound like, well, that point in time, you--I don't know what you couldn't do from what we (laughter), National Honor Society, and you're athletic and, you know, that's a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I could've got--you know, when I look back on it, if I had been the beneficiary of better counseling, you know, I would have had a broader perspective on what was available to me and what I should have been aspiring to.  But, I didn't have it.  You know, and I got a great education at the University of Illinois.  I don't regret any decisions that I made, or any path that my life took, 'cause all of it made me the person that I am today.  But, I could have--one thing that I do note is that people put a great deal of credence in the credentials that you get from certain schools.  I'm not sure that you necessarily learn anything different.  But, it gives you the imprimatur of having a high caliber pedigree.  And, so, I might have been a, I might have benefited more from going to an Ivy League school than I did University of Illinois.  I haven't done badly so I can't complain.  But, it might have been a different set of experiences for me.
Story_ID: 208995
Speaker 1: So, you started out as a phys-ed [physical education] major [at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Physical education major.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  That seems like a modest ambition for somebody in the National Honor Society.  You know, but--
Speaker 2: Well, you do--you chose what you like.  You know, if you're gonna chose a career then you should chose something that you feel like you could do for the rest of your life.  Because at that time, people did expect that they would be working in one career for years.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: So, how did you--what made you switch to broadcast?
Speaker 2: I had friends in the broadcast curriculum.  And, I was very interested in the sort of things that they were doing, and the kinds of opportunities.  And, I liked the media, you know, so, it seemed like a good idea.  It was my--at least some first-hand exposure to a different vein other than being a teacher or a social worker, which are the professional categories that I grew up exposed to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who were some of the teacher at University of Illinois that were--influenced you when you were there?
Speaker 2: Really, the only broadcast communications teacher that left an impression on me was Donald Mullally who was--he taught Broadcasting 101.  You know, I don't even remember any of the others.
Speaker 1: Was the black studies department there still fairly active in those days, or?  I mean, I think it was, I'm trying to think--I'm not actually who was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know what--
Speaker 1: --sure who was there in those days, I don't know.
Speaker 2: The counselors and there were people like Dean Shalee [ph.] and others who were probably much more of a day-to-day part of life for the African American students down there, than their professors.  You know, the thing that a lot of people don't like about Big Ten schools is that they are so large that the classes are largely impersonal.  You know, you have lots and lots of large lecturer hall classes with 150, 200 kids in it.  So, you don't have a personal relationship with your instructors by and large.  So, I don't have--there aren't many people that I can recite as, I had them for an instructor and they left an impression on me.  Not in college; high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], certainly.
Story_ID: 208996
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject [at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]?  Or, a favorite class I guess you'd say.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I did well.  I graduated with honors.  But, there wasn't anything in particular that made me say, oh, wow.  I'll tell you what was my more interesting classes were.  I had classes that I took as electives, things like, Film as Literature, and the Study of Humor.  Those things were incredibly interesting, and it--they were broadening with respect to my perspective on the world.  That was actually a better part of college to me than my own curriculum for the things that I majored in.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a part of any campus clubs, or did you run for office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  I was the social chairman for my chapter.  And, social chairman is actually, it's not just about having a good time because the social chairman is the person who helps you devise a means of raising money so that you can do your civic projects.  You know, you have service projects for--because it's a service sorority.  And, so, every year, you have to find a way to fund your service projects and that's the job of the social chairman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you meet any inspiring people in college?  And, often, you know, people come to college and lecturer or something or is there anything like that, is there anything like that that stands out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --during that period?
Speaker 2: College was fairly uneventful from the academic standpoint.  I did well.  I got good grades.  I applied myself.  I studied.  College was valuable to me in terms of broadening my perspective as a person who grew up in the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] community and really hadn't ventured all that far out of the Englewood community.  I met an awful lot of different people.  I met people who came to college with a very finely honed idea of what they wanted to be.  And, there were things that I'd never even heard of.  So, you know, it was very much of an awakening for me to go to college.  But, I didn't necessarily feel like the broadcast journalism curriculum was like a light came on over my head.  I left there, in fact, with a great, a feeling of great uncertainty about how this was gonna work out for me.  Because, I loved it as a career path.  But, there--coming back to Chicago [Illinois], which was at that time the number two media market in the country, it seemed highly unlikely that I would get an opportunity to apply my skills as an entry level applicant in the number two market in the country.  And, in fact, I did have to leave in order to be able to get my first broadcast job--
Story_ID: 208997
Speaker 1: Now, was your immediate goal to become a reporter, you know?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --a news anchor, or?
Speaker 2: I actually wanted to be in music.  I wanted to be on the entertainment side, a disc jockey.  But, radio is a very, very difficult field.  It is a very transient industry.  It is an industry where you fate is very much tied to whimsy.  You know, you're news, you're news director or your program director could wake up one morning and decide, everybody who's on the air is a sound that he's tired of, you know.  And, I--we need a fresh sound.  So, it is probably one of the few fields where you could work for somebody for six months, and you put that on your resume with hesitation, you know.  You may come to the end of six months and find yourself in another job, where you either found a better job in a bigger market, or you were forced to find a better job by being forced out of where you were.  So, people in radio move all around the county.  I think of, there's a guy on the radio, I think he's on the radio now in, maybe Miami [Florida].  But, it's almost like every market that I go in, I've heard him in.  He used to be here [Chicago, Illinois].  His name is Marco Spoon.  He used to be here.  He was in [Washington] D.C.  I'd turn on the radio in California, he was on the radio there.  I was in Miami a little while ago.  I turn on the radio Marco Spoon is down there.  And, it's like, I know what's happening with his life, you know, 'cause it's--the management changes or somebody changes their mind and you just go someplace else.  So, after a while that didn't seem so appealing to me.  It's okay as a twenty-one year old person.  And, the first really stable position to open up for me was a news position.  Now, as a person who has good skills as a writer, I've always been able to write well.  I've always been a big reader (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before that time though, were you really into music?  I mean, did you see yourself as someone who's a disc jockey, and--
Speaker 2: Well, I love music and I--
Speaker 1: Hosting a music show?
Speaker 2: My first radio job was in fact, a disc jockey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a great job.  I was twenty-one years old.  I was a broadcaster, a disc jockey in Springfield, Illinois, at a station [WTAX AM, Springfield, Illinois] that--it was just at the end of the era before stations got formatted, where there was a rotation that you heard every two and half hours like you do now.  So, before you had those kinds of formats, what you played as a disc jockey was entirely up to you.  And, so, you're in a room with a couple thousand records and you just pick what you wanna hear off the wall.  I was twenty-one.  The music that was in that room was all sorts of music.  But, what I was most familiar with, from among the music that was in that room, were the standards that I grew up listening to my parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] play.  So, I played a lot of jazz in Springfield, Illinois (laughter).  You know, I played Duke Ellington.  I played, I even played Tony Bennett.  You know, I--but, my, my show was very different from the show that was on in the morning.  And, very different from the show that was on the afternoon.  The guy in the morning liked show tunes.  The guy that was on in the middle of the day was a country and western guy.  I'm more jazz in the evening.  So, you know, each of us had manifested our own personalities in what we played.  But, it was a wonderful experience for me because, I knew the words to songs that were older than me.  And, I loved that music, and I still love it.  And, it was a great opportunity to just be completely immersed in it.  'Cause you are sitting in a room with a set of earphones on your ears, listening to stereophonic music and just empathizing and with a microphone in front of you.  So, it's you and the music and the people that you envision out there, on the other side.  And, that's a great experience for anybody.  And, it's a wonderful life, if you can make it work for you.  You know, and I--it gives me great pride to see people like Tom Joyner who learned the business of it.  So, that he could continue to do what he loves to do and be successful at it, very, very successful.  Because he not only controls his ability to listen to the music and do the very basics of it, which is be immersed in the music every day.  But, he learned the business of it so that he can make sure that he was financially secure.  And, he wasn't subject to being thrust from place to place like Marco Spoon is.  He owns himself.  Marco doesn't own himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had this job in Springfield at the station where you played the jazz?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that in '75 [1975]?  Was that after college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] or during college?
Speaker 2: I was down there in around '78 [1978]--
Story_ID: 208998
Speaker 1: --For a couple years I taught (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-eight [1978].  Okay.
Speaker 1: --I taught for a little bit.  You know, I stayed at home waiting for the great opportunity to break into the media and it didn't happen.
Speaker 2: So, did you teach on the college level or the--?
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't.  I taught at the University of Chicago, Office of Special Programs [Office of Special Programs-College Prep (OSP-CP), University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], which is a curric--you probably know [HistoryMaker] Larry Hawkins.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Coach Hawkins has that program that's been over there for a hundred years.  I taught speech and persuasive speaking to high school kids, you know.  I had been a product of that program when I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].  It's easy to come back.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, when you were--well, during your college years [at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], early '70s [1970s], there's a lot of political agitation going on, where you involved in any of that when you were coming along?  Or, did you--
Speaker 1: No.  You know, it really wasn't a lot of political agitation.  It--the difference between when I was on campus and when my sister [Leslie Sampson Mills] was on campus is that, things had kind of resolved, you know.  There was a lull and a sense of quiet on the campuses and it probably was a disservice to all of us, because we probably should have been agitated.  You know, but it was not the activism of the '60s [1960s] by the time I got to college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Come to, come to think of it, you're right.  Now, 'cause I was leaving school around that time, and I used to bemoan--
Speaker 1: It's very different; very different.
Speaker 2: --the attitude on campus--I mean, it changed.  Everything, everything, it sort of changed.
Speaker 1: It was very quiet.
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: The early '70s [1970s] was different.
Speaker 1: You just--it was, the emphases was more on the social life than on social activism.  And, so, at--we missed the opportunity to maybe make as much impact as we could have on a lot of social issues.  And, as a consequence, I think that there just isn't--there wasn't as much a sense of involvement in activism.
Speaker 2: I know that period of time, and now that I really think about, it was characterized by, I think, more black students in college than ever before.  For a brief period of time, there were more than it would ever be.  I mean, that were there--that are there now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was a culmination of all of those outreach efforts and all of that.  And, there was a liberalization in a lot of ways; the admission policies.  And, so, lots and lots of kids got in.  I don't even know that as many of them were prepared to be there as they should've been.  You know, it's almost like, you hear stories.  Some of the people that I know that were in Project 500 said they were literally swept up off the sidewalk.  You know, it's like, come on down to college, just come on in here.  You don't have to have any background.  You know, you don't have to be necessarily having been the best student or any of that.  Just come to college.  Well, that was an era onto itself.  But, it was a very different era than the era before that.  We had no sit-ins.  We had no protests.  We had no marches about anything.  We were never upset about anything.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  This is interesting history--'cause I know you're right (laughter).
Speaker 1: We were never upset about a thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now that I think about it, I know you're right, you know.
Speaker 1: So, very different.
Story_ID: 208999
Speaker 1: --I came out of school [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  I graduated early.  I graduated in three and a half years.  So, I came out before my class came out.  I went back to Chicago [Illinois].  I was unsuccessful in getting a broadcast journalism job.  I worked for the Office of Special Programs [Office of Special Programs-College Prep (OSP-CP), University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for a couple years.  And, then I got the opportunity to move to Dayton, Ohio with a friend of mine.  I went with a boyfriend who was getting a pharmaceutical job there.  And, I thought, well, this is a good idea to go to a smaller market maybe I can break into broadcast journalism there.  So, I go to Dayton, Ohio and the people in Dayton--I make the rounds of all the stations and they say to me, "You don't come to a big city like Dayton looking to get into (laughter) broadcasting."  So, I did not get into broadcasting in Dayton, Ohio.  I wound up working for NCR Corporation.  I worked for them for about six months and by that time, I had been out of school a little more than two years.  And, a friend of mine who was in the broadcast curriculum with me, who was a native of Springfield, Illinois, she is the person who got me the job in Springfield.  Because she had gone home and gotten a job immediately on her local radio station.  I, on the other hand, in bumping around looking here, looking there, looking in Dayton, trying to get a job in Chicago and none of that happened.  And, so, she had put in two years at that station and felt like she had learned everything that she could learn there and was ready to move to a slightly larger market.  And, her boss is there saying, "Well, do you know anybody who could replace you?"  And, she said, "Sure."  So, she called me and her new, news director, or actually her program director called me and he asked me--I was living in Dayton, he said, "If you'll drive to Danville, Illinois, I'll drive from Springfield to Danville.  I'll meet you, we'll have lunch, and we'll see if we can give you this job."  I didn't have an air check, which is what they call it when you have been on the radio or anything.  I didn't have an audition tape or anything.  But, he met me.  He liked me.  He liked the sound of my voice.  He hired me.  And, that's how my broadcast career started.
Speaker 2: So, did you try WDAO [WDAO AM, Dayton, Ohio] in Dayton?  I know you did, probably.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I tried everything, and then after they asked me that--after they admonished me about coming to a big city Chi- like Dayton to get into broadcasting, they say, "Well, you're from Chicago, do you know so and so?  They're from Dayton, they're up there in Chicago working."  And, I'm thinking to myself, "That's why I can't get a job."
Speaker 2: When you were talking earlier, now, I'm from Dayton, you know.
Speaker 1: Are you?
Speaker 2: And, when I got here in '77 [1977], people like Long John Silver from Dayton, who was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: DJ [disc jockey].
Speaker 1: I know Long John.
Speaker 2: He was here.
Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: There were quite a few of 'em were here.
Speaker 1: I know exactly who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: You know, during--yeah.
Speaker 1: And, Erma Bombeck was will alive.  And, Phil Donahue; well, all these are Daytonites, you know.  So, they had come to big city, made well, done well, you know.  But, they weren't at amenable to me coming from Chicago, breaking into Dayton broadcasting.  So.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Dayton's too big.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, so.
Speaker 1: So, you know, an interesting period of time.  And, I--everything made me who I am.
Story_ID: 209000
Speaker 1: So, I worked in Springfield [Illinois at WTAX-AM] for a couple years.  And, then I came back home [Chicago, Illinois] as a result of a break-in.  I wasn't making very much money in Springfield, you know.  I made two hundred dollars a week; ten thousand two hundred dollars a year and--ten thousand four hundred dollars a year.  And, I had gone home for the weekend and when I came back my apartment had been burglarized.  And, everything that I owned was gone.  And, they wanted me, they really wanted me stay, but--and they wanted to advance me money, but the problem is, when you're making so little money, if you took an advance you could never pay it back.  And, so, I needed to go home because I had no clothes except for the things that I had in my bag.  I had--everything that I had ever owned was gone out of that apartment.  So, it was like starting from nothing.  But, as weird as that may sound, that was a character building experience.  Because, when you have nothing, you realize the extent to which who you are.  You're so much contingent upon all the things that you own.  You know, you--when you're broken down to the very essences of your personality.  So, you don't have all you're cute little clothes.  And, you don't have your--all your creature comforts.  And, you don't have all the music, and albums that you used to have.  And, you know, so, none of the things that made you feel good, none of things that you felt like made you look special and distinguished you, you know.  No shoes, no clothes, no special things, no nothing, and very little ability to get those things.  You begin to understand the essence of who you are, and you've gotta be centered in who you are.  Because those are things that will destroy you, if you let them.  Or, certainly, really, really, really decimate your self-esteem and break you down to nothing, if you let them.  But, it made me a stronger, better person, I think.  You know, to come through it.  And, it was actually--I'd lost, so I'd lost it.  That was the first time I lost everything (laughter).  I've lost everything a coup--or, lost much a couple times, you know, through the results of break-ins and things like that.  But, that was the time that it was the most devastating because it was like, all the records that I had bought through high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  You know, I was a big music fan, and collector of records.  I had none of that stuff.  No clothes.  No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, were you out of town--
Speaker 1: No mementos.
Speaker 2: When they broke in?
Speaker 1: I was in Chicago [Illinois].  I was in Chicago.  And, I went away for the weekend and when I came back, it was all gone.  I lived in a little garden level apartment around the corner from a high school.  And, I could park my car right in front of my door.  So, it's pretty obvious when I'm there and when I'm not.  When I came back, my window was broken out and my front door was wide open.  And, I have no idea how long my apartment had been opened.  But, there was nothing left.  Not even food in the freezer.  There was nothing left.  So, you know, that kind of thing is pretty devastating for somebody.  I was 25--24, 25 years old.  So, I went home; start over, you know.  Went home, start over, and that is how I made the transition from music to news.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Because when I came home, I needed a job and I had--I wanted to stay in broadcasting.  And, the first opportunity that opened up for me was not a music job.  It was a news job.  Now, when I was in Springfield, I was a disc jockey, but I also, as you do at every small station, you have many responsibilities.  And, so, I was the public affairs director.  And, in a very small new--very small market, there's a very thin line between news and public affairs.  So, the Urban League banquet or the United Way [Worldwide] campaign, you cover all of those things for the station and you write stories.  They are public affairs and, you know, community affairs but, what goes in the news cast in a small town were things that might not ever get into a newscast in a major city.  So, I had experience as a newswriter and I had done those things.
Story_ID: 209001
Speaker 1: Their problem was that they went from a mechanical industry to an IT [information technology] industry, a high technology industry.  And, it changed the composition of the workforce and the skillset that was necessary to be a part of the workforce.
Speaker 2: We're talking about in Dayton, Ohio?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, at NCR [Corporation].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, I think a lot of places in the early '70s [1970s] were making that kind of transition where they could--
Speaker 1: It was NCR, Whirlpool [Corporation].  And, all of that stuff was happening and it was very turbulent.
Speaker 2: So, what exactly did you do at NCR when you were there?
Speaker 1: At NCR I was a national sales representative.  So, I worked for--I had an account.  My account was Montgomery Wards.  And, as a national sales representative, I didn't really have to sell them products, I was more like a customer service liaison to them because they already had NCR point-of-sale terminals.  So, I just had to make sure that they had all of the materials that they needed, you know, the receipts that go in, and all of the accessories.  Like the scanners, handheld scanners, and things like that.
Story_ID: 209002
Speaker 1: We were talking about the news job that you got in Chicago [Illinois], (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, my first news job was actually in Gary, Indiana at WLTH [WLTH AM, Gary, Indiana].  What they needed was a full-time news person, and I knew how to do that.  So, beca- I was always a good writer, and I had done news writing in Springfield [Illinois at WTAX-AM].  So, I went to work for them.  And, within the course of maybe six or seven months, a news director left, and I became the news director there.  And, it was a good opportunity because I anchored in the morning and then I administered the operation in the afternoon.  And, there were people there who--you know, it's a, it's a neighbor market to Chicago.  They hear everything that happens in Chicago.  But, they don't necessarily know very much about what happens in northwest Indiana.  Chicago doesn't know much about what happens in northwest Indiana.  So, I began to be a stringer for some of the local stations here.  And, as a result of stringing for one of those stations, I wound up getting a job here.  I couldn't break into Chicago proper when I first came back from Springfield.  So, going to WLTH was probably a good training ground for that.  So, I got my first job in Chicago was with a station for whom I was a stringer.  It was with WJJD [WJJD AM; WYLL AM, Chicago, Illinois], and WJEZ [WJEZ FM; WJMK FM, Chicago, Illinois] which was an AM and FM Country and Western outlet.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: They just all run together.  I guess this would be--
Speaker 1: So, you left Springfield in '78 [1978], so, that's--
Speaker 2: I left Springfield in '79 [1979]--
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], okay.
Speaker 2: --I think, yeah.  So, this is probably '82 [1982], '81 [1981], '82 [1982], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: So, you're at WJJD, here?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Country and Western.
Speaker 1: Country and Western.  And, you were writing the news basically, or?
Speaker 2: Writing and anchoring newscast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I worked there for five years.  And, toward the end of that five years period, they decided they wanted to have a presence out on the street.  That they wanted to actually have a street reporter.  And, so, I jumped at the opportunity to do that, because it was something that I hadn't done, and it was--what they wanted was somebody to cover politics.  You know, go down to [Chicago] City Hall and this was, you know, this was during the tail end of the [Mayor] Jane Byrne era.  And, Jane Byrne was doing a lot of sort of haywire things.  And, there was a lot of opportunity to send somebody down there and just get, get some live sound and, you know, add some flavor to the newscast as opposed to just talking head.  So, I jumped at the opportunity to do that in my last couple of years at the station.  I was their city hall correspondent.  As a result of that, I was air checked by somebody from WGN [WGN AM, Chicago, Illinois].  The WGN news director had heard me and he had also seen me because in my last two years, yeah, I think so, in my last two years at the, at WJJD, it was during the period of time when Harold Washington launched his campaign for mayor in the three way race between Jane Byrne, Rich Daley [Mayor Richard M. Daley], and Harold Washington.  I mean, all of that was going on.
Speaker 1: This is the hottest political time in Chicago history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --I think you can be safe in saying that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there's been no other time when--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A mayoral race was such a--was so hotly contested and--
Speaker 2: And, I wound up doing--I began to participate on a regular basis in shows, like Chicago Weekend Review [ph.] and things like that because the African American polit- community was so politically energized.  And, these shows with these talking heads realized that they didn't really have any perspective at all on what the African American community was thinking.  And, so, I was invited more and more as the city hall correspondent to participate.  And, it was an interesting time for me because, it actually--those--that participation in the last two years at WJJD and then in the next four or five years at WGN is what led me to become more politically active in the first place.
Story_ID: 209003
Speaker 1: Now, did you start WGN [WGN AM, Chicago, Illinois] after Harold Washington won the [mayoral] race or before?  That was '83 [1983] when he was elected, the spring of '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Jane Byrne was elected in '80 [1980]--so, that's--let me think, it kinda, it all runs together in my mind.  I think that I was working for W--I was working for WGN just before the election proper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I covered the last gasp of the [Mayor] Jane Byrne administration, as a WGN reporter.  And, because I remember when she lost the primary going down to the McCormick Inn [Chicago, Illinois], where the Harold Washington's --
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That'd be March of '83 [1983], yeah.
Speaker 2: --victory party was.  So, I was already working for [W]GN then.  So, I participated in these shows and at WGN, I hosted a show; a political talk show.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember (laughter).  I don't remember what it was called.  But, I had a weekly show and because it was WGN, which is the number one broadcast outlet, the same people who never called me back when I was at WGN would be tripping--WJJD [WJJD AM; WYLL AM, Chicago, Illinois] would trip all over themselves to call me back and get on that show when I was at WGN.  So, we could get anybody to come on and be on the show.  And, I developed relationships across the political spectrum.  You know, at every level because of the power of WGN Broadcasting.
Speaker 1: And, WGN, stands for World's Greatest Newspaper.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Chicago Tribune owns it.  So, it has all this journalist backup, you know, you'd guess.  I mean, it was--is it, I mean, so it seem like it'd be a pretty, I mean, it'd be a place where there'd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a great job.
Speaker 1: --be a lot of scrutiny--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In terms of what you do.  It wasn't?
Speaker 2: I loved being a radio reporter.  More than being a television reporter.  You know, I did TV part-time at WGN when I was at the radio station, I would work on the weekends for the television outlet, WGN TV [Chicago, Illinois].  But, radio is the best job in the world because radio is autonomous.  Broadcasting, television broadcasting has so many people in your mix when you're putting your product together.  You know, you, you can't even, you can't, you can't shoot the tape, so you're there as a reporter but you are very dependent on the ability and even the good will of your videographer, you know.  And, then you go back to the studio and you have a news producer who tells you--who wasn't there and didn't hear what you heard, tell you what the angle of the story outta be and how long the story's gonna be.  And, then you, you go into the vid--the editing suite and you have a video editor who is gonna work with you to plug in some pictures.  But, much of that isn't what you necessarily--unless your script, it tightly calls for a particular video element, you don't know what your--what the video aspect of your picture--your story is gonna look like at the end of the day.  You know, you know what sound bites you're calling for, you know what mural you are specifically speaking to that has to be represented because of what your script says.  But, all the rest of the picture elements in your story, you don't know what those are.  So, I wasn't very satisfied with television.  Radio is a great job and WGN is a great radio station to work for.  And, they gave me complete autonomy because they felt like I knew what I was doing and I knew the people, and that I came back with the story.  So, it was a wonderful job.  And, I worked for them until I was approached by Richard [M.] Daley, state's attorney, and his fledgling campaign to come and be a part of them.
Speaker 1: Now, this is around 1991 or so?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't.
Speaker 2: They approached me in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988]--
Story_ID: 209004
Speaker 1: --Right.
Speaker 2: In '87 [1987], that's when Mayor [Harold] Washington died, and I was a reporter in [Chicago] City Hall, working for WGN [WGN AM, Chicago, Illinois] when I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. His second campaign was '91 [1991], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It went--during that very tumultuous time when [HistoryMaker] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer was selected by the [Chicago] City Council.  And, Tim [Timothy C.] Evans had all those people come downtown and surround city hall, and march, and protest.  I was a reporter there.  I was trapped inside the building.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was there outside the building (laughter), making trouble.  And, it wasn't so much that Tim had people, I think, the people wanted to be there.  It was a genuine movement, 'cause we really didn't care that much, you know, who the figurehead was on some level.  We knew that we didn't want the mayor to be selected by the--
Speaker 2: By the city council.
Speaker 1: --white majority city council.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I--from my perspective it was more orchestrated in a lot of way.  But, it was a tumultuous time and it was a wonderful time to be a report in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean, I covered great stories as a reporter.  Stories that changed the way we do business in this country.  I covered the Tylenol tamperings, which changed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was a big story.
Speaker 2: That's huge.  And, it changed the way pharmaceuticals are packaged in this country.  I covered the Salmonella milk problem with Jewel Foods [sic. Jewel-Osco, Chicago, Illinois], which really was--when you look at the two of these, they were like case studies and what to do right in a crisis and what to do wrong in a crisis (laughter).  And, I was right there.  I covered both of them intimately.  I covered the first DNA case, which was that crazy case that Governor [James R.] Thompson presided over the, what was his name, Gary [Dotson] somebody.  It'll come to me in a minute.
Speaker 1: I know what you talking about.  Now, I can't think of his name either.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It'll come to me.  But, you know, that was the first case where somebody was exonerated by DNA.  You know, so, that was a fascinating case.  All the political upheaval that surrounded city call.  You know, from, from the end of the turbulent [Mayor] Jane Byrne era right on through the election of Harold Washington, the re-election of Harold Washington, and then I was finally a part of the administration when Richard [M.] Daley was elected.  But, you know, all of that time, it was just a great time to be in journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It seem--well, it's so much that goes--I mean, it's so much new in the City like Chicago.  I don't know if it's ever a bad time to be, you know.
Speaker 2: No.  There isn't.  There isn't.  We take our politics very seriously here.  Much more seriously than people do in other places.  And, we have a higher level of political awareness on the part of the general public, for the most part.  Not everybody.  But, for the most part.  So, being a political reporter is much more engaging here than in other places.
Story_ID: 209005
Speaker 1: Now, you're not a native Chicagoan [Chicago, Illinois] but did you have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I am.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, yeah.  Well, you are, but you, yeah okay.  I'm sorry.  I don't--but, did you have any--well, as a native Chicagoan, you know, did you have trepidation about working for Richard [M.] Daley, at that point?
Speaker 2: You know what, before I would agree to take the job, I said to the people who brought me in to interview with him, I said, "You know what, I have to really sit down with him and have some conversations so that I have an understanding about a couple things."  I wanted to know three things:  a) I wanted to know if, if he thought he would be like his father [Mayor Richard J. Daley], you know; b) I wanted to know, why you never stopped Council Wars [Chicago, Illinois]?  You had influence over aldermen, you could've stopped that in a minute.  You could've fixed things.  Why didn't you fix it?  And; I wanted to know what his commitment was gonna be to diversity.  And, I guess, the last thing I wanted know, which was not a specific question but, I just wanted to be a sense of--this was somebody that I had covered repeatedly as a reporter, and so, I knew him as a reporter knows a principle that he or she covers.  But, you don't really know a person that you cover.  So, I wanted to sit with him in a less guarded period of time, and get some sense of who this man really is.  And, so, I, you know, my questions, he answered.  He said to me, "My father was my father.  I'm not my father.  I'm a different person.  I live in a different era.  And, even my father became a much different person toward the end of his administration than he was at the beginning.  My father recognized that life was changing.  That it was very different.  And, he was much more open to change than people imaged that he would be."  And, I asked him why he didn't stop Council Wars.  And, he said, he offered to stop Council Wars.  He went to Harold Washington early on and said, "Mayor, if you want me to have my people vote in a certain way and work with you, we can stopped this if you want it."  And, he said, the mayor essentially said to him, really, both parties, both factions, the [Edward] Vrdolyak faction and the Washington faction; they like the tension because it was galvanizing.  It galvanized their forces.  They did not want for somebody to step in and play the peacemaker.  Because it, it kept their forces galvanized.  So, it was not something that they wanted to fix.  It was not something that they wanted to fix.  And, I had, you know, he said to me, he wanted an administration that was gonna look like the City [of Chicago, Illinois].  You know, he was committed to do that.  And, I, I, my request to him was, I don't wanna just be your mouthpiece, somebody wheeled out to talk about decisions that were already made.  You know, I if--it's all right if you don't do what I think you ought to do.  But, I want to be at the table when decisions are made.  And, I wanna have the freedom to speak my mind on it, so that I have some idea of the thought process that goes into the decisions that you make.  Because then I feel like I'm qualified to fully speak to why you arrived at the point that you did.  And, what went into the decision making process.  I'm not very good at just coming in at the end.  That's not the kind of person that I am.  And, he agreed that I could be at the table and could be a policy advisor for the administration and not just a spokesperson.  So, that to me was important because this is where I live.  This is where my family lives.  I wanted to be a part of--it seemed to me inevitable that he would be the mayor.  Because I did not see Gene [HistoryMaker Eugene] Sawyer advocating.  He was the mayor.  And, I did not see Tim [Timothy C.] Evans saying, well, Gene Sawyer is the mayor and I'm not going to split the vote.  'Cause at that time, you know, it was a, it was not a non-partisan election, it was a Democratic primary.  But, once a Democratic primary was decided, that was it.
Story_ID: 209006
Speaker 1: I'm surprised to find out it's not like that in every major city, but it certainly is here, when you win the Democratic primary in Chicago [Illinois], you're in, pretty much.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  So, I got my questions answered.  I knew that there would be people who would be disturbed that I made the decision to work with [Richard M.] Daley folks.  But on the other hand, I had known Gene [HistoryMaker Eugene] Sawyer for years.  And, I had known Tim [Timothy C.] Evans for years.  Remember now at that time, I had covered [Chicago] City Hall for eight or nine years.  Neither of them asked me to do anything for them.  And, it was a forgone conclusion that because both of them was so adamant about remaining in the race that neither of them was going to be the mayor.  So, then why shouldn't I work with Richard Daley, who is going to be the mayor?  And, can't I be more helpful inside than outside.  So, I decided that it was worth doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I did it.  Now, it was not without turbulence.  There were plenty of people who didn't like it.  There were people who confronted me in the streets.  There were people who sent me death threats.  There were bunches and bunches of friends of mine who called me up to say, "You know, I got in a big fight over you today."  You know, somebody was talking about you that didn't even know you.  And, running you down, and I jumped in on your behalf before I know you, and I know what you stand for.  But, it was not without turbulence.  Now, ironically enough, over time, people got a much better understanding of what I stand for personally and what value it brought for me to be there on behalf of the African American community.  And, people change.  And, I think the other thing is that, over time, people--Mayor Daley convinced people that he really was going to do what he said he was gonna do.  You know, the expectation--he was the beneficiary in many ways of incredibly low expectation about what he would do with respect to the fairness in the distribution of city services and his approach to governing.  People really thought that he would be incredibly unfair, and that he would exhibit incredible bias against the minority community.  And, that wasn't what happened.  So, he benefited from people having such low expectations.  And, he, he performed well beyond what they expected of him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The expectations were very low.  While I don't know the number fronts, so.  And, you know happily he's exceeded most of the low expectations that people had.
Story_ID: 209007
Speaker 1: But, when you were, when you--it was announced that you were gonna be, you know, working with the [Richard M.] Daley administration, people did discuss it and they were very--some people were very upset about it.  And, but, at the same time, when you looked at Gene [HistoryMaker Eugene] Sawyer and Tim [Timothy C.] Evans, and the new--the [Mayor] Harold Washington party was forming (unclear) it was not a chance, it didn't seem to me that, that--and I voted for everybody black that appear on a ballot, you know, whenever--whether it's a primary or general election.  It doesn't appear to me that anybody was likely to win.
Speaker 2: Well, and you know what, the thing about it is, I worked with these people.  I had exposure to each and every one of them, in a way that most people don't with the people that they are left to choose from in an election process.  Gene Sawyer was a nice guy who got pulled into something that really was overwhelming.  And, he didn't have the level of support that he needed to actually to be as successful as he could have been.  And, he spent a huge portion of this time defending himself from attack.  Now, who was attacking him at every opportunity?  Tim Evans.  If Gene Sawyer said, up; Tim Evans said, down.  But, what I didn't see from Tim Evans, during the period of time when Gene Sawyer was the mayor was nearly as much energy put into putting forth positive proposals to make me and other people aware of why he would have been viable and the better choice.  His energy went into pulling Gene Sawyer down.  Not into building Tim Evans up.  And, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, the question was sorta raised, in retrospect, one could--now, people I knew who were in Chicago [Illinois] for a long time pointed out that Tim Evans' mentor was Claude Holman, who is not known as the most progressive of men.  And, people had--well, wondered about, is they wondered--they knew he was smart, and articulate, and bright, the kind of person you would want to represent you, you know, if everything else was the way it should be.  But, there were some questions about, you know, in the progressive community about how progressive he really was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, he didn't show me anything.  You know, I was looking for--when, when all of that marching was going on around city hall, I was with him, emotionally.  You know, as a reporter, that wasn't reflected in my coverage.  But, emotionally, I was feeling like, he should have been the one as opposed to Gene Sawyer.  But, what I never saw, that was disappointing to me was, you have this window, this year and a half, two year window to show everybody why the [Chicago City] Council majority made a mistake in not selecting you.  He didn't maximize that opportunity.  He spent all of his time trying to destroy the Sawyer administration in point, and belittle them, and make them look like they were the mistake.  But, you don't do that by tearing somebody down, you do the best job on that by building yourself up above that.  You know, he should've been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you know, and you look at it though, you--it was a perfect setup for, for the majority that wanted to get the mayoralty back.  Because the put a--here they put Eugene Sawyer in an office and they know he's not gonna be there long, because he doesn't have the black community behind him.  They appoint him.  And, then there's really no clear choice in the black community and certainly with him being an incumbent, he gonna run again, it's gonna split the vote.  I mean, it's just, it's almost like a, it's like a formula almost, for defeat.
Speaker 2: Well, Gene Sawyer could've been more affective had he not been under assault at all times.  And, Tim Evans, had a perfect opportunity, notwithstanding what the setup that you may feel like happened on the other side of the equation.  Tim Evans had a perfect opportunity as the person who had the hearts and minds of the African American community at that time, to really show them what he was made of.  But, he didn't.  He didn't do anything that I felt like was particularly productive.  His energy was destructive, target at destroying the Sawyer administration.  But, when it came down--I couldn't tell you a handful of initiatives that came from the Evans folks during that period of time that were constructive things that were meaningful for the City of Chicago on a whole or the African American community in general.  I couldn't tell you.  And, I was there.  I lived with him.  I was a city hall reporter.  So, that was disappointing to me.  I didn't feel like was--I felt like the handwriting was on the wall.  And, at the end of the day, the people who didn't like it, they don't put any food on my table, they put no clothes on my back, they do nothing for my children, you know.  So, I have to make some decisions for myself about what is meaningful or not.  And, whether there could be meaningful participation on my part.  And, whether it was a great career move or not.  It was clear to me that he [Richard M. Daley] was going to be the mayor.
Story_ID: 209008
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think that pretty much, people who knew politics in the black community really knew, pretty much thought he [Richard M. Daley] would be [mayor of the City of Chicago, Illinois] too, you know.  They--even the activists, you know, which was a sad kind of a situation we had there, you know, so.  Two candidates and no, you know, electorate that was basically stunned (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know after the death of [Mayor] Harold Washington the black--
Speaker 2: We were in shock.
Speaker 1: --electorate--
Speaker 2: We were in shock.
Speaker 1: --was in shock; still in shock.
Speaker 2: So, the people that brought me into the Daley campaign, David Wilhelm, David Axelrod, Rahm Emanuel, was the same people that brought me into the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton campaign.  Because all--after three and a half, four years of working for Mayor [Richard M.] Daley, they had gone to the advisors to Bill Clinton and his fledgling run for president.  And, they asked me to come and work with them.  And, in '91 [1991], I wouldn't.  In '92 [1992], I felt like, well, this would be interesting.  It's a national campaign.  I've never worked in a national campaign before.
Speaker 1: Now, I did wanted to ask one more thing about Daley, were there--I mean, there's one skeleton in the closet I wanted to discuss.  And, I wonder if you see that as a, saw that as weakness in those days?  But, as [Illinois] state's attorney, there are lots of people locked up and who actually went to death row based on evidence that apparently in the light of DNA evidence over the years have shown to be faulty, they weren't the ones.  Only about fifteen now, you know, and they were all, you know arrested and prosecuted during the Daley administration.  Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, you know, hindsight is 20/20.  You can't--I can stand here now and say that's a travesty against justice.  But, I wasn't the beneficiary of that information at that time.  You know, every person in jail says, they didn't do it.  Some of them really didn't.  But, there has to be something concrete that proves that they don't do it, you know.  You don't get the, you don't get the benefit of the doubt when you're a criminal prosecution situation.  The benefit of the doubt actually works in the other way.  You know, particularly in the case, sadly enough, in the case of people who are poor and are generally underrepresented, you don't get the benefit of the doubt.
Story_ID: 209009
Speaker 1: I want to backtrack on a couple things, we talked through 'em while we were changing tape, but the idea that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That Mayor [Richard M.] Daley could have fixed Council Wars [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Who was then--?
Speaker 2: He was [Illinois] state's attorney--
Speaker 1: State's attorney, yeah.
Speaker 2: But, he--his ward organization is the 11th Ward organization.  He was closely aligned with other ward organizations that were part of the regular Democratic Party.  So, they were a good three maybe four alderman who were very closely aligned with the regular Democrats.  And, who could have easily switch side from the [Edward] Vrdolyak side to the [Harold] Washington side, if they had been asked to do so.  They were never asked to do so because it wasn't something that either Vrdolyak or Harold Washington really wanted to fix.  Both of them really enjoyed the galvanizing force of clashing like that.  Because it kept their followers energized.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The intensity of the public feeling about, you know--I know on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] the black community was, well, south and West Side [Chicago, Illinois], people were really intense (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really energized.
Speaker 1: --about how they--their loyalty to Harold Washington was really--
Speaker 2: Fierce.
Speaker 1: Beyond--yeah, fierce.
Speaker 2: Fierce loyalty.
Speaker 1: So much so that black politicians that wanted to vote another way from time to time, they're not even think about it.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you know, if that were to go away then you have a lot of people wandering off, doing--taking care of other agendas.  Because, you know, it, it is, it's an error to believe that we are monolithic, politically monolithic as a community.  We are not, nor is white America, they are, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's a shock to South Side of--I mean, the black community in Chicago [Illinois] they--we, I think we tend to think of the white aldermen, aldermen always being in one voting bloc.  Except for the couple of liberals from--you know, like Helen Shiller or somebody like, or Joe Moore.  But--
Speaker 2: But, there are bunches of different agendas that would exercise themselves if it was perceived that the political leadership was weak.  You know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you need the galvanizing force.  Politicians frequently used public pressure to keep their supporters in line and keep their legislative bodies in line.  It's like that stuff that [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan used to do where he'd call on the public to call their members of [U.S.] Congress if they were trying to deviate from his Reagan agenda.  You know, let them know that you want me to do this.  That's flexing your political muscle so that they know that the people that send them there want blind, faithful following of the elected, the key elected official.
Story_ID: 209010
Speaker 1: Was there anything that really surprised you positively or negatively about [Mayor] Richard [M.] Daley's administration in the first few years?
Speaker 2: Positively, I'm very proud of having being a part of the Daley administration.  And, I will say to you that the attention to detail for the nuts and bolts of government was an incredible thing to behold.  Because, this is really somebody who--he felt like the role of gov--of city government is to make sure that government really does operate well.  That gover- that the City [of Chicago, Illinois] looks as good as it can, that the people get the services that they're entitled to.  So, a lot of the things that have manifest themselves now, things that you see and all around you, you know, the way the streets look, the flowers and all of those things, the enhancements, a lot of those initiatives were things that--the seeds for which, literally and figuratively, were planted a long time ago.  This is somebody who I spent many, many hours riding around with him from community to community.  And, he took copious notes about the things that he saw, that he felt like needed to be improved.  You go into [Chicago] City Hall, city hall is gleaming and it's beautiful and it's well maintained and all of that.  And, people take pride in that.  So, just the, the basic housekeeping things that make people just stand back with awe, and look at the city and say, "Wow, it looks great here."  Well, this is our front porch, you know, when people come to the front porch of Chicago [Illinois] they have--they are awe struck by how beautiful it is.  And, it's because there has been such attention paid to the communities, particularly downtown, but all of the communities.  I am--I was pleased at the way in which a formula was devised to make sure that every alderman got resources to deal with the issues that each and every one of them needed to deal with.  You know, the--each alderman has a certain pot of capital money to spend as he or she sees fit, to take care of particular issues in their wards.  And, the aldermen are the people who know better than anybody what needs to be done.  That's not the kind of thing that you would stand out in city hall and say, you need a street on 43rd [Street] and Champlain [Avenue].  Alderman has to do that.  But, there wasn't a mechanism before that, before this administration, on how that was gonna be done.  And, so, things like that at the very basic levels of government, and maybe these were things that he learned from his father [Mayor Richard J. Daley], I don't really know.  But, I'm--I just feel good about having been a part of an effort to really drive services down to the lowest levels in every community.  Because, I think the real purpose of city government is service.  You know, your local government is the clo--very closest to you.  And, it is the entity that it--that provides you with basic services.  And, those services ought to be well, well provided and evenly distributed and accessible.  You ought to be able to call for service and get it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything, is there anything negative about those years that surprised you or even the dynamics of getting things done that surprised you?
Speaker 2: I can't say that it is a reflection on the Daley administration.  I think it's more a reflection of the political process itself and a reflection on it.  Politics really is like watching sausage be made.  I had a much more inanimate view of the politic processes was when I was a reporter.  And, I was--I thought that I really knew these political figures because I covered them so intimately.  And, I thought that I really knew government because I actually lived in city hall, you know, that's where my office was based on, on a regular basis, every single day I was there.  But, until you're inside it, you don't really know it.  And, you don't really know what the people and their personalities and who they really are.  And, some of them I liked much, much better before I really knew who they were.
Story_ID: 209011
Speaker 1: Now, on that same note, the city [Chicago, Illinois]--well, you're right the city looks better than it ever did.  And, people--the services are good and they seem to trickle down to the neighborhoods, too.  But--
Speaker 2: And, there is new construction everywhere; in every community.
Speaker 1: Well, I couldn't park my car in front of my place this morning because somebody was redoing the street.  But, on the same, by the same token, it's a little scary when you go to [Chicago] City Hall meeting and everybody is voting aye at the same time (laughter), it's hardly any dissention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you're right.  I mean--
Speaker 1: --it's, it's kind of--
Speaker 2: --it's, it's not, it's not democracy in the--
Speaker 1: No, and, and even the way they read ordinance, they read the numbers and if you, you don't, you know, the citizen going to a [Chicago] City Council meeting in Chicago [Illinois], I mean, you, you really, unless you know, have some kind of inside information about what's coming up next, you don't know.  'Cause you--it's just all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you think it's a lot different in any other city?
Speaker 1: Yes.  In--since, you don't, 'cause you don't hear it.  It's very much, it's not much debate in city council or discussion of issues, it's just like, "Aye, aye, aye let's go home," you know, pretty much.  Except in a rare occasion it might be two or three that might say, "No."
Speaker 2: Well, I think that not all of this and certainly it may not be the most commendable from a democratic standpoint.  But, I think to the--by the time stuff gets to the city council, the real diversions and thought on it and the issues have been hammered out.  You know, there have been intensive efforts to negotiate and try to come to some harmonious conclusion on things.  And, to mediate whatever objections you may have had to it and find some way to fix it at the committee level.  Or, or send it back to the department for fixing.  So, by the time it gets to the city council, they pretty much come to terms on it.  You know, we don't have, and maybe because we don't have a true two party system, we don't really have so much debate at the legislative level and the board level.  What debate there is takes place at the committee level or takes place before it ever gets there.  Because, there is, there is a lot of work put in to--by the inner-governmental people in making the rounds to the impacted aldermen, and the impacted the committee people and what have you.  And, running the traps with them to see what they think about it and trying to fix what they view as problems before it comes down to them.  And, it isn't--there--nobody is--for the most part so locked in their thought about what the legislation ought to be, that they're not willing to try and compromise and fix it before it gets to the council for a vote.
Story_ID: 209012
Speaker 1: There was also, now this has to do with the control of information.  There's an article by--that John Kass wrote about a year and half ago or two years ago, about how anyone, any reporter in [Chicago] City Hall is gonna be tailed by a young man taking notes about what he's writing about.  Is that--you have any, does that have any?
Speaker 2: Don't ask me about anything that John Kass writes.  Because, I know John Kass.  I knew John Kass when he was a reporter with me.  John Kass has never been a fan of [Mayor] Richard [M.] Daley.  When Richard Daley--when we both covered Richard Daley, he did not like Richard Daley.  John Kass brings his bias to the table every single day, every single day.  And, I am not saying that the mayor is without fault or blemish.  I'm certainly not saying that.  But, I am saying that there, there is never anything that this administration could do that would please John Kass on any day of the week.  So, for you to ask me about anything that John Kass says, I view with a jaundiced eye.  Because, I have been side-by-side with John Kass and we have seen the world in entirely different colors.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm sorry I asked about that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, is there, is there, to your knowledge is the administration that tight, where they actually tell reports?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And, write what they--okay.
Speaker 2: How could they write what they're gonna write.  I'm--you know, I can only give you my perspective on it as a person who was charged with being the press secretary.  I viewed it as my job to have some perspective on how the news was gonna be shaped and how it would impact the administration every single day.  So, I didn't--would not feel that it is out of bounds to have some idea of what people are writing or reporting.  I did not have, and nor do I think that they have, the ability to send some child to follow every reporter to find out what they're gonna say.  But, I don't think either, that it is out of bounds for them to feel like they, they want to know what it being said before it's printed or broadcast.  Because your job as a press secretary is to be anticipatory, not reactive.  So, the difference between being a reporter covering city hall and being a press secretary at city hall is that you can sit back and marvel over what you saw today as a reporter.  And, think about, wow, that was a interesting story, wonder where it's gonna go next.  But, you could go to bed that night without really worrying about where it's gonna go next and what it means for you.  When you're the press secretary, it's an interesting story and you have to pick it up and look at it from all angles and say, now, that means tomorrow they're gonna come here and look for this.  And, what's my answer gonna be?  So, you don't have the luxury of just sitting back and letting it unfold in front of you.  You have to be thinking about what your next step is.  And, if that means, using what staff you have to get some perspective on how the story is spinning for or against you, I don't think there's anything wrong with that.
Story_ID: 209013
Speaker 1: Was that your toughest task as a press secretary [for mayor of Chicago, Illinois, Richard M. Daley], to really look at all the sides and--
Speaker 2: Well, I regarded the job as much more than media relations.  Because, everything that you do in a political environment is political.  So, I was a part of policy discussions.  I was a part of scheduling which is after all a political process.  It isn't just where the mayor goes, it's where he goes, it's who he goes with, it's what he says when he's there.  It's who's there when he's saying it.  It's the essence of what he's gonna say.  It, you know, what's the ramification of that.  How does that story spell out?  Who's for it?  Who's against it?  You know, how do you mitigate any fall out from it?  All of that.  So, every day was complex because every day had a million different elements to it.  Plus, it's--when you're a candidate, you can talk about--you can run on your vision.  You run on your vision for a government.  And, it's a, it's narrow, and singular, and focused.  But, when you're an elected official, you have to run on your record and government is diffuse.  You got forty-five departments that are doing different things.  You got people out here freelancing left and right.  And, the coordination of all of your, your message.  And, how you respond to things and all of that.  All of that's a part of what that job entails.  You know, trying to make sure that you're speaking with one voice and that it make sense, and that you're not stepping all over yourself.  And, that you're in the right place, with the right people, saying the things, doing the right things, responding in the right way, on top of what you do that requires some response.  And, on top of what other people are doing that brings the story to your doorstep, whether you want it or not.
Speaker 1: Well, it's two more questions, as I can think of anyway, before we leave the Daley administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we need to hurry up and leave the Daley administration.
Speaker 1: But, did--is there any one particular thing that you had to announce that was, I guess, gave you more pleasure than anything else?  Or, what do you think was the greatest accomplishment of the Daley administration, you were there, as far as your concern as a black woman in [Chicago] City Hall?
Speaker 2: Well, one of things I was most pleased with was the fact that, we took [Mayor] Harold Washington's executive order for affirmative action and we empaneled a task force that took testimony and that created a framework so that we could build a historical pattern of preference that would give us the basis for put--setting down the affirmative action order into law.  And, that's the affirmative action law that we operate by right now.  You know, it is under court challenge but we are one of the few jurisdictions in the country that actually has legislation that has thus far withstood challenge.  Although, it--we have been forced now to make some modifications and the administration isn't happy over it.  But, doing that actual codified what, to that point had been an executive order.  And, that was the kind of commitment to a principle that made me delighted to be a part of the administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you think that after the initial shock and people's anger when you took the position that you were able to, you know, win people over with your performance?
Speaker 2: Oh, I felt like I was vindicated over time.  You know, I've always been the same me.  Those people didn't know me.  You know, it goes back to that, that incident that told you about, where you lose everything and you figure out exactly who you are.  I am very grounded in who I am.  And, I am the same me whether I'm at the White House [Washington, D.C.], or on 63rd [Street] and Morgan [Street] where I grew up [in Englewood, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm the same me.  So, I felt like over time, they would come to understand me, or not.  And, it didn't really matter as much to me whether they came to understand me or not.  I was gonna do what I felt like was right.  And, do what I felt like was most meaningful for the people that I care about.  And, do my best work for the people of the City of Chicago [Illinois], and let the chips fall where they may.
Story_ID: 209014
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go to the White House [Washington, D.C.] now.  This is the [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton campaign.  You mentioned David Axelrod, well, he's a veteran of so many campaigns, and a consultant for some, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) David was reporter with me.  He was at the [Chicago] Tribune when I was at WGN [WGN AM, Chicago, Illinois], and we both used to do these political panels shows all the time.  And, then David was bitten by the bug and decided that the really wanted to do this for a living.  And, we still participate on many, many panel shows, he as a political consultant and me as a political reporter.  And, so, when the [Mayor Richard M.] Daley folks were looking for a press secretary, he suggested me.  I went to talk to them.  I decided ultimately, I would do it.  I went through a couple campaigns, three with the Daley administration.  And, then, when they went to work for Bill Clinton, they asked me would I come to work for Bill Clinton.  And, at first I said, "No," and then later I said, "yeah."  It seemed like a forgone conclusion that he was gonna be the Democratic nominee, and I'd never really worked a national campaign.
Speaker 1: Did you know much about Bill Clinton at the time?
Speaker 2: No.  I did the same thing with Bill Clinton that I did with Rich Daley.  I had to go down there and meet him and Mrs. [Hillary Rodham] Clinton.  I went to Little Rock [Arkansas].  I spent some time with them.  I liked them.  I felt like they was somebody who I could work for and somebody who I got a good feeling from instinctively.  And, I operate by instinct a great deal.  So, I knew they were gonna be, that he was gonna be the nominee.  I wasn't at all certain that we were gonna win.  But, it seemed like a great experience.  And, the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, what was the, was the main challenge of the Clinton campaign?  I mean, I think we started, that one, you know, he was new to me.  I know when I heard his name, I said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah.  Well, I knew about him from '88 [1988] because he talked so long at the [1988 Democratic National] Convention [Atlanta, Georgia] and that was a funny thing, you know, as a ha ha joke.  But, people began to take him very seriously.  And, I was the mayor's press secretary when he came and based his Midwestern primaries from Chicago [Illinois].  So, he spent about maybe ten days in Chicago during the campaign primary stage during--flying from Chicago to where ever he was in a primary contest.  But, I liked him.  They were so smart.  The two of them were incredibly impressive, very, very, very smart people, very smart.
Speaker 1: What was the most impressive thing about the Clintons as far as you're concerned?
Speaker 2: The most impressive thing about Bill Clinton was his ability to really make contact.  You know, he was not a distant politician.  He was an empathic political figure with whom you know you made contact.  You know, he really did listen to people.  He really did empathized with the people that he listened to.  He was very, very smart, and could converse with you about anything.  But, that anything really was anything, whether it was music, or art, or you know, so it wasn't, it wasn't an erudite conversation, every conversation you had with him.  You know, you could talk about a lot of different things.  And, he was very approachable.  He was very approachable.  A very warm person.  Mrs. Clinton was not as warm.  But, a nice person.  A smart, smart person.  You know, her--it was a crackling intellect, you know, she was so smart.  And, you knew that this was a really good team because they complemented each other.
Story_ID: 209015
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember who the opponents of [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton were in '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush.
Speaker 1: Well, in the Democratic primary, I guess it was.
Speaker 2: Well, see I didn't come (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you join in the--
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: You joined in during the campaign.
Speaker 2: Come into the campaign--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the primary stage.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I came in as they were going into the general election phase.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for them the last six months of the campaign.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, is George Bush, the old--the elder, that I was, you know, running against--he was incumbent at the time?
Speaker 2: George H. Bush.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.  And, so, what was the strategy in that campaign?
Speaker 2: The Bush administration was so out of touch with the needs and the concerns of, day-to-day concerns of people, particularly on issues.  Healthcare resonated so much.  Because, healthcare costs were spiraling out of control.  It was a vast number of uninsured people.  You know and the economy was running wild, people could not afford the very basics.  And, our strategy was to keep hammering home, don't you get it, it's the economy, stupid.  You know, how can you not understand how important this is to the people that you represent?  You remember this is the guy who goes to the grocery store and sees the electronic scanner and it's gee whiz to him, because he's so out of touch, he hadn't been to the grocery store.  So, you know, he was out of touch, and we were in touch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, he was a--as an old, more of an old time Republican, he hadn't, the party, the Republican Party hadn't started to track galvanized some of the right wing forces there they've galvanized now, you know.  Do you--so, you think it wasn't really that difficult to defeat the elder, the elder George Bush in light of his--
Speaker 2: It was easier than I thought.  It was easier than I thought because one of the things that we discovered is that, he really was out of touch.  We, for example, we had our war room which was a way for us to do rapid response.  We had--we used all the technology that was available to us.  At that time, people weren't doing much emailing.  But, we used a fax tree system where we made sure that everybody had talking points for the day because they were sent out in, in trees, you know.  You send it out, and then those people send it out to other people and so on and so forth.  So, everything that they did that required a response, we were able to respond in the same news cycle because we were using those sorts of things.  When the Clinton administration was elected and we went into the White House [Washington, D.C.], we discovered they didn't even have fax machines in every office.  I mean, that was basic technology.  And, they were ju- they didn't, they didn't have good technology in terms of computers and things like that.  It was just--it was astonishing.  It was astonishing how little emphasis there was on technology.  Now, I am not saying that every Republican administration is like that.  It's just that he was a part of a different generation of folks.  And, Clinton was young and vigorous and also technology driven.  You know, so, it was such a dichotomy.
Story_ID: 209016
Speaker 1: Republicans had been in power about twelve years, I guess, at that point, right?  Three administrations (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Longer than that.
Speaker 1: Longer than that?
Speaker 2: Longer than that.
Speaker 1: I think two regular terms and then the one [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush term, you know.  That's twelve, I--isn't it?  I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's twelve years.  And, the country had gone through a transition where most of these people were in those days using faxes and most businesses that were considered progressive had--were emailing even--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What you're talking about, [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan who was an old guy.  Two Reagan terms and George Bush.  So, neither of these people were people who, under whose leadership you would--they would say, "Hey, get as much technology as you can.  You need to be going high-tech."  You know, that's just not where they were going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and the leadership sets the tone for what you do.  So, it was an exciting time to be a part of that because it was easier.  We [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton campaign] started out with a slight lead, and the lead got bigger and bigger.  And, we kept expecting that the gap was gonna close and it never did.  So, on November 3rd [1992], which was the day after the election [sic. Election Day], we woke up and we had been elected.  And, we really didn't have in place, as much as, as much preparation as we probably should have to go into the White House [Washington, D.C.], you know.  So, I went home [Chicago, Illinois] after about a week, 'cause I was an adult, you know.  And, campaigns are generally run--a lot of kids are involved and they don't have responsibilities.  But, I had a mortgage.  I had responsibilities at home.  I went home.  And, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] asked me to come back and work in the transition with him.  He was the transition chairman, he asked me to be the assistant to the chairman.  And, it gave me the opportunity to sit with him as he became the conduit for all these constituencies, from all over the country, as they came to speak to the administration, the incoming administration about every issue that was of importance to them and how they wanted to see the administration deal with those issues.  And, my job was to summarize the information that I had been given and make sure that it reflected what they wanted to say.  And, send it on to the incoming secretaries in each of those departments.  So, that they would have a perspective on the issue.  It was like a transition report prepared for each of them.  And, in the transition reports were copies of the reports that I had done from the constituencies that had come to talk to Vernon Jordan.  So, it was an interesting time for me.  You know, it was an education on everything in the world that a new administration would be asked to hear about.
Story_ID: 209017
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Avis, A-V-I-S, LaVelle, L-A uppercase V like Victor, E-L-L-E, Sampson, S-A-M-P-S-O-N, hyphen, Hoes, H-O-E-S.  That's my married name, and I rarely ever give all of those names (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: By you--I work as [HistoryMaker] Avis LaVelle.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: 3/5/54 [March 5, 1954].  My place of birth is here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a public affairs consultant.  I own a public affairs firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Avis LaVelle Consulting, right?
Speaker 2: A. LaVelle Consulting [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: A. LaVelle, okay, consulting.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 23, 2010.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in The HistoryMakers Studio at 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And, correct me if I'm wrong.  But, we're completing an interview that we began August 11, 2004.
Speaker 2: Much to my surprise (laughter).  Yes, you are absolutely right.
Story_ID: 209018
Speaker 1: We were talking about your experience on [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton's transition team in 1992 where you worked with [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jordan, I believe, on the transition team, making appointments to federal positions and recruiting people for, and--
Speaker 2: My principal responsibilities as Vernon Jordan's executive assistant was to help with the transition to a new administration by helping him act as a conduit to various stake holders who wanted to be sure that the new administration had some idea of what their concerns were as they came into government.  So, people would contact him as the head of the transition committee.  We would set up meetings, subject matter meetings, where experts of all kinds and citizen groups of all kinds would come in, bring their agenda issues to the new administration.  My job was to come up with a summary of those meetings and then to make sure that that information was forwarded to the appropriate incoming secretary for the department where that issue might reside.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, are there any stories from that period of time that stand out, that?
Speaker 2: None in particular.  I mean, I think they were all interesting in that the diversity of issues that I heard on a day-to-day basis was just incredible.  You know, we might have four or five meeting in the course of a day.  And, the issues could range from the lofty to the most mundane.  But, everybody wanted to make sure that their issue was on the new administration's agenda.  So, it really did give me a broad perspective on what gover--what people thought government was supposed to do.  And, that in itself is very interesting.
Speaker 1: Give me an example of a mundane issue that popped up.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe I won't call it as--it probably wasn't mundane to the people who were actively engaged in it.  But, there were people who came to see about things like, issues like mining rights.  You know, what, and what to do with nuclear waste in, in the mountains, you know.  People who came to see about issues like Indian [Native American] gaming.  In a course of a day, these might not have been issued that all of America were concerned about.  Each of these constituencies had their own set of concerns that were overwhelming concerns to them but they were largely very narrow concerns.  As you look at them in the context of what is important in the day-to-day life in most Americans.  But, each of those concerns had a department that would probably would regard them as much more important to that department's perspective, than to the perspective of an average American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, these are all issues that probably could--that the federal government could place a role--an active role (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in solving?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And, they needed to find a home in different departments.  And, so, my job was to make sure that the incoming secretary whose department was most equipped to handle that issue, knew that these people had been in, and that they had a briefing sheet on what the concerns and the issues were.  So, that hopefully when the department secretary came in, and the secretary no doubt was going to wind up meeting with those people, they would know in advance that the people had come in and what the issues were.  And, it wouldn't just be a cold call on the part of the people who were then coming back to see the new secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so, you--how long did you work for, I guess, the transition team?  Or, how long did it take (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Transition is short by its very nature.  It's just a couple months.
Story_ID: 209019
Speaker 1: And, then after that I went to the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services [HHS].  I was one of the three people that went into HHS on the first day of the new [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration.  Donna Shalala, me and her chief of staff Kevin Thurm, were the three, first three appointees for HHS.  I was her assistant secretary for public affairs.  And, it was very exciting time to be a part of government.  In fact, on the first day that we went in, we were invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for a signing ceremony by President Clinton, who was signing an executive order that was going to make sure that the government, the entire government observed Roe v. Wade [1973].  You know, which, it was more, it was a public affairs, I don't wanna call it a stunt, but it, you know, it was symbolic in a lot of ways.  It probably didn't have as much substance 'cause it was still the law of the land.  But, it was a significant day because it was an opportunity for the new administration to put its imprimatur on an issue that it felt was very important.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, well, you supervised a staff here of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were five hundred.
Speaker 2: Five hundred people.
Speaker 1: Five hundred public affairs and communications people in the Department of Health and Human Services.  Now, obviously, I didn't--not every one of those people reported to me.  They reported up through their respective bureau heads that--and, each bureau had its own communications organization.  But, they were all ultimately responsible to the assistant secretary for public affairs.
Speaker 2: Now, these are all over the country, right?  These are people assigned all over the country, or just in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 1: In Washington.  Well, see, most of--you don't have, you have regional offices for health and human services, and regional offices for [U.S. Department of] Transportation and all those.  You have five regions.  Or, you did at that time.  But, those are not fully functioning with their own full sets of communications staff and all of that.  Most of the, the nerve center is in Washington and most of the bureaus are in Washington.  And, so, a regional office wouldn't have a full staff of a representative from every bureau.  They would have what was most important for that particular region of the country.  You know, you're not gonna have somebody fully engaged in agriculture in Chicago [Illinois].  You know, so, it just depends on where you were and what the issues were in that regional office as to how that office was staffed.
Story_ID: 209020
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know two of the big issues that I read about on your website were immunization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And the other one I can't remember now (laughter).  But, immunization was one.
Speaker 2: Organ donation.
Speaker 1: Organ donation.
Speaker 2: Organ donation and immunization and actually birth control.  The whole RU-486 [Mifepristone] was one of the issues that we dealt with.  That's the day after pill, and the--bringing that pill to market so that it--taking it from an experimental stage into a, something that was available in the marketplace was one of things that we wrestle with.  Immunization, childhood immunization was a big initiative on the part of the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration.  And, rolling out an immunization program that would insure that every child in the country, not only had right, the right, but the access to the drugs to be immunized.  And, oh, by the way, making sure that everybody was on board for having the children immunized because there are many people who don't believe in immunization.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there seems to be.  If I remember correctly, during that period, there seem to be a lot of kickback against immunization.
Speaker 2: People thought that it caused Autism.  And, there is still a lot of people who believe that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  And, among educated people.
Speaker 2: --immunization causes that.
Speaker 1: People who are reading, not just religious people, but people who were reading ahead of the curve about this.
Speaker 2: Some are still very much convinced that some Autism is caused by vaccinations--
Speaker 1: Another issue was organ allocation.  Organ allocation has to do with the whole question of organ donors and matching organ donors to recipients.  And, the need for organ far outstrips the number of available organs.  So, the whole questions comes down to, who gets, who gets organs.  And during that period of time, there were two really high profile organ donation cases that really upset the applecart.  In terms of how the public regarded the fairness question.  I remember, Larry Hagman from 'Dallas,' and Mikey Mantle, both got organs.  They got livers, and Hagman had been--I think, Mikey Mantle had been a drinker.  And, Hagman had some other type of ailment; might have been cancer or something.  Both of those circumstances made them very poor candidates for organ allocation.  They should not have received organs.  And, there were people whose children, whose husbands and wife were on the waiting list who--pristine health records other than the fact that they needed these organs, had been waiting for a long time.  And, there was an outcry for these two men who because of their celebrity status seemed to have catapulted to the top of the list.  And, neither of which were really good candidates because of either their lifestyles or pre-existing health conditions.  And, so, it created such an uproar in the organ allocation community that, we, as the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services [HHS] had to weigh into this.  And, come up with new organ allocation guidelines to try and ensure that hospital were not rigging their own processes to make sure that high profile donors and high profile celebrities didn't somehow jump to the head of the line to curry favor with people who might give them money, or might increase the notoriety of the hospital.
Story_ID: 209021
Speaker 1: Your job is more about public education in a lot of ways, I guess, or how to--
Speaker 2: It was.  It was about public education.  It was about communications.  It's about--public affairs is this, it's the intersection between how you simulate public dialogue and influence public thought with the messages that you put out there.  So, my job was strategic communications.  It wasn't just about communicating the initiatives of the government.  You had to also think about how all of that's gonna be perceived in a political environment.  And, how do you package this to make sure that it's as palpable to the public as you need it to be.  But, also perceived in the way that you need it to be perceived from a political standpoint.  You know, because that all messaging is--has some political ramifications.  And, you couldn't just put a message out there without respect to the timing of it and how you target it, and how you package based on how you need it to be perceived.  Because, what--the one thing from working for the [Mayor Richard M.] Daley administration taught me and then subsequently for the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration is that, you're always in election mode.  You know, there's a very small window during which you actually get to govern without having to think about, how is this gonna play for re-election.  And, it--you almost always look at everything through a political prism.  You try to do the best that you can in terms of pure good, but policy is always intersected by politics and government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, in terms of the public affairs, would you call it a public affairs campaign, I guess?
Speaker 2: It's always a campaign (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right--
Story_ID: 209022
Speaker 1: Immunization. How did you, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we--
Speaker 1: --deal with public opinion in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, we had to work with the pediatricians on the ground.  We had to work with the children's advocacy organizations.  We had to work with the individual physicians and medical organizations to try to get each of those--each of those constituencies has a different set of concerns about immunization.  You know, so, you, you get to the root of what their concerns are and you craft messages to make those more palatable.  You had to work--target messages to the parents to make sure that they would actually recognize how important these immunizations are.  It's astonishing how many parents, not because they believe that immunizations cause Autism, but simply because they just aren't clued in enough.  Or, they--they're not motivated enough to make sure that their kids get the whole regiment of immunizations, even now.
Speaker 1: What was the hardest group to convince that immunization, I mean, was the proper thing to do?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the challenges were that pediatricians who did not want to take Medicaid, you know.  There are hospitals and physicians who really regard working with the government as more trouble than it's worth.  And, so, they believe it's too much red tape, it's too much interference.  It's just too hard.  And, making immunizations available to everyone means that you made immunizations available through Medicaid, through use--the use of public funding.  And, influencing all of these physicians to open their doors to people that they have heretofore not thought that they wanted to deal with.  Not, I don't think so much because of who the people were, but because of the funding process for that, you know.  Being--getting reimbursed by Medicaid is more than a notion, you know.  And, it's certainly isn't something that was happening in a timely fashion.  It certainly is something that required a lot of paperwork to be pushed around.  And, a lot of people just didn't wanna do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you were with the [U.S.] Department of Health and [Human Services (HHS)] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Health and Human Services.
Speaker 1: --Human Services from 2000--from 1992 until?
Speaker 2: I really went in, in January of '93 [1993] and I left in the middle of '95 [1995].  And, I came back to Chicago [Illinois] at that time, because my parents [John D. Patton and Mai Hicks Patton], both seemed like they were not doing so well.  And, I was the sibling with the most mobility.
Story_ID: 209023
Speaker 1: So, I came back to work for Waste Management [Inc.] to help the City of Chicago [Illinois] launch its blue-bag recycling program.  And, I came back right in the midst of the '95 [1995] heat wave, which was an incredibly amazing time to come back.  Because, it was the first time that I had been in Chicago in years without working for government.  Or, without being a, without being a paid observer of government.  So, I really, really was just a pure observer.  It wasn't my job to report on it, and it wasn't my job a part of making the story.  And, so, I was stunned and reminded of just the extent to which people expect so much of government.  Because there were people who were so angry with the mayor's office and angry with city government because of all of the tragedy that was occurring with people who were succumbing to the heat.  But, you know, I hadn't been in city government in a while to really understand.  And, so, I guess, I was shocked anew at just by how much people expected the government to do, you know.  It's like that there's a crisis when, when there's a crisis people really expect government to do a lot.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the heatwave where temperatures reached 105, I think, in the summer of 1995?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '96 [1996]--'95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Several people died.  I think some elderly people--
Speaker 1: Many people died.  But, you know what?  I talked to, I talked to an epidemiologist, you know, just in conversation about this (unclear).  Because, I wanted to understand whether it was so many more people dying as a result of the heat or whether it was the focus was on how many people died.  And, he told me that, it--what--there were people who died because of the complications from the heat.  But, a lot--they were counting every single person who died during that period of time as a heat related fatality.  And, there were people--hundreds of people die every day.  And, most of these people are a great deal of them were going to die anyway.  They--you know, their deaths really should not have been counted in the heat tally.  But, because it was--it made a great story that's how it was done during that period in time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, in a city with three and half million people, every day, a couple hundred may--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --pass.
Speaker 1: A couple hundred--especially, people who are elderly who have underlying health conditions anyway, you know, people in poor health, very poor health.  Many of these people were going to die anyway.  Three million people, if three hundred died, what percentage is that?  Not even one.  You know, but, the tally all counted into all the people who died today, you know, in--as a--in the heatwave of Chicago.  So, that was an amazing thing to me.  And, it was the first time that I had been here as a, as Jane Doe the average citizen.  And, it made me awful glad to be sitting on the sofa watching everyone in the city government have to come before the cameras to tell the people at home what they were doing to try to help the City of Chicago cope with heatwave.
Speaker 2: I think--was that the same summer one of the big transformers blew out?  And--
Speaker 1: Everything happened that summer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, the subbasements flooded in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]?  I think--
Speaker 1: No.  The subbasements, no, that was a different year.
Speaker 2: That was a different year.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was '92 [1992] for that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 209024
Speaker 1: My period of time at HHS [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] ended and I went to Waste Management [Inc.].  I was the vice president of communications.  And, first I was the vice president of community relations for the Chicago [Illinois] area.  And, then I became vice president of communications and community relations for the company.  And, I was really proud of the blue-bag recycling program because we went from nothing to something, and Chicago really hadn't been recycling.  And, our goal was to divert 25 percent of the waste stream.  And, I think we got up to about 23 percent of the waste stream.  The problem with the blue-bag was that, you had to keep reminding people of the value of recycling, you know.  And, you, you couldn't just do it and assume that people would have some sort of institutional memory.  You know, people are moving in and out of the City of Chicago, technology changes, people just needed to be reminded.  And, they didn't continue to have an education component of the program.  I did that for a couple of years.  And, I worked at Waste Management during the period of time when the company itself was undergoing a huge transition.  It was twenty-five years old when I came.  But, it was--still operated like a small company, even though it was a corporation with more than five hundred divisions.  Because, they had made so much money, that their money, the money that they made almost masked their inefficiencies.  And, mashed--masked the fact that they, they really weren't a well-managed company at the time.  So, when lots of people who had come along who had worked for them and who knew how inefficient they were, started their own businesses and really got up and going.  Those businesses were run much better than Waste Management.  And, there was a shareholder revoke.  'Cause they had gotten away from their core business.  They were trying to do a little of this and a little of that.  And, they had many, had taken on many endeavors and many of them were not profitable.  So, meantime, their core business, which was the garbage business was being picked off by companies formed by former Waste Management employees who had gone on to do it much better than the parent company, so to speak.  So, I, I only worked there for a couple years 'cause it was just an amazing experience to work in a place that was collapsing.  And, the people who were there--it was like people--let me give you this analogy.  It was like being on the deck of the Titanic with people still sunning (laughter), and saying, "Oh, you know, it's gonna, it's gonna settle itself.  You know, things are gonna be all right."  And, for many of those people who had worked there twenty years, they could not imagine that the company was crumbling, you know.  But, it really was because they never could get their footing back.  They never could regain their footing.  And, the, the shareholders led by Nell Minow and George Soros were forcing them to make real changes that were--fundamentally change how they operated and forced out a lot of the old leadership.  And, eventually, the company was sold to a competitor formed by a former Waste Management person.  And, Waste Management exists as a brand because it was a viable brand but, he just rebranded his company to become Waste Management.  So, the company doesn't really exist as it was, it's, it's a smaller company, a much more efficient company that has a Waste Management brand but none of the former leadership.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I did that for a couple years.  And, I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and commuted to Oak Brook [Illinois] every day.  And, when I got the opportunity to work seven blocks from my house at University of Chicago Hospitals [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], I thought, "That's a grand idea."
Story_ID: 209025
Speaker 1: So, I went to the University [of Chicago Hospitals; University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and I became (laughter), many things all at once, because it was a job that had many components.  I was the vice president of community relations, communications, media relations, government relations, and volunteer services.
Speaker 2: This is in '97 [1997], right?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I actually worked at the hospital almost five years.  And, it was, it was a good experience because I learned to do a lot.  I lobbied.  I was the chief lobbyist for the hospital.  I was in charge of all of the hospital's communications, you know, its annual report and all those things like that.  The volunteers reported to me, you know, so I was attempting to make it a good experience for the people who came in to volunteer.  And, I also was in charge of community relations.  So, I was trying to make the hospital be more relational to the broader community since it, it had had a history as part of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and not really being very hospitable to the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] community and almost--even during my time there, I felt like the senior management really wished that they could have picked the hospital up and moved it someplace else.  So, that they wouldn't have to, to be located in the Woodlawn community, you know.  So, it was an interesting period of time to be there.  And, it was during a period of time when the hospital had only, just a few years before I came there, begun to accept Medicaid.  You know, and they accepted Medicaid out of financial necessity.  Because, it was during a period of time when HMOs [Health Maintenance Organization] were aggressively squeezing down costs, and hospitals were learning how to deal with that.  You know, they weren't the--like Waste Management [Inc.], University of Chicago Hospitals wasn't very efficient.  And, they too had gotten away from their core business and they lost a ton of money doing other things.  You know, trying to run clinics and things like that, when it really wasn't what they knew how to do best.  And, so, they needed Medicaid because they needed another payer stream.  So, they reluctantly opened their doors to the Medicaid population only a few years before I came there.  But, they certainly didn't regard themselves as a place that was all that welcoming to the community.  I worked in the hospital for, almost five years.  During that period of time, my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] became very sick and she would--when you call the ambulance, they take you to the nearest hospital.  University of Chicago is an academic medical center.  If you ever are really sick and you need superior care, you want to go to an academic medical center, because it's where they teach doctors to be doctors.  And, so, the most cutting edge research and the most practiced physicians are those who work and teach in academic medical centers.  So, whenever they would get my mother into a hospital, I would then have to spend an entire day trying to get her back into the University of Chicago.  Because I felt like, I have to have her where I know she's getting the best quality care.  And, I have to have her where I know these doctors.  I also wanted to have her where I could go, at any time during my work day, and put my eyes on her.  Because, I recognized that even at the best hospitals, resources were stretched very thin, especially in oncology units, my mother had cancer.  So, it might take several hours in the day for them to get around to doing things that I felt like I wanted my mother to have sooner.  You know, if, if I wanted her lien to be changed sooner, I could go do it myself, in my own hospital.  You know, if I wanted her to have company, or you know, if I wanted her to have a snack, or if there--if I wanted her to have reading materials, it was easier to do that in my own hospital.  It's much harder to do that if I go elsewhere.  Plus, I knew that I could reach the doctors easily because I'm there, you know.  And, I'm an inner, inner office call if you will, and they dial five numbers to get me at my desk.  They didn't have to, to track me down any other type of way.  So, I--it, it was my job to do that in my own view.  But, as a result of my mother being in and out of the hospital so much, I think, I was--I wanted to leave the hospital setting when my mother died.  I didn't wanna work at a hospital anymore.
Story_ID: 209026
Speaker 1: So, I left the hospital [University of Chicago Hospitals; University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and I joined an information technology company called The Foster Group [Inc., Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, before we get you going with Foster Group.  I wanna go back and--'cause we talked about it off camera, we weren't rolling but the appointment to the [Chicago] School [Reform] Board [of Trustees].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: The appointment--
Speaker 2: That was in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: To the school board came I guess in--
Speaker 2: That was '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997]?  Ninety-seven [1997].  I served six years on the board.  No, I guess, I served, yeah, I served six years on the board, five as the vice president of the board.  And, I served during the tenure of two board presidents, and two CEOs [chief executive officer].  So, I got the pleasure of working with, Gery Chico as the board president, with Paul Vallas as the CEO.  And, then Mike [HistoryMaker Michael] Scott [Sr.] as the board president, and Arne Duncan as the CEO.  And it was--I really enjoyed the [Chicago] Board of Education because I'm a public school pro--protegee.  I felt like it was an opportunity to do something for those kids because I too was one of them.  I once was sitting in their seats.  And, I took that as a very serious obligation.  So, I'm, I noticed that on the board that I sat, there was a tendency on the part of a lot of board members not to speak out as much.  Now, we had vigorous discussions in the executive sessions but, not a whole lot was said during the public session.  You know, people would come before us and tell us things that I thought were outrageous in terms of the failure of the system to address the need of their child.  And, I felt like I couldn't be silent about that.  You know, I had to ask questions.  I had to bring whoever was responsible for it on staff before the board to explain to us, "Why? How could this happen?  And, how are you going to fix it?"  So, you know, it's not that I felt like I was on a crusade or anything like that.  But, if you as a parent take the time to come down here and complain about a situation, I just look at the rule of thumb.  You know, the radio rule of thumb from when I was a radio reporter was, if one person called you to complain about something, they're probably twenty people out there who feel the same way, who didn't bother to call you.  That's just to call you.  If you as a parent take the time off to come down to the board of education on a Wednesday morning, the third Wednesday of the month, and spend all morning waiting to tell this board about the issue that is perplexing you so badly that you would come down here, you deserve to have somebody give it some serious consideration and try to do something about it.  So, that's how I regarded my role on the board as an advocate for the parents who needed somebody to address something for them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you were on the--well, until, 'til two---
Speaker 1: I guess, it was 2002 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand two [2002], yeah, 2002.
Story_ID: 209027
Speaker 1: It says here, in '99 [1999] you were part of [Mayor Richard M.] Daley's re-election campaign.  Were you the campaign manager?
Speaker 2: I was the campaign manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  Was this the first time you served as a campaign manager?
Speaker 2: I worked with Mayor Daley a number of times.  In '89 [1989], I was his press secretary for his inaugural run and then I became his press secretary for government.  And, I had an informal role in the re-election campaigns but, I stayed in government.  In '99 [1999], I was still at the University of Chicago Hospitals [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], and I left on a leave of absence when he asked me to, to be his campaign manager.  I had not managed a campaign before but I certainly worked in a number of them.  And, it wasn't a particularly difficult campaign.  Because, while there was opposition, it wasn't stiff opposition, if you will.
Speaker 1: I remember it was [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush that ran against him.  And, then Bobby Rush was already a congressman, I think at this point, but he ran, he opposed Mayor Daley.  And, I guess it was, this maybe, would you consider this the last gasp of the, the, I guess, feeling, I guess, in the black community that we ought to have a black mayor or something, then, I don't know.  That, it seems like to me that was the last real gasp of it.
Speaker 2: Well, it really wasn't much of a gasp because the campaign never got going.  Bobby Rush's campaign never got going.  And, it's hard for me to assess whether it failed to get traction because of the candidate or because of the lack of real emotion driving that.  I think they wanted to ignite this sense that we deserve to have a black mayor, you know, Harold should have had a black successor; [Mayor] Harold Washington.  But, and, there were many who felt that it was a tragedy for blacks to have been, to have had the mayor's office for such a short period of time.  I was more of a realist about it, you know, it's like, you can only have it if you can keep it.  And, you can only keep it if you bring somebody really viable to the table to get it.  And, that nobody's gonna give it to you, you gotta take it.  And, we just never, as a community, mounted the candidate with the level of creditability to go beyond what might have captured the imagination of the African American community alone.  And, in truth, there were many by this point in time, who in the African American community, who were not supportive of Bobby Rush's candidacy.  You know, people had begun to feel like--remember now, it'd been ten years, '99 [1999]--from '89 [1989] to '99 [1999], Mayor Daley had done a lot. And, the tide hadn't begun to shift like it has now.  You know, the mayor has been the mayor twenty years now, twenty-one.  Ten years he was--his popularity was soaring.  You know, and, it wasn't that he could do no wrong but he certainly had done a great deal of right.  And, he had been very fair in terms of the delivery of city services universally to every community.  And, making a concerted effort to appoint women and minorities to key positions in his administration.  And, making a concerted effort to try and ensure that minority and women businesses got a fair share of city contracts in business.  So, you know, hard to get, hard to buck against that on the argument that--just a color-based argument alone.
Story_ID: 209028
Speaker 1: I know previously, Joe [Joseph E.] Gardner had run, had a fairly organized campaign before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Against Mayor [Richard M.] Daley?  Again--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think it was like a couple years before, I guess 'cause that when--
Speaker 2: I don't remember Joe Gardner.  'Cause I think Joe Gardner had died.  [HistoryMaker] Danny [K.] Davis had --
Speaker 1: Yeah. He had a camp--yeah--
Speaker 2: A campaign against him.
Speaker 1: He had a camp- right.
Speaker 2: Joe Gardner, Joe Gardner died a while before--
Speaker 1: Now, he ran once.  He had a pretty good run once, but he--
Speaker 2: But it wasn't, it wasn't during the time that Daley was the mayor.
Speaker 1: I think--yeah, it was.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that at all.  'Cause I remember--
Speaker 1: It was about a year or two before he died.  He died in '96 [1996].  And, you know, it was one the--either the campaign before he died.  I don't--
Speaker 2: You know what, that might have been when I was in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you know I went to Washington.  I left to go to Little Rock [Arkansas] in '92 [1992].  And, I stayed in Washington until mid-'95 [1995].  So, a friend of mine was a campaign manager during that period of time.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I believe it was--
Speaker 2: --I really wasn't here.
Speaker 1: --I believe you're right.  Because, yeah, it was prior to '95 [1995] and it was between the--it was--I think, Mayor Daley's first challenge--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I guess.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Was a--
Speaker 2: In the fourth, the-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The second full-term.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  'Cause the first full-term was '91 [1991].  And, the next one was '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: I guess so.
Speaker 2: The '95 [1995] election.
Speaker 1: Right.  Then '99 [1999] would be the next one.  Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I missed that chapter (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Right.
Story_ID: 209029
Speaker 1: I went to my IT [Information Technology] company for a minute.  I did government relations and business procurement for the IT company, The Foster Group [Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  And, it was right on the cusp of the IT crash.  You know, the tech [technology] crash happened shortly after I got there.  And, business was really bad into my second year there, and I lost my job.  That was the first time in my life I'd ever lost my job.  And, so, I became a consultant.  Not so much because I had really thought that this was the time that I would do this.  You know, I had, I had established a consultancy on the side, but I became a full-time consultant because I had lost my job.  And, by the grace of God, I never looked back.  You know, I--business came to me immediately.  My friends and fam- the phone rang for me--I got fired and I went into my office and I closed the door, and I was in a state of panic.  And, I prayed about it and I said, "Well, you know, I'm gonna have to turn this over, 'cause I don't really know what to do."  And, half an hour later one of my friends called me and said, "Don't you do projects?  I need you to do a project for me."  And, it was a project that I wouldn't have been able to do if I was still working for The Foster Group.
Speaker 2: Now.  Now this is 2000 or so, we're talking about, right around?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: This was 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004].  So, and so, I got fired in like maybe May somewhere like that.  May of--you know, I got a month's notice.  But, I got fired in May of 2004 from The Foster Group.  And, I got a project immediately and then another half an hour went passed and somebody called me and said, "You know, the Kerry campaign"--[Senator] John Kerry was running for president.  Kerry campaign wanted to open an Illinois operation and they were looking for an Illinois campaign manager.  This is a blue state, you know, they knew it was gonna be a Democratic state so it wasn't what they felt like would be a heavy lift.  And, they said, "You know, you really could do this part-time.  Don't you wanna consider that?"  And, that to was something that I would not have been able to do if I was working for The Foster Group.  But, there wasn't any reason for me not to do it.  So, in the course of an hour, I had a big full-time job and a project.  You know, and enough resources to meet my responsibilities and it, it kept me in the loop with the political people, you know, and the contacts that I needed to have with government and all of that.  So, it was a wonderful opportunity and it was like divine intervention.
Story_ID: 209030
Speaker 1: Was it [Illinois campaign manager, Senator John Kerry 2004 presidential campaign] more than a full-time job?  I mean, was it more than a part-time job?  I mean, being a Kerry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure.  It turned out to be a heavier lift than they thought it would be.  Yeah, absolutely.  Because, I'm not the kind of person, I don't just give a little bit on effort.  You know, if I'm gonna do it--I gave more effort than they put the resources into.  I raised my own resources for operating the campaign here because I felt like owed it to the people of Illinois who wanted to be supportive of the Kerry campaign to give them more of an opportunity than the national campaign saw fit to do.  The national campaign wasn't going to buy any campaign literature for them.  And, they weren't gonna buy any buttons, or signs, or banners, or any of those things because they had this philosophy, which I did not agree with, which said, "This is a blue state.  You don't need to spend any money in a state that's already gonna be yours."  Well, I felt like, how can you take for granted, the support of these people.  Particularly in a state where the [President George Walker] Bush people really felt like they wanted to be competitive.  And, the Bush people, because it is a blue state, they were very visible.  You know, there were people who had Bush signs and Republican support sign everywhere.  And, so, the people who supported John Kerry were calling me.  I didn't even have a campaign office for the first two months.  The campaign was in my purse on my cell phone.  And, so that, my phone was just blowing up with people calling me, asking me for buttons, and signs, and yard signs, and banners, and all of that stuff.  And, the national campaign refused to buy any of that.  So, I raised money from Democratic supporters here to be able to buy some of that stuff to give to committeemen and to individuals who felt like, how can this be a campaign operations and we don't have anything.  And, I had to buy the stuff.  We got it made ourselves because, the national campaign wouldn't give us anything.  And, in fact, the national campaign--to this day it irritates me to even talk about it.  How do you have an election night where people have worked so hard for you and volunteers have done everything; how do you have an election night and don't have an election night party for them to go to.  Particularly when you look back in retrospect, Illinois was the first state that went for Kerry and one of the few states that went for Kerry.  And, I had to raise money from private sources to have an election night party because the national campaign would not fund that.
Speaker 1: When you look--well, reflecting on this, is this like a sort of a, is this a singular difference between Kerry's campaign and other presidential campaigns, say the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton campaign in Illinois, was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--everybody, every campaign I've ever been involved with respected and appreciated the work of their volunteers and their supporters.  This was singularly different, singularly different for me as an experience.  And, quite irritating as an experience because I don't care if this is a blue state.  How dare you take for granted the work of the people who have worked so hard for you and the support of the people who want to express that support?  How do you do that?
Speaker 1: How did Chicago [Illinois] Democrats basically feel about John Kerry?  Were they very supportive?  I mean, were they enthusiastic?
Speaker 2: Well, for--no.  For many their candidate was ABB; Anybody But Bush.  But, Kerry was the guy.  So, you know, it's hard to get all cranked up and enthusiastic over somebody that you feel like is so different than you as a blue-collar town.  And, he's a guy who's a millionaire married to a billionaire and his favorite sport is windsurfing, you know, and that's really a huge chasm between him and us.  But, we didn't want another period of George Bush and we would support the Democratic nominee.  So, we were trying to be enthusiastic about him and he was making it very difficult.  His campaign was making it very difficult to do that because they didn't even support us.
Story_ID: 209031
Speaker 1: It sounds like a strain--do you have any reflections on the--now, he [Senator John Kerry] lost by a very narrow margin.  Some people say he--had it not been for some finagling in Ohio, he would've won.  Similar to the [Al] Gore campaign--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well.
Speaker 1: Four years earlier.
Speaker 2: I think he wasn't the best candidate.  I think the Democrats had again not chosen the best candidate.  You know, the process doesn't seem to yield what we need in order to be successful.  At least it didn't in that instance.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite into the other four?
Speaker 2: I didn't.  I didn't.  And, that's what really was distressing.  It's like my candidate was ABB [Anybody But Bush], but I was Kerry's campaign manager.  And, I had such a distaste for them at the end.  It wasn't for John Kerry personally because I don't think that he was aware of that.  But, I had such a distaste for the national campaign organization and the national finance organization because the fin--national finance organization was based here [Chicago, Illinois].  And, the people in that organization gave me a commitment that they were gonna do better than they did.  And, in the end, they stiffed the people of Illinois.  And, if I hadn't, if I hadn't been, if I hadn't had the foresight to raise the money, 'cause they promised they were gonna go an election party for these people and they didn't fund it.  But, I just didn't trust them.  So, I raised the money in advance.  And, it's a good thing that I did.  Because, if I hadn't, there wouldn't've been any place for the Democratic Party supporters to go that night.  And, God knows, across the country, there was little to cheer for, you know.  We were the first state to come in and one of the few states to come in for Kerry.
Story_ID: 209032
Speaker 1: Did you have any relationship with [HistoryMaker President] Barack Obama, you know, prior to the [Senator John] Kerry campaign?  I know he made his first big public splash at the [2004] Democratic National Convention [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.	I have known Barack Obama for years.  I didn't know him as he was running to become [Illinois] state senator.  But, he was the state senator for the hospital; the University of Chicago Hospital [sic. University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And, I lobbied for the hospital so, I spent many, many, many hours talking to him about hospital issues and funding issues.  And, he also worked at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] across the street, you know, from the hospital.  Additionally, we were social friends.  Our kids were kind of the same age.  My son is a little bit older than Sasha [Obama], a little bit younger than Malia [Obama], and we had friends in common.  So, we spent time socially.  So, I knew him.  I was able to be helpful to them during the, the 2004 democratic convention because as the Illinois campaign manager, I'm the person in charge of the credentials, and the floor passes, and all that sort of stuff for the Illinois delegation.  And, I tried to make sure--you know, they had a lot of people in their party and a lot of people that they wanted to make sure got a chance to see him when he made his remarks.  And, so, every day you get credentials and I really worked hard to try to accommodate everybody in their party to make sure that he as a senator, and he as the person whose moment was in the sun, had everybody there that their wanted to see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Ironically, though, I have a much, I had a much better relationship with President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton who was not from Chicago [Illinois] than I do with this administration from Chicago.
Speaker 1: It's--how do you account for that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think, I think what I got a chance to observe was that when you are, when the candidate or the, now the president is from your home town, there is so much jockeying for position for people to be close and closer, and I'm just not a good jockeyer, you know.  I've known you for years and I'm certainly willing to help you, but I'm not willing to knock people out the way to help you.  So, if you, if it's something you need from me, I'm more than happy to do it.  But, you know, I'm not gonna line up twenty deep to do it, you know.  And, so, it's just a whole different dynamic when--and here because of the historic nature and elsewhere because of the historic nature of what was happening, they had an embarrassment of riches in terms of people who wanted to help and people who would do anything to help at any cost.  And, I was at a different stage of my own life in terms of what I could give for political involvement.  I had, I had done the [Richard M.] Daley campaign and I had done the Kerry campaign.  My son was very small, at the time that I did Kerry and I was here.  When I did the Clinton campaign, I didn't have a husband or a child.  And, when I did the Daley campaigns, you know, I didn't have a husband or a child, the first one.  So, I could do, I could give 150 percent.  I could work eighteen hours a day.  I could come home and fall into bed at eleven o'clock at night, and get up at seven o'clock and go back to the campaign office.  I didn't feel like I could do that for the Obama campaign.  So, I could, I can wish them well, I could help raise resources for them.  But, I could not give to them what I had given to the other campaign because I was in a different stage in life.  And, perhaps unlike a lot of people who were novices to political campaigns, I know what the cost is.  And, I had disconnected myself from my regular life no less than five times to be deeply engaged in campaigns.  And, I know how difficult it is to re-engage in your own life when it's over.  I didn't wanna do that to my family so, I didn't have as much to give or as much time to put into it.
Story_ID: 209033
Speaker 1: What's your opinion of the current [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration now and what it's doing?  Are you pretty much satisfied with what they're doing, or do you have?
Speaker 2: I think they're doing as well as they can do.  I think that they underestimated how hard it is to do it.  And, I think that if they did anything, they probably--I think they afforded themselves too much media exposure.  I would like for them to have come in and buckled down and really got to work and been much more likely to exposed themselves to the media because, you--there could be too much of a good thing.  And, it's hard.  The work is hard.  And, so, if you're spending the time engaging the media and then you can be criticized for not spending the time doing the work.  And, you can overexpose yourself.  You know, give--make yourself available in smaller doses.  You know, that would be my one criticism.  But, I think because it's an administration that has a lot of people in it who have been around, and a lot of people in it who have not been around, I think they probably underestimated based on his personal popularity how hard it was gonna be to do some of the things that need to be done.  And, I'm surprised that they underestimated the resistance within their own party; within the Democratic Party to getting some things done.  There are, just as there was with [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, Democrats who really are not as supportive of Barack Obama as they've had to be publically.  When I was with the Clinton administration, the mid-term elections shifted.  The balance of power in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives].
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994], right.
Speaker 2: And, it was because he had so much difficulty getting the Democrats lined up to support his initiatives.  And, there was so much resentment from Democratic lawmakers in the [U.S.] Senate and other governors and things like that who felt like, "Who is this guy?  This governor from a small southern state to come here and take from me what should've been mine.  While I was up here as senator preparing myself to run for president."  Or, "Here I am the governor of a larger state with seemingly more credentials for management and all of that, preparing myself to run.  Here's this guy who jumps out here and eats my lunch.  And, so, now, he's the president.  And, in public I have to support him but not so much in private."  And, I feel the same type of thing is happening for Barack Obama.  I think that there are people who felt like they were forced into a position of supporting him because it's the--politicians are not always leaders.  Most of them are followers.  And, their constituents were so enamored with Barack Obama that they felt like they had to be in that position to do that.  But, I see some of them are backing away.  Some of them don't want him to come and campaign with them and some of them are not nearly as supportive of his legislative agenda.  And, so, they have to work really hard to get what they need done.  And, I think that they underestimated the extent to which, not all of these people in your party are well-wishers.  They don't all want to see you succeed.
Story_ID: 209034
Speaker 1: I'd actually launched my company [A. LaVelle Consulting, Chicago, Illinois], I had become incorporated in 2003.  So, this is my seventh year.  So, I was doing small jobs on the side that didn't interfere with The Foster Group [Inc., Chicago, Illinois].  And, I'm so glad that I was already launched because it made it easy.  I haven't had to look back.  I've been very blessed with lots of opportunities and I've been able to work for a lot of entities.  It's been a good experience.  It has been challenging but no more so than it is challenging anyplace else in the workplace.
Speaker 2: What--do you have projected goal that you set for yourself?  Are you satisfied with what you're doing right now until, you know, for the rest of your--
Speaker 1: I do like it.  I like it because I'm--I feel blessed enough to be able to work for a lot of clients.  I have a lot of non-for-profits and I do projects that I like.  I'm doing a project for The HistoryMakers because I like The HistoryMakers.  And, when you work for non-profits, they don't always have a lot of money.  So, it's kind of my way of giving back, you know.  I do a lot more work for the non-profits than are able to pay me for.  And, I don't mind doing that because I want--I work for who I like, you know.  I have the--I'm blessed enough to be able to say, "Okay, I don't think I can do this project because I don't really feel this."  Or, to say, "Yes, I'll help you with this because I really wanna see you be successful and to give some pro bono work to the project, you know.  Yes, I still need to be paid but, I don't feel like a lot of these entities can pay me what we get--what we put into it.  But, I'm proud of the work that we do.  I'm proud of what we've done to help them help other people.  Or, to help them further the cause that we both believe in.  So, that's rewarding.  And, because it is consulting, every day is different.  That's, that's what makes the job interesting.  I also like working for myself because I am--I don't work to live, I don't live to work, I work to live, that's what I mean to say.  So, I don't want my work life and home life to be out of balance all the time.  I mean, everybody's work and home life is out of balance some times.  It's a pendulum.  But, if you find that you, you have given so much to your work that you have no life outside your work, you're completely out of balance.  And, working for myself, I'm better able to control that.  I can take less money for a better quality of life.  You know, I'm not driven by material things, and I'm not driven by money.  So, I can take less money to have a better life.
Story_ID: 209035
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, and we have about four questions we ask going out of an interview.  The first one is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I would hope that we could find a way to really reach the youth.  Because I think that they're so disconnected from reality.  I think young people, African American young people don't seem to understand who we are, and how we got here, and what's realistic as goals and aspirations for themselves, and how to get there.  How to get there.  You know, everybody wants everything immediately.  And, they don't understand how much hard work goes into it.  And, they don't understand--I think they have inflated sense of self-importance in their own value.  And, most of them are not able to put aside what they think of themselves to work hard and to learn from somebody.  Because, I don't think that they understand how many people in their midst are important, they're not.  Celebrities and stars and things like that, they--but, they have done--made real contributions even though it may be history with a small "h."  They made real contributions but I don't think that these young people get it.
Story_ID: 209036
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I think--I am a person who--I let emotion, or I operate by instinct, and so I'm not completely governed by emotion, but I do let emotion help me make, influence the decision process.  And, I think you'll be in automaton not to.  But, there are decisions that I've made; for example, like leaving the hospital [University of Chicago Medical Center; University of Chicago Hospitals, Chicago, Illinois] when I did.  Now, maybe I wouldn't be a consultant if I hadn't left the hospital.  But, I left the hospital because I was so tired of being in the healthcare environment after my mother [Mai Hicks Patton] died.  It took me years to realize what had influenced my decision.  It wasn't that it was a bad job.  The job that I had is a job that Michelle Obama got when I left, you know.  So, it was a job that had a lot of opportunity attached to it.  Now, obviously I wouldn't, wouldn't be the wife of the president or anything like that but, you know, it's a, it was a great job.  It's just that I felt like at that moment I just couldn't be in the healthcare space anymore.  I didn't want to be.  And, there have been other decisions like that that I've made that were governed more by emotion than perhaps reason.  I was thinking about when I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and even in college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I danced with an African dance troupe, [HistoryMaker] Darlene Blackburn, and I really enjoyed it.  And, it--we learned authentic African dance.  And, when I was go--getting ready to go into my senior years of high school, I was going to be the captain of the cheerleaders at Englewood High School, and my boyfriend was the captain of the football team at Lindblom [Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  And, it was that summer during the period of time when you had, when we were, we were rehearsing, you know, we were--cheerleader practice for the coming year had already begun.  And, the Darlene Blackburn Dance Troupe was getting ready to Ghana [sic. Nigeria] for FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria], the festival of the arts and culture.  And, so, I had an opportunity to go the Ghana for FESTAC, for a week, during the heart of when I had to be there to have my squad organized, and if I did that, I wasn't gonna be a cheerleader when I got back at all.  I wasn't gonna the captain.  I wasn't gonna be able to be a cheerleader.  And, I--I'm sure boyfriend played into it too at that period in time.  But, I had the opportunity to go, and maybe it was for a month.  I think it was for a whole month.  'Cause we were gonna do FESTAC and travel around Africa.  And, at that time, it was more important to me to do what I was doing and what I was going to be doing for the whole year of my senior year than it was to do FESTAC and go to Ghana with the dance troupe.  Because, I had--that was my perspective at that time, you know.  And, so, it was governed by the emotion of the moment, and by an immature perspective on it in a lot of ways.  And, so, I made that choice, and I've often thought about, "God, I should've gone, what was wrong with me, why didn't I go to Africa," you know.  But, I try--one of the things I try never to do, no matter what the decision is that I've made is, I try never to look back in regret.  Because, whether it was the best decision or not, everything that I've done is what has made me who I am today.  So, even the bad choices that I've made, helped inform the choices that I make today and help shape me to become the person that I am today.  So, I look back on that and think, "I blew a month in Africa to be the captain of the cheerleaders at Englewood High School.  And, to have the boyfriend that I did at the time."  But, at the time, it felt like the right decision for me.
Speaker 1: It might have been, I don't,  you know, it's hard to judge that 'cause that festival was historic and, or everybody's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.
Speaker 1: Still talking about it but,--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had my own history, you know--
Speaker 1: You're only a senior--
Speaker 2: I was writing my own--right.
Speaker 1: In high school once, too.
Speaker 2: Right.  I was writing my own history.  And, you know, it's not like I had--I didn't have a mentor, and I didn't have a set of sophisticated parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton] to help me think through that and figure out whether that was the right thing to do, you know, and to give me a worldview.
Story_ID: 209037
Speaker 1: On that note, since, how has your success influenced your--impacted your parents or family, you know?
Speaker 2: My parents were very proud.  My mother [Mai Hicks Patton] has passed on.  My father [LaVelle's stepfather, John D. Patton] is in failing health now.  But, you know, they got a chance to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  They got a chance to, to see me be all the different mes that I've been and they were very proud; very proud.  You know, they, it was far beyond what any of us ever thought I would become.  You know, it's not that they, they doubted me or anything like that, it's just that, I didn't have roadmap.  And, I didn't have a set of aspirations that were spelled out from the beginning to say that I--when I got out of college [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I was gonna do this, this, this and this.  So, for--life for me has been an adventure, and it's been seizing the opportunities as they came along and I have not ever been able to predict what the next opportunity would be and even now I can't.
Speaker 1: Tell us about meeting your husband and about your son.
Speaker 2: Well, I met my husband in Washington, D.C.  Okay, (laughter), it four o'clock.  I gotta get outta here soon.  I met my husband--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. and I met him at a flower market.  I met him in '93 [1993].  I was buying myself flower, he said to me, "I don't know why a beautiful woman like you has to buy herself flowers."  And, I thought, you must be a pickup artist, up here every week picking up people (laughter) with kind of line.  So, he asked me--we talked a little bit.  And, he said, I looked too skeptical to give him my phone number.  So, he asked me would I call him.  And, I said, "Oh, sure I will."  So, I put his number on a little scrap of paper in my pocket and at the end of the summer, I threw it away.  I never called him.  You know, it's like I didn't even think about it.  And, the next year, I was doing the same thing, buying myself flowers, and I met him again.  And, he said, "I don't know"--he asked me for directions, and although he lived around the corner and when I was giving him directions he said, "I don't know if you remember, but I met you last year about this time at the flower market."  And, I kind of remembered.  And, so, we talked for a little bit and I said, "Well, last you gave me your phone number and I didn't call you, so maybe you need to call me this year."  So, he did eventually call me.  And, we caught up and we had wonderful conversation and, you know, it took several phone calls on his part to catch me because I was always busy doing something.  And, I felt like, I don't even know this man, and I don't know anybody who knows him.  So, I'm certainly not gonna rearrange my life to try to be available.  But, he turned out to be a great person.  And, we found out we were very compatible and we've been together since then.  It's been fourteen years, fifteen years altogether, we been--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Married fourteen years.
Speaker 1: You got a son, right?
Speaker 2: We've got a son.  He's eleven.
Speaker 1: And, you gotta pick him up in a little bit, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: I've gotta pick him up in a minute--
Story_ID: 209038
Speaker 1: One is, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my legacy is reflected in where I come from.  I'm from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and I think my legacy is what, what my life may have the ability to inspire in other people who come from humble beginnings, like in Englewood, so that they understand that it really isn't where you come from.  It's what you do with what you have.  You know, I--humble beginnings, uneducated parents [Adolph Sampson and Mai Hicks Patton], poor school; poor quality school.  But, I had an excellent education at that school.  And, you can become well-educated, you can be successful no matter where you come from, if you have the desire to do that.
Story_ID: 209039
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who had the opportunity to do incredible things.  And, who had the opportunity to spend time with presidents and kings and heads of state and all of that.  But, also had the ability to remain the same person that I always was, who values everybody, no matter what their station is, for their contributions that they're able to make.
